Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session adjourned on Thursday , 21 February 2008 .
Statement by the President
For the first time , the past week has seen the death of a soldier on an EU operation under the European security and defence policy .
Sergeant Gilles Polin , a French member of the European Union Force ( EUFOR ) , was killed on active duty after he had inadvertently crossed the border between Chad and Sudan in his all-terrain vehicle .
Another French soldier was wounded in the same incident .
Together with the Sudanese authorities , EUFOR is now investigating how such a tragedy could have occurred .
I should like to express our deepest sympathy to the late sergeant 's family and to all his relations .
May I remind the House that the purpose of the EU operation in Chad and the Central African Republic is to protect the refugee camps that have been established in the areas adjoining these countries ' borders with Sudan as a consequence of the conflict in Darfur .
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Request for waiver of parliamentary immunity : see Minutes
Membership of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Signature of acts adopted under codecision : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Oral questions and written declarations ( submission ) : see Minutes
Lapsed written declarations : see Minutes
Transfers of appropriations : see Minutes
Petitions : see Minutes
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Action taken on Parliament 's positions and resolutions : see Minutes
Order of business
The final version of the draft agenda for this part-session , as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday , 6 March 2008 , pursuant to Rules 130 and 131 of the Rules of Procedure , has been distributed .
The following amendments have been proposed :
Monday :
No amendments .
Tuesday :
( DE ) Mr President , I rise to make the following request : on Tuesday afternoon there is to be a discussion on the Lamfalussy process .
I have heard that Mr McCreevy will be unable to attend .
We must accept that .
The Commission is a collegial body , and any Commissioner can stand in for any other .
I have a high regard for Mrs Fischer Boel as a Commissioner , but would it not be possible in this case to ask Mr Almunia , who is more familiar with the material , to represent the Commission ?
Mr President , I believe you have had word that Commissioner Frattini will no longer perform his function as a Commissioner with effect from 14 March .
We observe a certain disparity between the Frattini case and that of Louis Michel , who ceased to perform the duties of his office from the day on which he became an election candidate .
Perhaps , Mr President , you can ask the Commission to inform us why this distinction has been made and to explain why in one case the Commissioner in question ceased to perform his duties on the day he became a candidate , whereas in another case the Commissioner will not relinquish his duties until about a week after his nomination .
That is the request I make on behalf of my group .
I believe there are no objections to the first request , namely that Commissioner Almunia present the Commission 's views in that debate .
As for the second request , we shall look into that .
Wednesday :
No amendments .
Thursday :
We have received several requests for the debates on breaches of human rights .
The PPE-DE Group has moved that the second item , on Afghanistan , be replaced by a new item entitled ' Arrests of demonstrators following the presidential elections in Russia ' .
( DE ) Mr President , this is not an item about the Russian elections themselves but about the fact that , in the immediate aftermath of the Russian elections , demonstrations were broken up by OMON security forces and 50 people were arrested , most of whom are still in custody .
That was a brutal act of aggression , and we take the view that it demands an instant reaction from this Parliament .
( DE ) Mr President , we discussed this at last Thursday 's meeting of the Conference of Presidents .
I do not believe it serves any purpose to discuss this matter now in isolation .
In the not-too-distant future , in the run-up to the EU-Russia summit , we shall have the opportunity to debate the overall state of relations between the EU and Russia .
This item could be incorporated into that debate .
Accordingly , we have recommended that , instead of consigning it to Thursday afternoon , when only 25 Members are present , we should deal with it as part of the major debate that we already intend to hold .
The delegation from our Parliament is due to visit Russia in a few days ' time .
We should await their return and listen to what they have to report .
( Parliament approved the request . )
( FR ) Mr President , what has just happened and has made some of my fellow Members laugh is very serious .
Mr Daul , we are talking about a young man of 23 , sentenced to death for downloading an article on the rights of women in Islam , in a country that has close ties with the European Union , where our soldiers are defending Afghanistan , with a new constitution that , officially , defends fundamental rights and freedom of expression .
With one voice you have just taken on a responsibility that I hope you will not come sorely to regret .
( Applause )
Let me make the following proposal , Mr Wurtz : I have already written to the President of Afghanistan about this matter , and if you are all in agreement , I shall take the initiative again , not just in my own name but on behalf of the whole House .
May I assume that this is what everyone wants ?
In that case , we shall not immerse ourselves any further in this matter , Mr Cohn-Bendit , and I shall launch another initiative on behalf of you all .
I would really like to avoid a debate .
If Mr Schulz wishes to speak , Mr Cohn-Bendit is entitled to address us first .
Does Mr Cohn-Bendit wish to speak ?
That is the proper procedure , but I shall not give anyone preferential treatment .
Mr Cohn-Bendit does not wish to make a statement .
What about Mr Schulz ?
( DE ) Mr President , I do not intend to make a statement .
I should just like to say that I fully share the views expressed by Francis Wurtz .
The decision we took in the Conference of Presidents last Thursday was based in part on the point he has just made .
May I now ask you to let us avail ourselves of the possibility of adding this item to Thursday 's agenda ?
We now have other matters that we can put on the agenda .

Since I just made an exception for Mr Schulz , I must let Mr Posselt speak again , but please do not let this discussion drag on any further .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to endorse what Mr Schulz and Mr Wurtz have said .

Our purpose was not to prevent the House from addressing another issue but to put Russia on the agenda .
I would appeal to the chairs of the two main political groups to let us return to the old arrangement whereby we could deal with up to five topics .
The restriction to three items was a mistake , and that is the source of these difficulties .
I must inform those Members who do not yet know about the other requests for inclusion in the agenda that the ALDE and GUE Groups have tabled a joint request for the inclusion of a new item dealing with the case of the Iranian Mehdi Kazemi .
I believe that is also a very urgent matter .
In addition , the PPE-DE Group has also requested that the case of Archbishop Paulos Faraj Rahho be placed on the agenda .
I must brief you on the subject of formal requests .
We can now vote again on whether to put the case of the Afghan on the agenda , but if that request were approved , it would definitely rule out a vote on the other two topics .
I have to make you aware of that .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr Schulz requested that this topic be added to the agenda as an extra item .
If that is not possible , I regret to say we shall have to vote against it .
We would like to put the Iraqi bishop on the agenda as well as supporting Mr Schulz 's request .
That , after all , is what he himself was proposing .
We already have two items on the agenda .
A third item may be added .
It can be this one , but it could also be either of the two others that have been requested .
We have agreed on two items , and three more requests are on the table .
Under our Rules of Procedure , we can only put three items on our agenda , which means that we have to choose between the case in Afghanistan , the Iranian case and the Archbishop .
We are bound by that rule .
This is why I asked you whether you were in agreement with the procedure of voting first on the Afghan case .
If that request is approved by a majority , the other two will lapse .
I have to inform you properly of the procedural consequences .
Mr President , I do not see the logic in taking one of them before any of the others , because they are all different ; they are all cases which have great merits on their own .
My group , together with the GUE / NGL Group , has proposed that we have a debate on the Iranian homosexual in mortal danger , and I would like to find a way of dealing with this .
I fear that this is what happens when groups do not coordinate and start acting out of order .
We made a clear decision on Russia at the Conference of Presidents last week .
If the cooperation - and there is a lot of it between the PPE-DE Group and the PSE Group - cannot manage this in such a way that we do not end up in this mess , then I think the two groups ought to be looking at it .
I think you have got to find a fair way , Mr President , of dealing with these three together .
It is indeed a difficult business , because we can only have three items .
It would also be possible , however , to regard the Afghan and Iranian cases as a single issue of ' individuals facing the threat of death ' .
This would leave only one case uncovered , namely that of the Archbishop , which could be addressed in another item .
That , I believe , would certainly be a reasonable approach .
( DE ) Mr President , we shall make an exception and support that proposal .
Let me also say to Mr Posselt that his group 's request explicitly stated ' instead of Afghanistan ' .
Rather than trying to talk one 's way out of a tight corner at this stage , it would be better to consider the implications of requests before tabling them , but in this case , Mr President , we can support your compromise .
I do not see any contradiction there , and in the matter of the Archbishop we can choose a procedure through the President of Parliament which also devotes due attention to his cause without our making it an item in the topical and urgent debate .
( Parliament approved the President 's proposal . )
( The order of business was thus established . )
Situation in Gaza
The next item is the President 's statement on the situation in Gaza .
The chairs of the political groups will outline their respective positions on this issue .
They have , however , asked me to make a statement too , and I have gladly acceded to their request .
In view of the escalation in the Middle East , there was an urgent need to put the current situation on the agenda once more .
We Europeans are again asking ourselves what we can do , how we are to react to the spiral of violence that is causing the Middle East to flare up once again before our eyes .
To come straight to the point , the only response is the resolute pursuit and emphatic fast-tracking of the peace talks between the Israelis and the Palestinians .
The peace process launched in Annapolis must not be destroyed by violence and terrorism .
As Members of the European Parliament , we must do everything in our power to prevent that .
The television images of victims of the conflict that reach us daily are harrowing .
If we were moved to sympathy and outrage a week ago by the sight of the innocent Palestinian civilians , including many children , who lost their lives in Gaza because of the disproportionate use of military force , since last Thursday 's appalling murderous attack on a school in Jerusalem we have been sharing the sadness and anger of the Israeli population .
Sympathy is a noble virtue in politics too , but sympathy is not enough .
Sympathy is no substitute for political action .
Viable political solutions must be found rationally on the basis of clear principles .
The protection of human life and respect for international law are embodiments of such principles , and they must therefore be our benchmarks .
On behalf of the European Parliament I strongly condemn the acts of violence perpetrated by Hamas and other Palestinian extremists .
On behalf of the European Parliament I ask the Government of Israel to listen to the voices both within the country itself and beyond its borders that are calling on it to match its rhetoric with actions designed to promote peace .
The Gaza Strip has become the running sore of the Middle East .
To some people it is a thorn in the flesh , because extremists are in political control there .
Many would like to turn their backs on it , to detach the Gaza Strip from the rest of the world and pretend it did not exist .
Behind the walls that already exist there and those that are currently being built along the Egyptian border live people - men , women and children who have the right to decent living conditions - and people do not tolerate walls and divisions for ever .
People are afraid .
We sympathise deeply with the population of places like Sderot and Ashkelon who live in daily fear of new mortar attacks .
We take Israel 's security very seriously , and we shall always defend it .
The European Parliament and I myself , during my visit at the end of May 2007 to Israel and the Palestinian territories , including the Gaza Strip , have repeated that message countless times .
Mortar attacks on Israel from the Gaza Strip must stop .
That kind of resistance is terrorism , and it is non-negotiable as far as we are concerned .
Yet while people 's emotions are being ruled by fear , death is final , and no one can bring back the hundreds of people whose lives have been sacrificed to Israel 's security needs since the Gaza Strip was sealed off .
We must question the proportionality and the expedience of this approach .
We must also ask whether it is consistent with international law that the population of any territory should suffer for the extremism of their leaders .
Providing the population of Gaza with minimal humanitarian aid and otherwise ignoring them cannot be a durable and viable solution .
The European Union is helping to alleviate distress with its humanitarian assistance , but its priority must now be to make a greater long-term political investment so that its financial generosity is channelled in the most strategically desirable direction .
At the donors ' conference in Paris last December , where the European Parliament was also represented , the European Union pledged EUR 540 million for 2008 to support the process launched in Annapolis .
The new Pegase funding mechanism is already operating .
The European Parliament wants the European Union to lend vigorous support and assistance to the peace process .
As the budgetary authority , however , we must ensure that our financial commitment does not miss its target .
All parties will have to realise that the European Union cannot have military actions destroying the fruits of our financial solidarity .
It is the will of the European Parliament to work hard , as an honest broker , for a solution to the Middle East conflict .
Our new working group on the Middle East intends to contribute to the pursuit of that goal .
In two weeks ' time , together with the follow-up group of the Paris donors ' conference , comprising the French Foreign Minister Bernard Kouchner , the Norwegian Foreign Minister Jonas Gahr Støre , Commissioner Benita Ferrero-Waldner and Tony Blair , Special Envoy of the Middle East Quartet , we shall be discussing progress in the actual delivery of our aid .
If the European Union is to act as an honest broker , even-handedness is imperative .
However , if we focus on the constant diplomatic struggle to describe the escalation in Israel and Gaza in an even-handed manner , we are liable to forget that people , not words , are meant to be at the heart of our policies .
What is termed the Annapolis Process must not be used as a smokescreen behind which the settlement policy remains in place and the Palestinian territories continue to be sealed off with countless security zones that restrict people 's freedom of movement .
The situation of the Palestinian population cannot improve unless people can move freely in Gaza and the West Bank .
Without freedom of movement , the establishment of a stable Palestinian state is inconceivable .
Security has more than just a military dimension . Security cannot be achieved unless people in Israel and Palestine acknowledge and respect each other .
Security begins with reconciliation .
The time has come to sow the seeds of lasting reconciliation between Palestinians too .
Hamas must alter its position and work alongside moderate Palestinians to build peace .
Once again I declare our support for President Mahmud Abbas and Prime Minister Salam Fayyad .
One of the keys to success is an arrangement on the crossing points along the border of the Gaza Strip , with high priority attaching to a rapid solution for cross-border traffic at the Karni and Rafah crossings .
This is an area where the European Union bears special responsibility too .
Ladies and gentlemen , let us do everything in our power to back up our financial commitment with consistent political action so that we can contribute to peace in the Middle East and , above all , give our support to the people of the Middle East .
( Applause )


on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , a few months ago , in Annapolis , the Israelis and the Palestinians had a dream : a dream of two nations , each living securely in its own State with internationally recognised borders , after decades of conflict , grieving families and tragedy .
At the Paris conference a few months ago , the international community was willing to back that dream and enable it to become a reality .
Europe , the main international donor , believes in that peaceful and secure future and is making every possible effort , within the Quartet , to help the two parties break the vicious circle of violence and lack of understanding .
However , in just a few days the disproportionate use of force and armed provocation killed dozens of Palestinians in the Gaza Strip and several Israeli soldiers in violent confrontations .
Only last Thursday , a Palestinian killed eight students at a prominent religious school and was himself killed .
The bullets of fanatics and individuals motivated by revenge , intolerance and rejection of others have made it even more difficult to seek dialogue , compromise and peace .
The international community and we in Europe cannot and should not set ourselves up as judges of either side .
Our task is to make the Annapolis signatories see reason , in other words bring them to the negotiating table .
The PPE-DE delegation to Jerusalem and Ramallah that I led a few weeks ago taught me three lessons .
The first is the expectation of Europe in the Middle East : not just of a Europe that supports the peace process financially , although that is essential , but of a Europe that makes its presence felt much more and is stronger politically .
We have to take more action and act more effectively .
The second lesson is that we need to encourage moderate parties in Israel and Palestine and give them our political support .
The risky path that these parties have chosen , the path of peace , dialogue and responsibility to their peoples , is often not to their advantage electorally .
It is those parties and moderate figures that we have to encourage as much as possible , because they and only they hold the keys to a peaceful and sustainable solution in the region .
The third point is that Europe has to make both sides realise that they will never be able to escape this vicious circle of security , defence and violence by building walls , killing people with rockets , humiliating the other side .
No , it is only if their neighbours , especially young people , are allowed to build a future , realise their ambitions , develop in their own land , that a virtuous circle can be formed and produce results .
Together with my group , I welcome the recent call by both Israeli and Palestinian leaders for further dialogue , following the Annapolis roadmap .
Europe has to step up its political support . I stress , its political support for the moderate groups in power .
That is the only way out and yesterday , during the church service , we heard a Palestinian and a Jewish representative call for the same thing , peace for their peoples .
( Applause )
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as far as the analysis of the situation is concerned , I really have nothing to add to your remarks and those of Joseph Daul .
We all agree on what is needed , and we are all familiar with the present situation .
There is therefore no need for me to recapitulate the list of requirements from the perspective of the European Union or to repeat anything about the role of the EU itself .
I must stress , however , that we cannot stay silent when things we construct with resources provided by the European Union are then senselessly destroyed within a short time .
That has all been said .
For this reason I will look at what we in the Socialist Group have to say in this debate at the current time and pick out the following thought for us to ponder : if the principle of renouncing violence cannot be established as a priority , there will be no solution for Gaza and no end to the spiral of violence that has plagued the Middle East for decades .
This is why it has to be said quite categorically that the renunciation of violence - the announcement by both sides of their intention to refrain from any further use of force and to focus all their efforts on the achievement of a negotiated settlement - is not an invention of this House but underlies repeated attempts over the last few decades - and Annapolis was essentially nothing more than a fresh attempt - to bring about dialogue without violence .
Why do these attempts keep failing ?
The reasons are obvious , and they must be spelled out .
They fail because there are people on both sides with an interest in continuing the struggle or preaching violence .
On the one side , particularly in terrorist circles , there are those who propagate denial of Israel 's right to exist and therefore advocate the use of violence as a matter of principle , while on the other side , in the democratic structures of the State of Israel , whenever an Israeli Government is prepared to negotiate in search of peaceful solutions , the whole process is held hostage by parliamentary tacticians .
This , of course , is precisely what we are experiencing once again .
In Annapolis , the Prime Minister says he wants to negotiate , and Members of the Knesset and ministers from his own government restrict his negotiating mandate for reasons of party-political tactics that all of us will recognise .
The fate of the people in Gaza and the pointless blockade that has brought chaos and misery to that territory are the result of the view espoused by Hamas , which seized power illegally , that violence is the only answer .
This point has to be clearly highlighted , as has the observation that the powers they have usurped are not being used to dissuade radicals in their own ranks from resorting to violence .
That , in fact , is at the root of the suffering endured by the civilian population of the Gaza Strip .
Just as firmly rooted is the fact that those on the Israeli side who seek to sabotage every small step forward because they are pursuing their own agenda succeed repeatedly in undermining even the most minimal progress by means of provocation .
I cannot arrive at any other explanation for occurrences such as the announcement of the continuing construction of settlements .
Who are the ultimate losers ?
Women , children , defenceless people , especially in the Gaza Strip , but also , of course , Israelis living close to the border .
To sum up what we have been experiencing , let me say that the radicals need this conflict to justify their existence .
That has been a fact of life for decades , and this chronic condition is prevalent on both sides .
We must say to these radicals on either side that they can never achieve their goal .
They may perpetuate violence , but they will never achieve their political objectives , because political objectives are never achieved by violence .
Perhaps , then , the crucial task for us Europeans is to take to heart some words spoken by an Israeli , namely Yitzhak Rabin .
In 1995 , he made one of the wisest statements I have encountered : ' We shall fight terrorism as if there is no peace process and pursue the peace process as if there is no terrorism ' .
That is the message to both sides .
Without such a message there will be no peace .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , the situation in Gaza is , first and foremost , a humanitarian disaster .
No amount of condemnation of any party to the conflict will solve that .
Gaza has been besieged since June of last year .
One and a half million people are trapped with hopelessly insufficient provision of water , electricity , fuel and sewage disposal .
Two years ago , three out of every five Gazans depended on UN assistance ; it is now four out of every five .
Businesses are bankrupt , jobs are almost impossible to find and the situation is worse than at any point since the Israeli annexation of the territory in 1967 .
The Israeli soldier , Gilad Shalit , has been held prisoner since June 2006 , and I believe some 11 000 Palestinians languish in Israeli jails .
The major condemnation of the European Union in all of this is that we have followed blindly the strategy of the Americans .
Marc Otte , the European Union 's Special Representative , speaking to our Delegation for relations with the Palestinian Legislative Council recently , said that , on strategy , the European Union follows the USA .
The most obvious result of this is that Palestinian infrastructure , funded by the European taxpayer , is being regularly destroyed by the Israeli army using American weapons .
Should we be committing European money in this way , in these circumstances ?
If ever there was a need for a common foreign and security policy for the European Union , surely this is it !
My group welcomes the informal truce reached at lunchtime today .
We wish Egypt success in its mediation talks , but we are convinced that the cycle of violence , which most recently led to 56 deaths in Gaza on 1 March 2008 and eight deaths in Jerusalem on Saturday , cannot be broken by violence .
For peace to succeed , we need dialogue .
Annapolis promised peace within 10 months , but many of us believe that , once again , Israel is trying to de-legitimise every interlocutor .
Hamas continues to be cynical with its policy of rocket attacks , knowing that the response will be disproportionate .
We condemn violence from all sides .
Yes , Israel has a right to defend itself against indiscriminate attacks on civilians , but it has a duty as a democracy to be more just than its disposable power implies .
We seem to be getting further away from a two-state solution - whether it is the rocket attacks on Ashkelon or whether it is the 530 new settler homes just announced in Givat Ze 'ev , near Ramallah .


The policy of the West has been based on three assumptions : number one , you cannot possibly talk to Hamas ; number two , Israel is the only democracy in the region and must be treated as a normal democracy and , number three , Mr Abbas is the voice of the reasonable Palestinians .

Many in my group question those three assumptions and believe that our policy needs to be looked at again urgently to find a situation where those communities can live together .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - Mr President , like my colleagues , I agree with most that has been said by Mr Daul , Mr Schulz and Mr Watson before me .


The reality of what we are looking at - apart from the geopolitical nature of the conflict or even the historical nature of the conflict - is that , every day , innocent human lives are being lost .
Every single day , families lose their members .
Every single day , one person dies or is injured .
We go further and deeper into driving the forces of moderation further apart .
We should not get into the blame game ; we can all go back over what happened in Gaza over the last months , with the cynical exploitation by the Israeli authorities , cutting off water , power and food supplies to people , literally attempting to starve them into submission .
But this is not just over the recent past ; this is something that has taken place over many decades .
Likewise , the equally cynical reaction of Hamas by launching rockets into areas and by the brutal killing of eight people in a school .
But , even though we can go on and condemn continuously the actions of the extremists on both sides , whether they are the official terrorists or the state terrorists or the state-sponsored terrorists , it does not get away from the ultimate fact that what is required is dialogue ; what is required is understanding ; what is required more than anything else is respect for all human life .
A respect of the value of one single person 's life .
Only then can we truly find a way towards bringing peoples together .
Because all of us speak about a two-state solution , but a two-state solution that is predicated on two viable states , not a patchwork of little bits in between everything else , but two viable states .
Likewise , when those two viable states are recognised , when their leaders are recognised , for negotiation and for discussion .
Through that dialogue with this , hopefully , another first step towards peace in the region with the ceasefire which has now been called , with the talks to get under way between President Abbas and Prime Minister Olmert and also with our desire to give whatever assistance we can .
I do not blame Europe for giving assistance to build roads , and water and energy plants , to build schools and health centres for Palestinian people who were thrown to the four winds when they were displaced from their own lands .
We all have a responsibility to ensure all of our fellow men are cared for and look after .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in two minutes I cannot draft the peace plan , but I can make one or two points .
It is time we reviewed our vocabulary , for it is not dialogue we need but negotiations .
This term ' dialogue ' tells us nothing .
War is being waged there , and it takes negotiation to end wars .
That is the point .
And how does one negotiate ?
Graham Watson is right : if the European Union pursues a strategy of its own - and not the US strategy - it must do the following : firstly , it must negotiate with those who hold power in Gaza - and that means Hamas - so that they do what they have always said they would , namely organise a ceasefire .
Then the other side will arrange for humanitarian aid to be taken to Gaza .
That is called negotiation - you give something , and we shall give something .
Secondly , we must say tell the Israelis that , if they want to negotiate with the Palestinians , there is one thing they must do , namely put an immediate stop to any settlement-building and do so visibly , otherwise they will receive no more assistance from the European Union . That is what I call negotiation .
I am in a position of power and try to exploit it . Otherwise the whole business is pointless .
I believe in this dialogue , and we shall pursue it .
I believe in playing politics , in simply telling my interlocutor that things cannot go on like this .
Israel 's colonial policy is endangering the State of Israel .
We must say that to the Israelis .
And we must tell the Palestinians that the latest attack has endangered the Palestinians and that the attacks must stop .
Once the European Union finally makes the transition from dialogue to political negotiation , which includes exploiting positions of power , there will be a chance of progress in the region .
In short , dialogue can wait - the political cards must be played first .
( Applause )
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , thank you for your statement .
We had only just decided on this formal initiative after 110 Palestinians were killed in bomb attacks on Gaza when eight more victims , this time Israelis , were killed in Jerusalem .
On each occasion we all condemned those crimes , but I agree with the earlier speaker that everyone can see that more is needed if we are to have any hope of breaking this vicious circle for good .
The Union needs to be courageous enough not just to condemn all the crimes committed by both sides , but to point to the main cause of all the problems , the occupation , with its grim succession of cruelties and humiliations , never-ending sources of hatred , despair and thirst for revenge .
There is thus no justification for continuing the occupation .
That must be stated plainly and the appropriate conclusions drawn .
A prominent Israeli peace campaigner , our friend Nurit Peled , winner of the Sakharov Prize , made that clear when she lost her child in an attack by a Palestinian .
Speaking to the then Prime Minister , Mr Netanyahu , she said , ' You killed my daughter ' .
That ' you ' referred not just to an individual but to a policy that his successors had followed and intensified .
Now it is called ' the Gaza blockade ' , and it even goes so far as to deprive the civilian population of food and healthcare .
It is also referred to more generally as ' the sealing off of towns and villages on the West Bank ' , ' incursions and bombings ' , ' targeted assassinations and mass arrests ' , which include children , ' further colonisation and building of the wall ' , ' annexation and policy of the fait accompli in Jerusalem ' , etc .
It is prolonging the war to treat these crimes as relative and allow their perpetrators impunity .
If we are to reach out to the forces of peace on both sides , we must dare to tell the truth .
We must call upon the Union to take this decisive step at last .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) It is the prime duty of any state to guarantee the safety of its people , and that is entirely consistent with international law .
It explains and gives legitimacy to Israel 's response to the increasing number of missiles raining down on it from the Gaza Strip .
This Palestinian rocket fire has been going on , moreover , since 2001 . And it increased enormously after the Israelis withdrew from Gaza in 2005 .
Since then the number of Palestinian rocket attacks on the Jewish state has risen by a good 500 % .
Prior to 2006 it was rare for there to be more than 50 rocket attacks on Israeli territory each month .
By early 2008 the number was 50 a day !
It means that more than 250 000 Israeli citizens are now exposed daily to Palestinian rocket fire from the Gaza Strip .
The accusation that Israel is using disproportionate force in response to this deadly threat conveniently overlooks the brutal tactic used by Hamas and other Palestinian terror organisations of launching their rocket attacks from bases in residential areas .
At the end of February the Dutch media reported on this at length under the telling headline - the words of a Palestinian from the Gaza Strip - ' Please , no rockets on Israel from here ' .
And it should be said that Israel follows strict legal standards in its military procedures .
An example , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , which the Arab world would do well to emulate .
In the meantime Hamas , the leading power factor in Gaza , is able , as a member of the ' axis of destabilisation ' in the region , to count on substantial support from Iran , Syria and Hezbollah .
An unnamed Hamas commander made this abundantly clear only yesterday to the Sunday Times .
If Iran can smuggle its Fajr rockets into Gaza , Hamas may even be in a position to threaten Tel Aviv .
Do the European institutions share this Israeli concern and if so , what is Europe 's strategy vis-à-vis this axis of destabilisation ?
That is the issue , if there is to be stability in the Middle East and any prospect of peace .
Mr President , I can readily join in deploring the recent events in Gaza and the Middle East and in remarking on how terrible is the humanitarian tragedy there and the immense suffering that all sides are being subjected to .
But I have to draw a distinction between the orchestrated , constant , repeated attacks upon the State of Israel and the right of that State to defend itself .
It is an internationally recognised state .
It recognises and accepts a two-state solution in the Middle East , and yet it is constantly , persistently and viciously subjected to the most horrendous violence from across its borders , particularly from Hamas-controlled territory .
I therefore make no apology , from my perspective , of saying that Israel does have the right , indeed the necessity , to defend itself and to act against those who , beyond reason and argument , will not even make the most basic concession of accepting the right of Israel to exist .
We hear much talk in this debate and elsewhere about a balanced and even-handed approach .
There is nothing even-handed in equating , no matter how justified they are , the political demands of Gaza with the vicious and repeated terrorist attacks on Israel as epitomised by the attack on the school .
There is nothing even-handed in equivocating over Hamas 's refusal to recognise Israel and then demanding that no walls , no defensive action should be taken by the state that is not even recognised .
It is a consequence of that failure to recognise the right of Israel to exist which has bred so much of the trouble and turmoil in the Middle East .
The item is closed .
One-minute speeches on matters of political importance
We now come to the one-minute speeches on important political issues .
- ( EL ) Madam President , as you know , the talks in recent weeks between Greece and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , about the name to be used by the latter in its relations with all international organisations , have reached a sensitive stage .
Discussions are taking place within the framework of UN decisions .
During his recent visit to Skopje on 27 February , the EU 's High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy , Javier Solana , referred to Greece 's declared intent to place a veto on that country 's NATO accession prospects if the issue of the name is not settled first .
He made comments which strike an odd note for anyone upholding European principles and values . He even said that he did not favour the veto .
In view of the fact that Greece has been an active , fully-fledged member of the EU for 27 years , we request that Mr Solana refrain from comments that hinder the negotiation process between a Member State and a country wishing to join NATO and the EU .
We urge him to bear in mind that he represents the EU Member States , and call on him to respect their sensitivities and contribute towards resolving the issues , showing the Community solidarity that is expected of him and is his duty in view of the office he holds .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( CS ) I just want to say that I am very alarmed by the attitude of some European Union politicians and Members of this Parliament towards the Czech Government 's negotiations with the US regarding the visa waiver programme .
Although our government has not breached a single provision of the Treaties , it has become an object of criticism , moralising and lecturing . This is spite of the fact that the negotiations took place with a country that has traditionally been a friend and ally of European democracies , not an enemy or a suspect state .
Some critical comments are difficult to explain to Czech citizens who have been waiting for the United States visa waiver programme for years .
Those who wish to discredit the image of the European Union in the eyes of the Czech public are free to carry on with their insensitive actions .
We should all try not to bring up useless negative emotions in this case because there are no grounds for suspicion and the security of the European Union is not at risk .
Madam President , Parma is famous for its ham and the Champagne region for its champagne , but I wonder how many colleagues here realise that Yorkshire is famous for its rhubarb .
The Yorkshire rhubarb growers have applied to the European Commission to grant it protected designation of origin status , and I would urge the Commission to accede to this request .
Nearly 90 % of Europe 's indoor-grown rhubarb was , until recently , produced in Yorkshire ; that figure may have declined , but the quality has certainly not declined .
The special climate of Yorkshire and the special techniques developed by generations of growers have ensured the special quality of this rhubarb , which is grown when the roots are transferred to dark sheds and the darkness means that the stalks grow up seeking light and produce a very special quality which many top chefs and the finest restaurants recognise as being an exceptional delicacy .
I urge the Commission to grant them this status .
( RO ) Technical progress in the medical industry , as well as the progress made by medical schools now make it possible to achieve certain levels of performances in the treatment of patients which seemed unachievable in the past .
Unfortunately , there are still many cases when medical malpractice , which could have been avoided , endangers patients ' lives .
Malpractice still represents a reality in many European Union countries .
This phenomenon occurs mainly in many of the countries that have recently joined the European Union .
Responsibility for the organisation of health services lies with the Member States , and each of the European Union countries has its own legislation on malpractice .
Nevertheless , given that consumer protection and patient rights are important objectives of the European Union , I believe that we need an approach at European level , with respect to the provision of information to patients , as well as with respect to the legislation on malpractice within the European Union space .

( PL ) Madam President , Written Declaration No 88 / 2007 on investigating the abuse of power by large supermarkets was signed by 439 Members and officially adopted by the European Parliament .
In May 2007 the Polish Parliament passed an act on the creation and operation of supermarkets that meets the demands expressed in the Declaration .
In particular , the act requires local authorities on whose territory supermarkets are to be located to ensure that a balance is maintained between the various forms of trade and that the principle of fair competition in the pursuit of commercial activities is respected .
The European Commission has called these measures into question and is demanding that the Polish Government change them or face referral of the matter to the Court of Justice .
I would like you , Madam President , to draw the European Commission 's attention to the flagrant contradiction between Parliament 's expectations and the Commission 's action in this matter .
( DE ) Madam President , the presidential election took place a week ago in Russia , and the result was as disappointing as we might have expected .
Dmitry Medvedev won , and the losers were democracy and human rights .
Three days before the election , I had a meeting with representatives of human-rights organisations in Moscow .
They reported flagrant obstruction of the opposition during the electoral campaign and harassment of independent journalists and human-rights activists .
Moreover , suspicions of electoral fraud cannot be dispelled .
The EU should now send a very clear signal that it does not accept this conduct .
Relations between the EU and Russia should be placed on a more honest footing .
The same applies to relations with China , particularly as today is 10 March , the date on which , in 1959 , the popular uprising in Tibet against the country 's occupation by the People 's Republic of China was brutally crushed .
- ( EL ) Madam President , a short while ago we heard the discussion on Palestine .
The humanitarian situation in Gaza is worse than it has been since 1967 .
Currently 80 % of the population , in other words about 1.1 million people , are dependent on food aid compared with 63 % in 2006 .
Unemployment has reached 40 % , according to a report by Amnesty International .
We saw what happened in the area last weekend : murders were committed on both sides ; there were hostilities , while the Palestinian people awaited a better tomorrow that is slow in coming .
It is therefore time for the EU to assume its responsibilities and implement a policy based on objective criteria rather than dictated by Big Brother America .
( BG ) Yesterday was a day of homage in Bulgaria .
March 9 is the date on which Turkish terrorists blasted the carriage for mothers with children on the Sofia - Burgas train 23 years ago .
Seven people died , out of whom two were children .
Another nine were badly injured .
Today , one of the persons convicted for participation in the preparation of that atrocious crime , Sabri Mehmedali , is a party functionary of the Movement for Rights and Freedoms .
For almost two decades , this Movement , an ethnic partry existing in violation of the Bulgarian Constitution , has been using the central and local government levers , not only tolerating but also encouraging the dissemination of Islamic fundamentalism .
The MRF is the only party in Europe that has erected a monument to proven terrorists who killed children .
Less than two weeks ago , nine people were burnt alive in the sleeping car on the Sofia - Kardam train .
There is serious evidence pointing to arson committed on the eve of the national day of 3 March .
Last year , on that memorable date , Turks harassed sexually Bulgarian young people in the country called Bulgaria .
The sense of impunity that the government has inspiured in the MRF instigates violence among the Turks .
( The chairperson interrupts the speaker )
( NL ) May I draw the House 's attention to next Thursday , 13 March , which is World Kidney Day .
As you are know , chronic kidney disease is something of a silent epidemic in Europe , because its progression is often asymptomatic .
Most people are not familiar with the disease and it is not seen as a priority by policy-makers .
It is thought to affect 8 % of Europeans , a figure that is set to double over the coming decade unless something is done about it .
Last week the European Kidney Health Alliance and World Kidney Day held a symposium on the subject , with an accompanying exhibition , and I myself have set up an MEP group along with a number of colleagues .
I urge all members of the House to support this initiative , because I am convinced that the European Parliament can play a leading role in encouraging Member States to act promptly to get the scale of the problem recognised and an appropriate strategy devised .
( FR ) Madam President , two legally important Council of Europe documents are ten years old : its Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities and the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages .
According to the Copenhagen criteria , these two documents are the criteria for membership of the European Union for the new Member States .
I would urge the countries concerned that have not yet signed or ratified those two legally important documents to do so .
According to the Copenhagen criteria , France , Belgium , Greece and Luxembourg cannot be members of the European Union .
These European documents have to be incorporated and the European Union would have the credibility with Kosovo and new Member States to ask that ...
( The President cut off the speaker )


( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , through the hunger and thirst strike that he is currently on , our colleague Marco Pannella has launched the first great ' World Satyagraha for Peace ' .
Satyagraha is a non-violent collective action .
It is an action about which I should like to inform colleagues in writing , calling for the respect of democratically spoken words , and is emblematic not just as regards the situation in Italy .
I should also like to remind you that today is the 49th anniversary of the Tibetan people 's uprising against Chinese repression and to send our best wishes to the Dalai Lama and the tens of thousands of people on the march in Dharamsala , including the Radical Party leaders , Sergio d 'Elia , Matteo Mecacci and Marco Perduca .
We have just heard that the Indian police are taking steps to prevent the march , and for that reason as well we send them our best wishes .
( PL ) Madam President , a recent major report on child poverty in Europe showed that almost 19 % of our children live below the poverty line , defined as 60 % of average per capita income in a given country .
There are countries in which the figure is higher .
Unfortunately , Poland is one of them .
I therefore welcome the European Commission 's intention to propose a specific programme to combat child poverty .
We are conscious of the demographic situation in the European Union .
Our families need support in many ways , and poor families are in particular need of help .
What , then , are we to think of the high VAT rates on children 's clothing - from 7 % to 22 % in Poland ?
In some countries such as the United Kingdom and Ireland , which are by no means the poorest , the rate is zero , and in others , like Luxembourg , it is very low - only 3 % .
The governments of these countries have been very far-sighted , but there is a great deal of hypocrisy in the matter .
I call on the European Parliament to take action aimed at changing the VAT Directive with respect to children 's clothing and footwear .
( PT ) Madam President , A Voz do Operário , an educational and charitable society , was founded in Lisbon on 13 February 1883 , and for 125 years has worked tirelessly in the fields of education , culture , partnership and social support , which I applaud .
This long-standing work is continued through two schools which aim to equip hundreds of children with skills that will help them to develop , creating the conditions for them to adapt to their social environment in a critical and sustained way , on the basis of principles of justice and solidarity .
This intense and recognised activity continues to this day , despite the society 's current difficulties due to lack of government support because of the Ministry of Education 's failure to fulfil its obligations .
And this is the same Ministry that is trampling on teachers ' rights , leading to the largest demonstration of teachers in Portugal - the ' March of indignation ' - with 100 000 teachers , mostly ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( GA ) Mr President , as regards the increase in the number of sex offenders who are convicted in the courts of various Member States ; a number of countries now have a Sex Offenders Register in operation .
When a sex offender is released the police are informed of his place of residence .
If he lives near a school or a youth club , for example , the police and the public should be given that information .
Many offenders reoffend , especially those who do not receive treatment while in prison .
However , there is nothing preventing them from committing the same crime in another country .
Therefore , it is clear that a European database is necessary in order to ensure international co-operation and to help resolve this problem .
Madam President , may I draw your attention to an issue which is of crucial importance for the proper functioning of our Parliament as well as for our political weight , both individually and collectively .
I respect very much our interpreters and their difficult job .
Most of them are very professional and committed .
I would like to underline , however , that weak interpretation leads to misunderstanding both among us , the MEPs , and between us and the citizens .
When I speak in plenary , I try to use Bulgarian as much as possible .
I have this right and it is part of EU diversity and multilingualism .
I use simple sentences and give the written text in advance , so that I can be sure my message gets through .
However , to my surprise , I recently discovered that one third to more than half of any of my speeches simply disappears in the English version , not to mention the other languages which are used by smaller nations .
I believe I speak to all citizens .
I expect to be understood by all EU citizens and I cannot accept that technical issues prevent that .
I kindly ask the Presidency of Parliament to take the necessary measures to improve the quality of interpretation .
( The President cut off the speaker )

( RO ) Over the last months the press was informed about violent events of a racist and xenophobic nature targeted at Romanian children in Italy .
Two cases caught the attention of public opinion : a 13-year old boy in Civitavecchia , near Rome , who was taken to the emergency room after being beaten by an Italian friend ; In the second case , discrimination and stigmatisation are even more obvious , going as far as a Romanian mother being requested the change of her son 's name .
The child no longer wants to be a Romanian or to hear of Romania .
The reason for such behaviour lies with the fact that the boy was permanently insulted by his friends for being a Romanian , despite the fact that he speaks Italian and he has integrated well into society .
Honourable President , that is why I ask myself whether all these forms of xenophobia with effects on Romanian children are the result of a media campaign against Romanians ; within the meaning of the fundamental principles ...
( PL ) Madam President , at the present time opinions are being canvassed in the European Union concerning changes to the Fruit Juice Directive , 2001 / 112 / EC .
The powerful citric acid producers lobby wants it to be legally possible to increase the acidity of fruit juices and their ingredients , including apple juice , by adding citric acid , lemon juice and lime juice .
Such a possibility would infringe the principle of fair competition and wipe out European fruit juices , including apple juice .
So the question is : why do the EU authorities so often give in to pressure from lobbying groups and , in the event of further surrender , what measures will be taken to protect producers of apples and apple preserves ?
May I remind you that , in the vote on reform of the fruit and vegetable market , the European Parliament rejected an amendment tabled by a group of Polish Members aimed at introducing protective measures for apples .
In these circumstances , acceptance of the proposal to allow additional acidification of fruit juices , including apple juice , with citric acid would be a huge injustice and a blow to the European fruit farming sector .
Madam President , in accordance with the challenge of the EU development cooperation policy for the new Member States , I shall focus on the national strategy for education in Romania .
Even before my country 's integration into the EU , the national strategy for education in Romania was focused on making the system compatible with existing systems in the other EU countries .
Therefore , in 2004 we started the Bologna reforms , and a three-year degree structure has been in use since the academic year 2005-2006 .
Recent surveys show that the acceptance of the European credit transfer system ( ECTS ) is now complete , and students in Romania are already following the new system .
For the future , we plan to finish successfully the implementation of the Bologna reforms , in order to encourage Romanian students to study abroad and foreign students to study in Romania , and to make sure that the degrees awarded by the universities are in accordance with the needs of the labour market in Europe .
( ET ) Colleagues , Belarus is a blot on the map of Europe .
Conditions there are no different from life behind the iron curtain , which many colleagues in this Chamber experienced personally .
I remember the yearning for freedom which most Estonians felt ; and Finnish radio and television helped North Estonia maintain that yearning , along with Radio Free Europe and Voice of America .
All Belarusians need this kind of window on the world .
On 10 December , human rights day , the television satellite Belsat began broadcasting in Poland , its mission is to make Belarus a community of citizens .
The most important partners of the station , which operates in Belarusian and Russian , are the journalists of Belarus fighting for democracy .
The ten per cent of Belarusians who have satellite dishes can currently watch the broadcasts .
The station is backed by Poland , Ireland , Lithuania , the Czech Republic and the USA .
Good television , my friends , cannot be made on the cheap .
Because of this I ask both the European Commission and all Member States to support Belsat financially .
I see it as our bounden duty as democracies .
Madam President , a few days ago presidential elections were held in the Republic of Cyprus .
The voters demonstrated their wish for a speedy solution to the Cyprus problem by electing a moderate politician , Mr Christofias , and by ousting Mr Papadopoulos who was considered by many to be a hardliner and nationalist .
This important change is further proof that the Greek Cypriots genuinely want a resolution of the long-lasting conflict with the Turkish Cypriots and with Turkey , which is occupying 40 % of the island .
The Greek Cypriots have made a very brave move by showing moderation and compromise but in order for things to move forward Turkey must now reciprocate with an appropriate goodwill move such as the return of the ghost city of Famagusta to its lawful inhabitants or the withdrawal of a significant number of Turkish troops of occupation from the island .
Madam President , I wish to raise the Treaty debate which is taking place in Ireland at the moment .
I think it is simply outrageous that Sinn Féin and its leader , Gerry Adams , are claiming in this debate that if you were to vote ' yes ' to the Treaty , it will mean that Ireland will be engaging with NATO and will lose its neutrality .
Nothing could be further from the truth .
There is a triple-lock safety net there to make sure that this cannot happen .
They have said the same thing during the Maastricht , Amsterdam and Nice Treaties and it has always proven to be false on every single occasion .
They have opposed every treaty since 1972 ; yet they claim they are pro-European .
If you are ' pro- ' something , you do not oppose it every single time .
Recently , in his speech to the Ard-Fheis , Gerry Adams never mentioned the EUR 1.65 billion that the EU has given to the peace process on the island of Ireland .
I think it is only fair that somebody who says he is pro-Europe should recognise the work that this Union has done to improve the peace process on the island of Ireland .
If you are pro-Europe , you prove that you are pro-Europe and you do not put out outrageous allegations on this Treaty that are not true .
( HU ) Thank you for the opportunity to speak , Madam President .
Ladies and gentlemen , over the past few days two events have drawn our attention once again to the need for a common European energy policy .
On the one hand , Russia has again significantly cut the amount of gas it supplies to Ukraine , thereby seriously endangering Europe 's energy security .
On the other , Gazprom and the Hungarian government have entered into an agreement on the Hungarian section of the South Stream pipeline , an agreement incompatible with current European Union provisions .
The lesson to be learned from these two events is clear : although Russia can be considered less and less of a partner in energy matters , the European Union 's dependence on Russia is steadily growing .
This dependence is going to result in a deterioration in energy supply security and ultimately to an increase in prices .
To avoid this happening and to ensure that we can guarantee European consumers a secure supply at a reasonable price , the European Union needs to speak with one voice .
It is not yet too late to strengthen the foundations of a common European energy policy based on solidarity . Thank you .
Madam President , I rise to draw your attention to the problems being experienced in the south-east of England in consequence of the industrial action taken in the French cross-Channel shipping industry on the Dover-to-Calais route .
For many years this vital link in the trans-European network has been an inefficient bottleneck .
Perhaps that is understandable when it is caused by bad weather or technical problems , but on this occasion - for over two weeks now - the whole economy of this region has been held an innocent hostage in this dispute .
I ask that the Presidency prevail upon the European Commission and the two respective governments to ensure that the principle of free movement of goods and people throughout the European Union is upheld .
I also ask that in the longer term they bring pressure to bear so that far greater urgency can be applied to finding long-term solutions to this problem , which brings so much hardship to our region .

( BG ) Mme Chairperson , Colleagues , I would like to once again draw your attention to the proper and efficient use of the EU financial resources .
The reports adopted at the previous session and the debates on them clearly define some key outstanding issues of the existing system.Unfortunately the media and the general public continue the debate on the inability of some of the old Member States , as well as the new Member States , including my country Bulgaria , to apply the European standards sufficiently well and to protect the EU financial interests .
It is also obvious that there is a lack of an effective preventive policy aimed at preventing irregularities and violations in the disbursement and absorption of financial resources .
The events over the recent weeks , in which the European Commission has discontinued the resources under the PHARE and SAPARD Programmes for Bulgaria , are a further testimony to the fact that most of the irregularities in the spending of these resources are associated also with corrupt practices .
In this connection , I believe that the European Parliament 's mechanisms should be strengthened and we should insist on monitoring of the implementation before the European Commission .
( The chairperson interrupts the speaker )
( PL ) Madam President , last month I wrote to the European Commission asking it to halt examination of the Republic of Poland 's request for restructuring aid for Krajowa Spółka Cukrowa ( Poland 's national sugar company ) , reject the application and initiate control proceedings .
My letter had the support of 35 MEPs from various countries and political groups .
In connection with the grant of restructuring aid , Krajowa Spółka Cukrowa intends to close the Lublin sugar plant and demolish all the buildings .
In the opinion of the plant 's staff and protest committee , which has also written to the European Commission and the European Parliament Committee on Petitions , the preparation and examination of Poland 's application contravened Community rules .
We still await a response from the European Commission .
I am drawing the European Parliament 's attention to this specific problem because ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we have often discussed here whether the Olympic Games in Beijing will improve or worsen the general human-rights situation in China .
That is a fairly contentious point .
What seems certain , as far as I can see , is that these Games will have a disastrous effect on animal welfare in China .
I read today that there were plans to kill 200 000 cats in Beijing by caging them , starving them , letting them die of thirst or simply poisoning them on the grounds that some guests might object to the presence of cats .
This is something that cannot be tolerated .
I believe people should think twice whether they really want to be spectators at these Games .
Athletes should think twice whether they ought to take part in these Games , and organisers should think twice about the wisdom of their decision to award the Games to China .
We need have no second thoughts , however , about you , Madam President , being able to express the disapproval of this House .
( The President cut off the speaker . )
( PT ) Madam President , I would like to take this opportunity to express our solidarity with the 100 000 Portuguese teachers who demonstrated in an impressive and imposing ' March of indignation ' in Lisbon on 8 March last , organised by the Portuguese National Teachers ' Federation .
In response to an offensive promoted by the Socialist Party Government against teachers ' rights , democratic school management and state education , the teachers reaffirmed their determination to fight for dignity , employment , teachers ' rights and improved conditions , and to protect high-quality teaching and state education in Portugal .
( SK ) In Slovakia on 25 March we will commemorate the 20th anniversary of the Candle Demonstration for religious and civil rights and freedoms .
The Communist regime violently broke up this peaceful gathering of religious believers .
This was a serious breach of civil rights and of the freedom of assembly , guaranteed by the Constitution , by the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and by the Helsinki Final Act ( 1975 ) .
Although the Candle Demonstration was held at the initiative of religious believers , it expressed the desire for respect for human rights of all citizens .
Its roots were in religious and civil dissent , in the sacrifices of people who were executed , in the suffering of unjustly imprisoned people and in the Pontificate of John Paul II .
Because of people 's courage to revolt , the Candle Demonstration in Bratislava in March 1988 can be considered the beginning of the end of communist totality in Czechoslovakia that finally reached its culmination in November 1989 .

( BG ) Mr. Chairman , Colleagues , I would like to draw your attention to the Suhodol case , the environmental disaster for the Bulgarian capital cirty , affecting directly the health and life of millions of people .
In December 2007 , the citizens affected by the unregulated landfill in the area of Suhodol sent a petition to the President of the European Parliament , after the landfill , which had been closed at a decision of the Ministry of the Environment and Water in 2005 , was re-oepened with the intervention of over 2,500 police and gendarmerie officers on 4 December 2007 .
The affected persons invoked the Aarhus Convention which has been ratified by the National Assembly of the Republic of Bulgaria .
The Sofia City , unlawfully supported by the Council of Ministers of the Republic of Bulgaria , has acted without the mandatory environmental impact assessment by the Ministry of the Environment and Water and without subsequent hearings of the affected population .
Furthermore , the Sofia City , again unlawfully suppoorted by the Council of Ministers of the Republic of Bulgaria , has carried out activities for which no enforceable judgment is in place .
I would kindly request you , with a view to terminating the biological terrorism , that the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , the Committee on Petitions ...
( The chairperson interrupts the speaker )
We have to stop now , because we have gone well beyond thirty minutes .
That concludes the item .
Ongoing negotiations on bilateral agreements between the USA and certain Member States with regard to visas and PNR ( Passenger Name Record ) ( debate )
The next item is the statement by the Commission on ongoing negotiations on bilateral agreements between the USA and certain Member States with regard to visas and PNRs .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , let me begin by saying that , as everyone knows , the common European visa policy has so far brought us tangible results with several third countries , such as , very recently , Canada and Australia .
This has not been the case , unfortunately , with the United States .
Since 2004 , we have been working very hard to achieve the aim of having all Member States in the United States ' visa waiver programme .
I , together with the Presidents-in-Office of the Council , have constantly pressed the United States administration to make the voices of all EU Member States heard in Washington .
President Barroso , as you know , has raised the issue personally with President Bush , as well as with the leaders of the US Congress on each of his official visits to Washington .
We have all argued that EU Member States already meet the additional security criteria as set out in the reform legislation recently adopted by the United States .
We fully understand that the lack of progress with the United States has created a lot of frustration among those not yet participating in the US visa waiver programme .
Our citizens have a legitimate right not to understand the reasons for such discrimination .
We should not allow ourselves , however , to be divided and bullied into going beyond what has recently been agreed and accepting what should be out of the question - for example , providing others with access to Schengen migration data and asylum data .
All this should be out of the question .
We need detailed discussion , negotiation and consideration of reciprocity .
We have , after all , achieved a great deal together .
Most recently , we have celebrated the expansion of the Schengen area to most of Europe .
In turn , it gives us collective responsibility for dealing with all matters relating to the security of the external borders and for ensuring the correctness of the screening and handling of data pertaining to all those who visit our common territory .
I do not question the right of EU Member States to engage with the United States on issues which are national prerogatives , for example cooperation between intelligence services or air marshal programmes , but we are of the view that what the US is asking from all of us in different visa-related issues raises serious legal and political questions .
Allow me to underline that , although the sense of urgency may be understandable , we all have to acknowledge that the signing of the memorandum of understanding does not get anyone into the visa waiver programme the next day .
The United States still has to set up the electronic travel authorisation and the air exit control .
It will undertake extensive on-site evaluation visits in the countries concerned .
Therefore , there is no need to hurry into something that is legally questionable and leaves each country to its own devices when negotiating with the United States .
Since all European Union Member States , both those seeking the waiving of visas and those already in the programme , are concerned by this and are being approached by the United States , Coreper - the ambassadors of the European Union Member States - adopted on 5 March a common baseline : a set of common parameters that will guide the discussions the Member States will have individually with the United States .
It will be a good basis for our talks with US partners at the EU-US ministerial troika on 13 March 2008 .
In parallel , I will present tomorrow a mandate for proper EU negotiations with the United States on matters arising from visa policy .
By pursuing a common approach based on common parameters , we will reinforce the possibility of reaching , in the short term , an agreement with our American partners on the mandate proposed by the Commission .
We need to keep in mind that the EU and the United States are close allies .
This has been demonstrated on numerous occasions .
Fighting terrorism is a global challenge , which not only affects us all but which can also only be successfully countered if we work together .
The European Union is ready to do its part by keeping Member States united and respectful of European common legislation and competence .
In conclusion , we will be negotiating with the United States .
It is simply not possible to abandon , to renounce , not only our European legislation but also our common criteria , on the basis of which we have been negotiating .
We will continue to negotiate .
No Member State will be entitled or allowed to violate or to derogate from European legislation on this .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , the common visa policy is a matter of Community competence .
Moreover , Member States are obliged to respect the principle of solidarity in this area .
If that principle is being infringed , we should ask ourselves why .
The Council says the American visa waiver programme should finally create the same rights for all EU citizens .
Unfortunately , we still lack a concrete timetable showing how and when that goal is to be achieved .
The Commission declares that joining the Schengen area at the end of last year was a great success for the citizens of the new Member States .
Yes , entry into the Schengen area brings them real benefit .
But that only makes the humiliating , time-wasting and costly procedure for obtaining a tourist visa for the United States all the more irritating .
Can the Commission now assure us that it will take all necessary steps to achieve equal treatment of all EU citizens by the United States ?
Can the Commission assure Parliament that it will actively take on the coordinating role and render bilateral agreements superfluous ?
Parliament itself must take some of the blame . Especially those on the left of this House , whose indiscriminately harsh criticism of the United States strengthens that country 's conviction that it can quietly and effectively negotiate with individual states .
It also ties the Commission 's hands .
Countries excluded from the visa waiver programme must show political backbone and resist pressure from disgruntled citizens at home .
By breaking the principle of solidarity , they are putting the governments of remaining countries under increased pressure to place particular national interests above Community principles .
Those countries that already participate in the visa waiver programme must stop treating this as a problem only for those who are still waiting to be included .
On behalf of my group , I can assure the Commission that we shall fully support its efforts to achieve visa-free movement of tourists on equal terms for all EU citizens .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( EL ) Madam President , the recent pressure brought to bear by the US Government on individual European governments in connection with participation in the visa waiver programme should be condemned outright and should entail substantial penalties .
Under no circumstances , Commissioner , should any other response be allowed . In other words , the unacceptable demands of a US Government that is already on the way out and whose President , just two days ago , vetoed a bill forbidding the US secret services to use torture , must not be used by the Commission to justify the inclusion of such provisions in European law on the pretext of maintaining solidarity .
The bilateral demands and pressure by the United States infringe the national sovereignty of individual Member States and the fundamental rights of their citizens .
Greece and 11 of the 12 new Member States are being pressurised to allow the US security authorities access to a range of extremely sensitive personal data , which is not required of the other European countries .
It is as if the singled-out countries were Europe 's poor relations or guinea-pigs for America 's new security measures .
Secondly , the measures infringe the common visa policy , because , as we know , third countries are obliged to treat all the EU countries equally .
They cannot divide us into good and bad Europeans .
All the excuses used hitherto , that the passports of some European countries were supposedly insecure , are now invalid , yet the United States carries on regardless !
Thirdly , the measures contravene the recent international PNR agreement between Europe and the United States , which clearly defines what the Americans can and cannot take for themselves .
Fourthly , the measures contravene European legislation on data collection and processing , such as the Schengen Convention .
On this point , you have rightly said that the Americans are asking to be given access to such data .
Madam President , the US Government is promoting whatever is in its own interests by its favourite method of ' divide and rule ' .
The question is , what is Europe doing to protect its authority , laws and citizens ?
Unfortunately , the answer so far has been disheartening .
For years the European Commission has failed to persuade the United States to extend the visa waiver programme to all EU countries on equal terms , thus opening the door to bilateral negotiations with individual countries .
The Czech Republic meanwhile seems in an indecent hurry to accept the new illegal terms , in breach of Community policy and solidarity .
In the midst of this hive of political pressure and secret negotiations , it is encouraging , Commissioner , that you have responded today .
However , in the light of what I have said , we call on you to provide explicit answers on these points :
Firstly , do you intend to take steps against Member States that conclude bilateral agreements with the United States ?
Will you bring a case before the European Court against the Czech Republic if the implementing measures of the agreement prove to be contrary to Community law ?
Secondly , have you asked other European governments that are now negotiating with the United States not to yield to such pressure ?
If so , which are the governments that you have spoken to or are now in communication with ?
What exactly are you telling them , in terms of what they are permitted or forbidden to do ?
Thirdly , if the US Government continues with its policy , what specific steps do you intend to take against a third country that is violating European policy and law ?
Fourthly , can you assure us , Commissioner , that you will not propose or agree to any change in the current PNR agreement , the common European visa policy , or other European policies ? Such change will lead to the unlimited violation of European citizens ' personal data , a policy unfortunately promoted by the United States ?
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , I wish to begin by expressing my understanding of the frustration of the Czech Republic and other non-visa-waiver countries .
However , it would be highly destructive if the Czechs were to go it alone , and we should not fall for US ' divide-and-rule ' tactics .
I hope that the Commission and the Council have learned an important lesson : that a proper mandate and approval of the European Parliament is not an obstacle for negotiations but , rather , strengthens the position of the European Union .
The US should act as a loyal and reliable ally and respect EU law .
Concerning PNR , I wonder why it should be included in the memorandum of understanding at all if it is already covered by the EU-US agreement .
The ink on the EU-US PNR agreement is not even dry yet , and not all Member States have ratified it , so what else is it that the Americans want ?
Has the Commission been able to establish whether the implementing measures of the memorandum of understanding are in line with the EU-US agreement and , if not , can we then assume that the agreement has become invalid ?
Because , if that is the case , then the agreement no longer exists and we should engage in new talks , and I then assume that there will be codecision for the European Parliament .
With hindsight , it is even more regrettable that the Council and the Commission have accepted the EU-US PNR agreement on such vague and open terms , because it leaves much room for the US to further widen the scope of the EU-US PNR agreement .
Finally , I think the EU will only have a proper position vis-à-vis the United States if we speak with one voice , because if we do not - if we are divided - then our rules are made in Washington and not here or in Brussels .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , the business of data exchanges between the United States and the European Union has been fraught with major problems from day one .
The debate on the transfer of passenger name records and the difficulty with the PNR agreement and its legal basis have been enough to show us that there is simply no such thing as balanced negotiations on these issues .
The US side keeps stepping up its demands and asking for more material , while the European Union finds it difficult to speak with one voice and continually resist these unreasonable requests .
These matters are arousing grave concerns among the people of Europe , particularly as regards the privacy of personal data .
They fear that their data will be misused , which is why the approach adopted by the European Union , whether on the transfer of passenger records or on visa policy , has been the focus of huge public interest .
We must not give in to the attempts being made here to create divergences between Member States , for we shall only weaken one another if we do .
Nor can we allow some Member States to be singled out by the United States for different treatment in terms of special demands and requirements .
The Commission has made two requests in this matter : besides the united approach , it especially asks for backbone , backbone and more backbone .
Constant kowtowing to the United States only leads to more onerous demands .

on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , let me say categorically that we must not permit the United States to split Europe .
The European Union must act as one , because that is the only way for it to make its distinctive mark and to carry weight on the international stage .
This applies especially to its dealings with the United States .
A single Member State naturally possesses less clout than the European Union as a community .
Nevertheless , by going it alone , a Member State can weaken the Union as a whole and indeed seriously weaken it .
Such an approach gnaws at the very core of Europe 's credibility .
It virtually gives the United States a hammer , served on a silver platter , with which to drive a wedge through Europe , enabling Washington to obtain from individual states what it cannot obtain from the Union as a whole .
The negotiations between the United States and the EU that culminated in the agreement of July 2007 on the transfer of passenger name records showed that it was scarcely possible for the Union to secure US acceptance of any of its positions .
In the view of many Europeans , and in my opinion too , that agreement already lets the United States access too much information on European air passengers .
Moreover , we do not even know exactly how these data are being used or to whom they are being passed on .
The fundamental question is whether these stacks of data serve any purpose at all in the fight against terrorism .
I therefore find it downright grotesque that individual Member States are now going even further than the agreement requires and are letting themselves be drawn into a kind of horse-trading in which visa waivers are being bartered for the transfer of even more data .
That cannot be in the interests of the general public .
Citizens of these Member States would certainly be given the right to enter the United States without a visa , as other EU citizens already can , but at what cost for all of us ?
No , such an approach exposes Europe to the risk of blackmail .
If the Member States do not act together and show solidarity , and if they do not nurture the cohesion of the Union , we should not be surprised if people in the United States do not take the European Union seriously .
( PT ) Madam President , Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I have five brief points to make .
First : divide and rule .
The American administration 's strategy in seeking to negotiate bilaterally with EU Member States does not surprise me .
Divide and rule is an old and understandable tactic , but we cannot allow EU Member States to aid and abet that strategy .
Second : weakening of the European position .
Negotiations between the Commission and the American administration have been protracted .
It is regrettable that any Member State should decide to sign a bilateral agreement , thereby weakening the European Union 's common position in relation to US demands , particularly on the eve of the European Union-United States ministerial troika to be held this Thursday in Slovenia .
Third : collapse of solidarity .
As European Parliament rapporteur for Schengen , I followed the calls for the early enlargement of the Schengen Area and the abolition of internal borders .
The demonstrations of joy just two months ago now seem to ignore the fact that we are managing a common area .
I roundly condemn this lack of European solidarity .
Fourth : the legality of the agreement .
There is a worrying cloak of secrecy over certain still unknown details of the agreement .
It will be particularly serious if it seeks to bypass the agreement between the European Union and the United States on the sharing of data under the PNR Agreement , and is particularly unacceptable if it directly or indirectly allows the United States to access European databases such as the VIS or SIS systems .
Fifth and final point : the freezing of these agreements .
I call upon the Council to reach a consensus on freezing these undesirable bilateral agreements as a matter of urgency , and call upon Commissioner Frattini and the European Commission , as guardian of the Treaties , to bring all the instruments at their disposal to bear .


( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , many people have already said this , but I must say it again : I believe that this is a particularly serious matter .
It is serious firstly because our American allies have deliberately - it must be borne in mind that they have done it deliberately - chosen to deal separately with European Union Member States on matters which they know very well are part of the competences of the European Union , taking advantage of that to make unreasonable security demands .
It is also serious , though , from the point of view of the Union .
It is a sad sight to see the Member States lining up separately in order to be able to offer their citizens the prospect of a trip to the United States without a visa , in exchange for security measures that the Americans could not negotiate with the Union as such .
I believe that this mess is the unfortunate result of a tragic lack of political strategy on our part .
Until now , the Commission and the Council have dealt with the United States administration pragmatically , on a case-by-case basis , each time at the request of the Americans , without ever having the courage to demand real reciprocity from the Americans .
I am not addressing that remark to Mr Frattini , because I know he has tried , but he was not supported .
If I understand it correctly , given the seriousness and urgency of the situation , the Commission is now asking for an explicit negotiating mandate to ensure that the Americans comply with what they should have complied with from the outset , Community law and Union competences .
We shall support the efforts by the Commission on this point , but the Commission must not forget that it will be needing Parliament , especially when the Treaty has been ratified , because nothing that is being done now can enter into force if Parliament does not authorise it at some point .
The Commissioner should tell that to his successor , whether temporary or permanent .
( CS ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , as we heard earlier , the situation is untenable .

Three years after the enlargement of the European Union there is inequality between the old and new Member States and the negotiations between the European Commission and the United States on eliminating this inequality have not made much progress .
There can therefore be no objections to bilateral negotiations between the countries concerned , in particular since they do not represent a breach of any part of Community legislation .
On the contrary , the Czech Republic included EU requirements in its Memorandum so that the Memorandum was fully compatible with EU law .
This is also reflected in the opinion of the Council Legal Service .
Community competence in the matter of common visa policy has not been breached either because the Electronic Travel Authorisation System that is being set up is not a visa .
It is certainly true that the US is willing to negotiate on including countries in the visa waiver programme only on a bilateral basis since it is obliged to do so by its domestic legislation .
Only countries can be admitted to the programme , not international organisations or communities .
That is the reality of the situation .
No precedent for other countries has been created .
In my opinion , the Czech Republic and other countries should and can continue bilateral negotiations with the United States .
Of course they will always be prepared to be transparent in their actions , to share information and to discuss their next step with the European Commission and with the presidency .
I would like to thank the Commissioner for his realistic attitude , demonstrated in his presentation .
I would just like to warn against any outside pressure at EU level on some individual Member States that might involve political risks and discredit the image of the European Union , especially now when ratification of the new Reform Treaty is taking place in the individual states .
( NL ) The Americans ' 2008 tactic of divide and rule sets the pattern in transatlantic relations .
But more than anything else we should realise that ultimately we have only ourselves to blame for this .
This time the Czechs were the first to be targeted and the first to yield .
Last Thursday the Commission was unable either to deny or confirm that European law and rules had been contravened .
How bizarre is that ?
When are Member States going to realise that each of them , to a greater or lesser degree , is a voice crying in the wilderness ?
In political dealings with the rest of the world and thus with the US it is crucially important that Member States should speak with a single voice .
Transatlantic relations are indisputably very important , but none of the EU Member States - however loyal - is ever going to become the 51st state of the US union .
This has to stop .
The ball is in Europe 's court .
And quite frankly I am furious that the Council is not represented here in the House at the moment .
That shows a total lack of understanding of what urgency means .
Madam President , as others have said , this memorandum of understanding is illegal under European Community and EU law , which confers competence on the Community or Union for visa policy , key aspects of anti-terrorism and security policy and transfer of passenger data .
It must surely be illegal for the Czech Republic to transfer to the US any information from common EU databases , such as the Visa Information System .
But , almost more importantly , it is politically disastrous .
Some of us learnt early last year on a visit to Washington how damaging the bilateral lobbying efforts - not only those of the Czech Republic , by the way - were to the attempts by the Commission and Presidency to present a united front in the interests of the whole EU .
But no , some Member States just could not get it .
Sure , I understand the frustration of countries whose soldiers are fighting and dying alongside Americans , not only in Afghanistan but , controversially , in Iraq , at the fact that their citizens are suspected of terrorism when they want to visit the US .
There is an irony in there somewhere . But how stupid to fall into this ' divide-and-rule ' trap !
This is so far from being in line with EU aspirations to have weight in the world that it causes one almost to despair and exposes the Council as a whole to ridicule .
Like Ms Hennis-Plasschaert , I note that they are not here to answer that charge tonight .
( SK ) Slovakia , as well as Poland , Lithuania , Estonia and some other EU Member States have long been struggling , just like the Czech Republic , to get on the list of countries that will not need a visa to travel to the United States .
Any progress in the journey towards the abolition of visas is very important for our citizens because it means achieving equality for all EU citizens .
I trust that both the Commission and the Slovenian Presidency will realise that a legal action against the Czech Republic , taken because the country signed the Memorandum of Understanding with the US , would not be a good signal from Brussels just when the Lisbon Treaty ratification process is under way .
I am in favour of adopting a compromise between a single EU approach and rules according to which the Member States could also engage in bilateral negotiations with the US .

( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , let us remember that , with the exception of Slovenia , all citizens of the new accession countries travelling to America must obtain a visa .
Unlike other Europeans , these citizens must queue at American embassies and pay substantial sums , and for years they have been waiting in vain for the Union to support their efforts for inclusion in the visa waiver programme .
Among the old Member States , only the Greeks are in the same situation .
It is true that the European Union has long been in discussions with the United States on this issue and that , especially following the expansion of the Schengen area , the officials in Brussels have stepped up the pressure on the Americans to include the new Member States in the visa waiver programme .
However , four years have passed since our accession and nothing has happened so far .
That is why the Czech Republic has decided to go it alone and grant its citizens their wish .
The Memorandum signed between the Czech Republic and the US must therefore be seen as a contribution to collective efforts to give all members of the Union the same rights .
Let us remember that this step is fully in accordance with EU law and no one should dispute it .
( DE ) Madam President , we also discussed this issue in the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , and there is no one on that committee who does not sympathise with the situation in which the new Member States find themselves , particularly with regard to visa policy and bilateral dealings with the United States .
Yet there are also older Member States - Greece was mentioned in this context - which are similarly waiting for a change in US visa policy .
No one , then , is questioning their right to break ranks , but we must ask whether what is legal is necessarily legitimate .
In this case it is not legitimate , because it undermines a united approach on the part of the European Union and thereby obstructs the conclusion of an agreement that would apply to the whole territory of the European Union .
A step-by-step approach is essential .
We have just managed to deal with the new members ' accession to the Schengen Area .
The next step is to consider how we can obtain a general arrangement on the visa issue .
One final word : I find the threat with the Treaty of Lisbon utterly disgraceful .
( CS ) Allow me to elaborate a little on the debate held here a few minutes ago .
It was said many times that we , meaning the European Union , must pursue a single and common approach when dealing with the United States .
This is what the whole issue seems to be about as far as most speakers are concerned .
It is not about individual benefits for individual members of individual Member States : it is about a common anti-American policy .
Let me tell you that for the overall majority of Czech citizens the visa waiver programme represents the symbolic final touch to the historic occasion of our return to the fold of democratic countries .
I also want to assure you that the process of visa waiver ratification by the Czech Parliament will be much quicker than the process of ratifying the Lisbon Treaty .
Madam President , like many colleagues , I also think that the unity of the European Union is very important , not only in visa policy but other issues related to the United States of America .
I would , however , like to ask the Commissioner specifically : do you think that the US is now demanding from those Member States who are trying to independently negotiate a visa waiver programme different levels of requirements based on other reasons than security ?
Do you think that the US is playing EU Member States against each other and trying to use other issues also linked to the matter ? Or is it just security concerns from the US side ?

Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you for your contributions .
As freedom of movement is , in my view , a fundamental right of our fellow European citizens , which we recognised by enlarging Schengen , the first thing that has to be said is that the European Commission and the European institutions must work towards an absolute and not a relative result .
All the citizens of all the Member States must be allowed to travel to the United States without a personal visa .
That is our clear objective and , as a result , I understand the apprehension and concern and also the unease of some Members from Member States which have been in the European Union for many years , such as Greece , or have been members for four years .
A first aspect has to be clarified , however , if we are to have a fair picture : it is not true that we have achieved no results !
Our work at a European rather than a national level has provided significant results , very recently with Canada , for instance .
I visited Canada last year , at a time when none of the new Member States were included in the visa waiver programme with Canada .
Twelve months on , they all are .
We have agreed a system of parity of treatment with Australia , with the result that there is no discrimination between the old and new - in inverted commas - Member States of the European Union .
We have yet to achieve such results with the United States , it is true , but I should like to remind Members who spoke of four years , that is to say the date on which they entered the European Union , that the United States changed its law less than a year ago , in August 2007 .
It is only since that date that the United States has said that it is willing to extend the visa waiver programme .
It is not therefore possible to speak of four years , leaving aside the fact that negotiations with the United States date back even further , but of less than 12 months of negotiations on the basis of a new law .
What we negotiated before , on the basis of a law which has now changed , is obviously no longer of any relevance .
In my view , we must work with the United States to bring all European citizens within a regime where they do not need personal visas , without some Member States thinking that they can achieve such a result before the others .
I say that very frankly .
Why ?
Because that would give the upper hand in negotiations to our interlocutor , in this case our American friends , who may well be our friends and allies , but are nevertheless conducting negotiations , and will press on with those negotiations if they find any weaknesses in Europe 's house .
We must ensure that we do not show any weakness : that is the point and we must be very clear about it .
You will remember that when I presented the Europe-United States PNR agreement to this House , an agreement which some criticised and others welcomed , I said that the agreement would place Europe in a stronger position vis-à-vis the USA .
I should now like to say that those who supported the European PNR were right , because one of the key points of the mandate that we are requesting is that there can be no exchanges of data and information over and above what is provided for in that agreement , and if such requests were to be made , the European Union would reject them .
Therein lies the proof that such a European agreement makes up for the weak position of Member States from which further data have been requested - and there is no doubt that they have been requested - as well as access to databases which belong to us , to Europe .
As a result , however , of that agreement which some criticised and others supported , we can now tell our American friends very clearly that it is not possible to go beyond the European PNR agreement .
That is a sign , in my view , of strength and not of weakness .
We already know what can and cannot be done .
Our regulations , European laws and the agreements that we have signed and initialled set that out .
In that respect , it is obvious that Europe has to speak with a single voice when tackling these issues , and it is also obvious that the ' divide and rule ' approach is the most mistaken approach of all from a European point of view and is an approach which we must resist and which the Institutions obviously have to oppose .
Why , however , are we discussing this issue in this House today ?
Because even though there are clear laws , even though there are detailed agreements , there has been a temptation , if I may put it that way , to jump ahead .
A temptation which may be politically comprehensible to the citizens of those countries involved , but which is not institutionally acceptable .
It is for that reason that we have had to react , obviously in a spirit of solidarity with all the Member States , including those aspiring to enter the visa waiver programme .
What have we done ?
We have asked Coreper , that is to say the ambassadors of the Member States , to agree on a baseline document .
We consider that document to be a red line : it reiterates what can and cannot be done .
We have also asked the Member States to ensure that any political negotiations abide by that red line , that key point , and have reiterated , for instance , that exchanges of information over and above those for which the European agreements already make provision cannot be agreed to , and that issues such as the return of ' overstayers ' have to be negotiated at European and not at national level .
Matters of a kind that , frankly , it would not have been necessary to reiterate had there been a formal mandate .
We have done so for the sake of clarity , to say once and for all that we understand the concerns of the Member States which are not at present in the visa waiver programme , but that the rules of the European Union take precedence over those concerns .
Were we to call that into question , even once , it would set a precedent that would be followed by many more , each more dangerous than the last .
In conclusion , Madam President , we are working this week to propose a negotiating mandate to the US that will make it very clear that all the Member States , unanimously , even the representatives of the Czech Republic and Estonia , have agreed that the baseline cannot be overstepped in individual negotiations .
Are there margins for individual negotiations ?
Yes , certainly , in areas for which Europe is not competent , that is obvious .
However , for all those issues for which Europe is competent , and they are the overwhelming majority , the Member States are giving us a unanimous mandate ; that , I may say , is a line that the Slovenian Presidency is absolutely determined to follow .
Tomorrow I shall ask the Commission for a formal mandate to inform the United States of our line and , as regards that line , there can be no concessions or retractions .
Mr President , as often in these debates I find that we do not get an answer to our questions .
I put a very precise question to the Commissioner : whether he has been able to establish if the implementing measures regarding the PNR part of the memorandum of understanding are in line with the EU-US agreement , and , if not , does that mean that the agreement would be invalid ?
The Commissioner said that some Members opposed the agreement and others endorsed it .
I would like to remind him that when we passed a resolution in this House last year in July , it was passed with near unanimity and it called the agreement substantially flawed .

Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I shall be very brief .
I thought I had made myself clear , but let me reiterate : there will be no implementing rules , contrary to the document approved by Coreper and the mandate that I shall request .
There are no implementing rules as yet , because the Czech Republic has agreed to our request not to present implementing rules until a common European position has been found .
We have found that position and the government of the Czech Republic will abide by it .
The debate is closed .
Data protection and consumers ' rights ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on data protection and consumers ' rights .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , I should like to begin by pointing out that Directive 95 / 46 / EC ( the ' Data Protection Directive ' ) applies to data controllers established in the Community .
It also applies to controllers not established on the territory of a Member State when such a controller uses equipment situated on the territory of a Member State , unless such equipment is used only for purposes of transit through the territory of the Community .
The Directive ensures rights to all individuals , whatever their nationality or place of residence and regardless of whether they act as consumers or not .
It lays down substantive provisions imposing obligations on data controllers and recognising the rights of individuals .
It also prescribes sanctions and appropriate remedies in the event of breaches and establishes enforcement mechanisms to make them effective .
We follow closely developments in technology and associated challenges , in particular those relating to the protection of privacy and personal data .
As far as transatlantic cooperation is concerned , we maintain regular contact with the United States authorities responsible for monitoring safe harbour - the Department of Commerce and the Federal Trade Commission - in the context of which questions relating to the protection of personal data are addressed .
Issues posed by new technologies and their worldwide deployment are also examined .
In this particular case , which is the merger of Google and Double Click , the case is still being analysed by the Commission in order to decide whether the envisaged merger is in line with Regulation 139 / 2004 / EC ( the ' Merger Regulation ' ) .
We will adopt a decision soon .
However , it can be said that the Commission has carried out an extensive analysis of the economic aspects raised by the proposed merger in order to determine whether it is compatible with common market rules .
Companies are required to comply with national data protection laws implementing the Data Protection Directive , and national data protection authorities are the bodies responsible for enforcing compliance by those entities which process personal data within their territory .
A merger between different entities does not exonerate the parties to the merger from their obligations under national data protection principles .
Indeed , any decision the Commission may take to approve a merger is without prejudice to the obligations imposed on the parties by Community legislation on the protection of privacy with regard to the processing of personal data .
Irrespective of the approval of the merger , the new entity , in its day-to-day business , will have to respect the fundamental rights recognised by all relevant instruments , including , but not limited to , privacy and data protection .
National data protection authorities are therefore charged with the task of ensuring this compliance and , if necessary , taking appropriate measures to enforce compliance .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , the Internet is a great boon .
None of us can imagine working without this new technology today .
It also permits exchanges of data on a staggering scale .
Nothing , however , is perfect , and the imperfections become clear when billions of file records are stored over long periods of time .
On the case under examination , Commissioner Frattini made it clear that the legal framework of the European Union had to be activated to examine the merger of Google and DoubleClick .
We shall await the findings of that examination and then draw our political conclusions .
This does , however , beg the basic question as to how we deal with data protection on the Internet , because user companies , large or small , are not indifferent to the way in which their data are protected .
There are no easy answers , because at the heart of this issue is the unanswered question whether an Internet Protocol address constitutes personal information .
In the case of providers that allocate static addresses it does , but with a multitude of other providers the IP address does not automatically reveal the user 's identity .
In such cases , we believe there is actually a net loss of data protection , because collected data can even be disclosed to third parties .
Whether legal rules are needed must always be judged in the light of necessity and proportionality .
Users , of course , obtain a host of benefits by publishing their data .
The crucial point is that they take a conscious decision to pass on their data and that they can determine how the said data may be used .
This means that users must have information rights , that is to say the right to be told what data pertaining to them are stored , and there must therefore be clear rules governing the transfer and sale of data to third parties .
For this reason , we should begin with voluntary commitments , ideally adopting a transatlantic approach - because we simply cannot regulate the Internet in the absence of common global initiatives - and if the voluntary commitments prove inadequate , we shall then have to discuss legal measures too .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( EL ) Mr President , when ordinary users go online , they are unaware that their most sensitive personal data , such as their political and philosophical beliefs , finances , purchases , travel and interests generally , are recorded while they perform simple searches , make purchases or take part in discussions .
Indeed , private companies collecting such data are often not even European . Today neither European laws nor international agreements prevent large private companies from using our personal data .
I would go so far as to say that nothing prevents third-country security authorities from accessing such data .
Why does Europe have the responsibility and potential to become involved in this ?
Because , as Mr Frattini rightly said , the Data Protection Directive applies to electronic and Internet service providers within and outside Europe .
Our personal data does not lose its importance and interest simply because a company is outside Europe .
I have three specific proposals , Mr President :
Firstly , private citizens themselves really must be called on to give their express consent to any collection , let alone use , of their personal data as , in any case , the directive I have mentioned stipulates .
This must be posted not in small print , but clearly and explicitly .
At present , even those citizens wishing to delete their data or prevent it from being shared with third parties are usually unable to navigate their way around confusing web pages .
Sites are designed to be complicated , so that companies using special tools and software can later discover the users ' interests and sell them products , or so that the security authorities can subsequently locate users for other reasons .
Secondly - and I am glad Mr Frattini has said this - the European Commission really must understand that the mergers of those companies are important in terms not only of financial analyses , but also of citizens ' personal data , which is probably being abused by others , or could be in future .
We are not merely a community of money and markets ; we are , first and foremost , one of values .
Thirdly , Mr President , allow me to conclude : today 's discussion opens up a very broad topic the surface of which we have barely scratched , although it concerns a worldwide problem .
An international Charter of Fundamental Rights for Internet users is needed .
Nothing of the sort exists at present .
In this day and age , however , Big Brother will not appear , Mr President , because some dictatorship puts him there .
Big Brother will do so because our whole lives are now recorded in the form of electronic traces on the Internet . If all of us together cannot find some basic principles to protect us , we shall wake up tomorrow to a very different and , I believe , far nastier world , however user-friendly , enjoyable and magical everything may seem to us today .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) I would have liked really to see Mr Frattini 's colleague Mrs Neelie Kroes sitting alongside him today , because I think the strict differentiation between market rules and privacy rules is outdated .
We know that the merger between Google and DoubleClick is going to happen and of course the European Parliament does not want to meddle in the details of that merger , but we do want to know what guarantees of privacy will be given .
Personal data have become big business .
Information on clients , users and their habits and preferences gives companies an invaluable competitive edge .
So the protection of personal data should no longer be viewed in isolation from competition policy .
The Commission has opted for a very traditional approach to competition which is no longer adequate to deal with 21st-century behavioural advertising .
Competition must include privacy and consumer safeguards if mergers are going to result in mega-concerns that hold a lot of information on their users , as is the case with Google / DoubleClick , for example , or would potentially be the case following a tie-up between Microsoft and Yahoo , Yahoo and Rupert Murdoch , or Reed Elsevier and ChoicePoint , etc .
Personal data can be misused to exclude newcomers from the market and the point is that in a healthily competitive situation the consumer can insist on privacy , companies can be disciplined by consumers , as happened with Facebook , for example .
And we have rules for media concentrations too .
So why do we not include privacy protection in competition policy ?
IP addresses can be regarded as personal data . And that has potentially far-reaching implications for the industry , but for the user too .
So European , but above all international , standards are urgently needed for this sector .
The European Union must give a lead here and work on this whole issue with America , in consultation with the industry .
I thus suggest that this be placed on the agenda for the Transatlantic Economic Council .
Lastly , it is in the interest of businesses too that people should feel confident that their privacy is properly safeguarded .
Just now I mentioned the case of Facebook , where consumers used their muscle to make Facebook more careful about privacy .
So I would urge the European Commission to take a different approach which combines competition policy , consumer protection and the protection of personal data or privacy into a single whole .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , we are concerned about a merger which is not really a merger : it is the union of two complementary undertakings .
One undertaking , Google , which has a myriad of data , more data than anyone in the world , and another undertaking , DoubleClick , which has the capacity to process those data on consumer habits , manipulate and channel them .
This matter should be of concern to the European Commission because it is a dangerous marriage for the citizens of Europe , and for the privacy of our daily habits .
The structure of the merger may endanger that privacy , yet the national authorities do not have the capacity to know how those data are being manipulated , and neither will consumers know where their data are going or how they are being used by third parties .
. - ( SV ) Mr President , the consumer is defenceless on the Internet .
If you want to use popular services , you cannot select the option ' do not collect data on me ' .
Nor can you find out what happens to your data .
You do a search , you buy something .
If one and the same company is able to combine all that information , it can gain an enormous marketing advantage and amass a wealth of information on all those who use the Internet .
The same applies if you want to download a film legally on the Internet .
Then you have to use the software of a single company , i.e. Windows .
We cannot protect ourselves against these large companies unless our legislators help us .
How flimsy data protection can be becomes apparent when , for example , the fight against copyright infringements is also factored in .
A file sharer gets his computer searched and all his private information perused .
This information is then sent to media companies in order to establish what was copyright-protected and what was not .
When media companies have access to police investigation material , how can you protect consumers ?
It is time data protection was given a powerful boost .
( DE ) Mr President , I must admit that I like this ' catch the eye ' arrangement , particularly the part before the countdown starts .
We undoubtedly have much to discuss in the realm of data protection .
Some members from the Greens Group addressed the subject of data pertaining to private businesses and individuals .
Mergers like the one between Google and DoubleClick certainly do raise some questions .
Nevertheless , care should be taken not to confuse one thing with another .
However many frogs croak , the result will only ever be a croaking sound .
What I mean is that we should not forget the need to understand the underlying technical processes too .
We - and my political group is certainly no exception - often take a particularly close interest in matters relating to the Internet and , of course , data privacy and frequently respond to them in a highly emotional way .
If I am to grasp how the Internet and data capture work , however , I must first understand the underlying technology .
In this respect , I believe there is much to be said for Mr Weber 's approach of ascertaining first of all the extent to which IP addresses might constitute personal data within the meaning of Directive 2002 / 58 on privacy and electronic communications , for in some cases the IP address in conjunction with user data certainly can be the key to the collection of personal information .
On the other hand , given the state of technological development today , when fridges , for example , can automatically retrieve recipes from the Internet , the question whether the IP address of my fridge truly constitutes personal data is obsolete .
( DE ) Mr President , as the previous speaker rightly mentioned , the technical background to these rules has to be examined .
We have a case here that is somewhat awkward in that it does not fall entirely under the heading of competition law , and yet it involves overstepping a critical mass , which poses serious problems .
At the end of the day , it will be more than difficult for national data-protection authorities and data-protection legislation to deal with any infringements arising from this merger , because the data passed on to DoubleClick will be further processed in a completely different way .
We have a technical difficulty here that we must resolve .
I believe that the accumulation of so much potential in the hands of one group is extremely bad for the market , because it excludes new competitors .

Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I also believe that the concerns expressed by many speakers are concerns that we all share , in the sense that we do not as yet have a satisfactory system for protecting personal data as far as the new technologies and the Internet are concerned .
The same attention , possibly even more , has to be paid to protecting personal data during a counter-terrorism investigation as it does when my personal data are revealed not to a court , but to a private industrial group .
These are therefore serious concerns and , obviously , although relatively new , the idea that Mr Lambrinidis has put forward of a sort of world data protection map is completely in line with the global nature of the Internet .
As you know , and as I have just pointed out in my introduction , the existing rules are applied with reference to the territory in which a particular provider is established , but this geographical limit is not really in keeping with the Internet .
That is therefore the direction in which I believe our work should be moving , and I also believe that it is important to find a link between competition aspects and aspects of policy to protect consumers , including their personal data .
This is something about which we are only beginning to talk and , as you know , the Commission is following developments in many spheres of data protection that are not covered by European legislation .
These include initiatives by the Council of Europe , the United Nations and the International Conference on Data Protection .
Nevertheless , there is a risk that we have to keep in mind .
Let me put the following question : might a world data protection map not weaken protection as it would have to cover an extraordinarily large number of people ?
If anything , that makes it clear that we have to consider our European legislation as an example - if I may be so bold - to be exported and not accept weaker data protection rules solely because those rules are to be applied in a much broader geographical context .
In conclusion , I can tell you that in order to set practical work in motion , the so-called ' Article 29 Working Party ' , of which all those involved in this work are aware , and which is a Working Party responsible for coordinating data protection measures , is preparing a reasoned opinion on data protection in relation to search engines and service providers .
In other words , we are tackling this aspect , and a questionnaire that will provide a starting point for this reasoned opinion has been sent out ; the questionnaire covers data protection policies and has been sent to a very large number of senior figures , search engine managers and service providers .
My view is that that the responses gathered and the opinion which , I am sure , will be published as swiftly as possible , hopefully before the summer recess , could perhaps for the first time provide a coordinated answer as to the problems involved and the directions that work should take .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( RO ) Nowadays more and more European citizens use Information Society services , be it financial services , intelligent transport systems , taxation systems for road infrastructure usage , computerised systems for healthcare , the Internet , surveillance and monitoring cameras , or use of biometric data .
The security and safety of such services is vital for user confidence .
The security of electronic networks and computerised systems along with technologies for enhancing personal data protection are the main concern of the Strategy for a Safe Information Society , adopted by the Commission in 2006 .
In a Communication dated May 2007 the Commission presented , the potential risks related to the use of information technology , such as identity theft , surveillance or even fraud .
In order to achieve a safer Information Society the specific products and services should include mechanisms for data protection even from the design stage .
Likewise , it is necessary that the processes and principles applicable to providing security in the Information Society be defined and accessible to all those involved in the design , operation and use of computerised systems .
I ask the Commission to examine the necessity of certain Community regulations on the security of electronic communication services and computerised systems .
Any supplier of services specific to the Information Society must observe the national and international legislation on data protection .
Common rules in the field of civil aviation security ( debate )
The next item is the report by Paolo Costa , on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on common rules in the field of civil aviation security and repealing Regulation ( EC ) No 2320 / 2002 - .


rapporteur . - ( IT ) Mr President , Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , we are today celebrating the conclusion of a procedure that started as far back as September 2005 .
The road that we have travelled has been long and in some cases difficult , but ultimately I feel that it was worth the effort .
The issue at stake is the security of civil aviation .
The regulation that we had in force , that has been in force up to now , was adopted in the emotional climate surrounding the attacks on the Twin Towers on 11 September 2001 .
It had a difficult birth , but was then approved and applied and , while it has had some success in recent years , there have been practical gaps and inadequacies .
It is for that reason that we are now about to revise it .
The aim is to provide a more flexible response to technological , psychological and behavioural changes in the fight against terrorism , obviously taking account of the experience that we have gained up to now .
Security and protection from terrorist attacks are an obvious priority , but cannot be discussed in isolation . They have to be seen in a slightly more balanced context .
Checks have to be stringent and efficient , but should not overly inconvenience passengers , and their application should not entail unnecessary costs .
Costs should possibly be shared and should not be borne entirely by passengers .
It is for that reason that new checks cannot be introduced without adequate democratic scrutiny .
It is on those two points - costs and democratic accountability - that Parliament 's delegation focused its attention during the conciliation stage of this procedure .
As regards costs , I am happy to be able to inform this House that an article , not a recital , has been included to lay down that they - security costs - must be shared between passengers , airports , air carriers and national governments .
Under a further article , not an interinstitutional declaration as in 2002 , but an article , the Commission is to examine the problem in more detail and to put proposals before this House and the Council in order to resolve the problem through an appropriate sharing of costs between taxpayers and passengers .
As regards democratic accountability , we successfully managed to achieve the use of enhanced comitology or comitology with scrutiny , especially when any new check , control or limitation on passengers ' lives is introduced .
Were Parliament to decide in future that a security measure is disproportionate , it will be able to call for a public debate in order adequately to examine such considerations .
Overall , I feel that the balance between an effective fight against terrorism and , at the same time , respect which is as broad as possible for privacy , practices , and pointless irritations for passengers , has in this way been achieved .
Obviously , only actual testing of its application will tell us whether this has been fully achieved .
It is for that reason , Mr President , that I would recommend to the Chamber , to our House , that it approves the agreement reached in conciliation so that the Commission can make an effective start on its work .

Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , you have before you a proposal for a new framework regulation on aviation security , with which you are all familiar .
I appreciate all the work and effort you have put in to achieve a positive outcome in a long and difficult conciliation procedure .
We have now come to the final stage for a new framework regulation , further evidence of better regulation .
On 4 March the Council formally completed the third reading of this balanced and beneficial text , which is important for both the industry and for passengers .
It is now up to members of the European Parliament to conclude the process .
I am grateful to Mr Costa for asking Parliament to agree with the text and thus ensuring a successful outcome for the conciliation .
Everyone has shown a spirit of compromise in the conciliation process , but I think I can say that Parliament came out the winner , because most of the amendments and ideas suggested are in the text on which you will be voting .
I understood your expectations regarding the financing principle .
I made a very strong personal commitment in the conciliation process .
With your permission , I refer to my previous statement that I intended to submit a draft legislative proposal to the Commission on the division , between taxpayers and users , of the costs arising from the stricter aviation security measures the Member States can adopt in addition to the basic rules laid down in this new regulation .
That does not prejudice the right of initiative of the Commission or compliance with domestic procedures , in particular conducting an appropriate impact study before any legislative proposal .
Furthermore , with the introduction of the regulatory procedure with scrutiny , the change to the new ' comitology ' decision will give the European Parliament greater power over the general rules the Commission has to draw up after the adoption of the framework regulation .
Whilst allowing more flexibility in the system for adapting the legislation in the regulatory procedure with scrutiny , all this provides a counterbalance in the general implementing legislation .
Thus we are making institutional progress in all these situations .
As regards Article 4 , I draw your attention to the statement made .
The Commission is declaring its intention of proposing general measures as indicated in the current Article 4 ( 1 ) ( a ) , and detailed implementing measures within the meaning of the current Article 4 ( 2 ) .
The Commission intends to use Article 251 of the Treaty establishing the European Community to propose any additions that are needed to the common basic standards laid down in this regulation .
The Commission notes that it is important to allow detailed implementing measures to be devised by methods that can not only ensure effective detection and deterrence , but also provide the necessary flexibility and speed , whilst at the same time keeping sensitive documents confidential in order to protect passengers .
The Commission also points out that the continuity of the implementing rules will be maintained until they are replaced by new measures adopted under this regulation .
As for the substance , the new regulation allows the development of more appropriate legislation that is better able to address security issues holistically and flexibly , rather than dealing with them through a series of individual and repetitive approaches .
Initial estimates by the Association of European Airlines suggest that the more flexible methods can reduce costs by up to 500 million .
To summarise , when this new regulation is adopted it will make it easier to adopt rules with non-member countries that have equally high air security standards .
This one-stop security concept is in the interests not only of passengers but also of the European Union aviation sector .
Besides that , I hope that the latest technological developments will enable us to amend the total ban on liquids on board aircraft by the beginning of next year .
As soon as the appropriate technology is available to detect liquid explosives , I shall endeavour to take that new factor into account in the regulations .
The European Parliament will be able to review any plans for a change of rules in that area .
Ladies and gentlemen , this has been a lengthy process .
It has taken a great deal of effort by everyone to arrive at the compromise needed for the adoption of this new regulation .
Not only will this new regulation help us improve security in the air , it will also reduce costs , simplify the rules and protect civil aviation more effectively .
So I thank Parliament for its work on drawing up this legislative proposal and I am obviously hoping wholeheartedly for your support and adoption of the text .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , as both the rapporteur and Commissioner Barrot have said , following long negotiations in the conciliation process , Parliament and the Council have finally reached an agreement , which I believe to be positive and worthy of our support .
In the light of the ongoing terrorist threat , we believe that clear rules for security and , importantly , common implementation across Europe 's airports and airlines are absolutely necessary , and this proposal delivers on both counts .
Whilst we have been unable to reach an agreement with the Council on the issue of financing these security measures , the Commission has agreed to come forward with a separate proposal on financing these measures within the next few months .
I hope that this will be sooner rather than later .
I want to make it clear , here and now , that when coming forward with this proposal both the Council and the Commission should take heed of Parliament 's strong and united position on the issue .
Parliament must not be seen as another hoop that the Commission and the Council must jump through , but instead as a serious and equal player in the process .
Passenger safety and security are of paramount importance and , as such , I hope that the Commission 's forthcoming proposal will reflect our strong stance .
Despite this sticking point , this report should be applauded .
I can see the benefits in common security standards across Europe . And , given that the heightened terrorist threat to aviation today is one which is ever growing , this proposal offers important improvements for passenger safety and security .
I therefore urge the House to give this measure its full support .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the terrorist attacks of 9 / 11 and other subsequent threats have made us realise how vulnerable the aviation sector is and how deadly the effects of an attack using an aircraft or perpetrated inside one can be .
And what an enormous impact those effects can have on the economy and thus on each and every one of us .
Consequently it is important that we do everything necessary to ensure maximum security and it goes without saying that we must have maximum harmonisation on the matter at European level .
But at the same time we must also seek a balance between security on the one hand and comfort , privacy and freedom of movement on the other hand , as the rapporteur says .
That was always our view as the European Parliament 's delegation during the negotiations , and I think we worked well together across party lines with Mr Costa , Mr Jarzembowski , in the conciliation procedure too .
We all pulled together and we came out of it with a good compromise deal , as the Commissioner rightly points out .
That is not to say that we are one hundred percent happy .
Everything will depend on how the agreements reached are implemented on the ground .
And in two essential areas : firstly , implementation of the measures .
We have secured a significant continuing involvement for Parliament via the new comitology procedure with scrutiny , and we have de facto obtained a kind of veto , for cases where we think the proposed measures are disproportionate .
So there is room for interpretation , for debate , and I think the liquids ban made it clear that this is necessary .
We cannot allow a committee of experts to have carte blanche and not be accountable ; and so to me this new form of democratic scrutiny is altogether a plus point .
We can perfectly well take on that job if the Commission keeps us continuously informed and briefed , and I think this will be something very important .
We must also devise the right procedure in-house which will enable Parliament to do this adequately .
Secondly , we did not quite get what we wanted as regards the financing of security measures , we know that .
We wanted to remain consistent in our thinking .
Our expectation is that the security measures agreed by Europe will be adequate for everyone .
If Member States need or want to do more , then they should bear the cost of that .
We did not manage to get that accepted , but I am sure , Commissioner , that the undertaking you have given will lead to a new debate and genuine results in future .
In any event , as of today we have a framework that should allow us to take security measures quickly but will at the same time provide democratic accountability .
It remains to be seen whether the system works to everyone 's satisfaction .
My Group too will support this .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) To be blunt , there is no doubt that aviation is and remains a popular target for terrorists .
So the need for stricter security rules for air transport , with the extra cost and burdens that entails , is immediately obvious .
But when it comes to maintaining the basic framework for this , it is truly essential that the measures in place should be effective .
In that respect this agreement , whilst not perfect , nevertheless represents an important step forward .
Regarding the enhanced role of Parliament , I very much hope we shall make full use of this .
More than ever we need to apply a measure of realism to assumptions concerning the effectiveness of our laws and rules .
It is of course important that collective stress should be properly managed .
At the same time , the air traveller does have to be taken seriously .
Costly but sham security does no one any favours .
Terrorists are getting more and more ingenious .
The answer is not to confiscate bottles of water , shower gels or contact lens fluid . The solution lies in the efficient operation , across borders , of police , justice and intelligence services .
I look forward accordingly to the phased plan which the Commissioner has just described .
The importance of aviation safety should not and ought not to be ignored and I am full of praise for the work that has been done to bring about this solution which ensures the safety of air passengers and workers .
When we draft and implement these types of regulations , we need to be careful that these regulations aren 't regulations for the sake of regulations and that we consider other aspects of the aviation sector as well .
On that basis , I welcome the provision in the Report which states that certain passengers - those who come from countries which have identical safety measures as the Union - need not go through extra security checks .
It is a great pity that the same approach is not taken with regard to duty-free goods and transit passengers .
As it stands , if a person comes from the United States to Ireland and changes planes in Paris , any duty-free goods bought in the United States will be taken from that person in Paris .
This nonsensical system means that passengers and retailers are loosing out .
I agree that security concerns are a priority .
However , the solution that was agreed in Singapore shows that the two things can be done .
Why is it then that those arrangements cannot be made with other countries ?
We know that there are plans being made , but it is happening too slowly for passengers and retailers who have to bear the consequences .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , this has been a very long-running saga , and I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate my sincere thanks to Mr Costa .
In the negotiations , including those with the Council , he remained steadfastly committed to the position formulated and supported by the Members of this House in committee .
One of the points at issue , as has been mentioned , was the funding of security measures - the reason why is fairly obvious .
For example , these security measures lend themselves very well to the concealment of what would be less than entirely legal funding arrangements for the various national airlines .
I presume this is precisely why there were all sorts of resistance in the Council to a set of rules that imposed greater transparency in this area , and of course it was our Group 's clear and unanimous desire to have transparent , straightforward funding provisions that were designed to help preclude problems .
The second point was the arrangement whereby Parliament was to be more closely involved in the continuing development of the security provisions .
This was fiercely resisted too , although I could not comprehend why , because the European Parliament , after all , had only tried to indicate an escape route that could be used , for example , to get out of measures that had once been adopted but had subsequently begun to prove inexpedient .
I can just about support the compromise , but I would have wished for more .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( CS ) The European Parliament and the European Commission have been debating aviation security for several years .
The purpose of the amendment to Regulation ( EC ) No 2320 / 2002 of 16 December 2002 is to ensure an improvement of the common rules in the field of civil aviation security .
The resulting document , however , is not very clear .
So that not only myself but also many other Members of this Parliament can raise their hands in favour of the result of the conciliation procedure , I want to hear a clear answer to my question .
Commissioner , Monsieur le Commissaire , c 'est pour vous : since the new Regulation does not guarantee a common procedure for testing pilot safety , how will this issue be solved once Regulation ( EC ) No 2320 / 2002 is abolished ?
Can you confirm that the European Cockpit Association and the Commission have agreed on the preparation of a regulation establishing a common procedure for testing pilot safety ?
If yes , when will this text be presented ?
Your answer will determine how we will vote tomorrow .
- ( EL ) Mr President , let me begin by expressing my deep satisfaction with the agreement that has at last been reached on the amendment to the Regulation establishing common rules in the field of civil aviation security .
I should like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Costa , on his work , as well as the representatives of the political groups , Mr Jarzembowski and Mr El Khadraoui , who , together with our rapporteur , formed the core of our negotiating group .

Armed with their detailed knowledge of the subject and its technical dimensions , and with their unwavering dedication to the European Parliament 's position on transparency and respect for citizens , they have fought hard and unrelentingly to achieve this objective .
I should also like to thank all the members of the European Parliament Delegation , of which I had the honour of chairing , for their cooperation at all stages and especially at critical moments .
Let me commend the Portuguese Presidency 's continuing efforts to achieve mutual understanding and agreement . I should also like to single out the European Commission 's constructive and decisive contribution , to which Commissioner Barrot contributed so much .
The new regulation is not merely the result of successful negotiation .
In the final analysis , it represents a shared view of the relationship between security on the one hand , and private citizens and our political objectives on the other .
The new regulation is the fruit of the experience we have gained through applying the security rules .
It is a better expression of the need for transparency and responsibility on the part of all the agencies involved .
It provides an effective framework for the safe movement of passengers in a globalised environment , while enabling Member States to adapt their policy to new developments and the special needs that may arise during a particular period .
The regulation also requires Member States to maintain transparency and bear part of the cost - vital conditions , according to the European Parliament .
As well as the Member States having to honour these obligations , the European Commission has undertaken to draw up a report at the end of 2008 , which will contribute enormously to this endeavour . The European Parliament will then prepare to play an effective role in enforcing the necessary measures .

( RO ) I would like to congratulate the rapporteur Mr. Costa and all colleagues that took part in the negotiations relating to the third reading .
We are discussing this document after more than two years from the regulation being proposed by the Commission in 2005 , with a view to replacing the regulation of 2002 , adopted following the terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001 .
Air transport has experienced an accelerated development over the last years .
If in 1970 there were approximately 200 million passengers in the EU-15 , in 2000 their number reached approximately 600 million .
Unfortunately , the terrorist attacks of 11 September caused , a decrease between 2000 and 2001 of approximately 2 % in the number of passengers using air transport .
The European Parliament believes that the safety of passengers and of the personnel working in the field of air transport is highly important .
The debates as part of the conciliation procedure mainly focused on the distribution of costs related to the necessary security measures , the uniform performance of security inspections , the impact of certain programmes for the safety of civil aviation , adopted at national , airport or air carrier level .
Common security standards should subsequently be adopted using the regulatory procedure with scrutiny , so that the European Parliament will have an important role in this process .
The costs related to the additional measures for civil aviation safety should be incurred both by Member States and users .
By 31 December 2008 the Commission will submit to the European Parliament a report presenting the measures to be imposed , so that taxes related to the security measures be used only for this purpose and the required transparency on the calculation and use of such taxes will be provided .
As regards the use of security officers on board aircrafts , each Member State has the competence to decide on the registered and authorised aircraft in the Member State in question , but their role was improved by the enforcement of certain provisions on the training and security terms imposed thereon .
( PL ) Madam President , air transport needs defined legal rules , but they must be as flexible as possible and at the same time sufficiently harmonised , especially with regard to flight security .
The document we are discussing today meets those criteria .
It is , in my view , a difficult but good compromise by the members of the Conciliation Committee , and I thank them for the work they have done .
In this connection Mr Costa and Commissioner Barrot deserve special praise .
Since time is short , I shall confine myself to a few points .
First : charges for air security must be transparent and relate only to actual cost .
Second : measures taken in this area must not interfere with competition among airports and carriers , which is natural to the free market .
Third : the principles governing civil aviation security need to be standardised at world level .
It is therefore to be welcomed that the document refers to cooperation with the International Civil Aviation Organisation , the ICAO .
Fourth : security standards must also be met by third-country carriers , otherwise our European measures will be ineffective .
Fifth : suitable procedures must be prepared for dealing with crisis situations , which may never arise but are always possible in the event of a terrorist attack .
Finally , let us jointly strive to make the passenger , including disabled passengers , the subject , rather than the object , of the action taken by all parties involved in air transport - especially when it comes to security measures , which involve a degree of inconvenience .
Madam President , I am pleased to see that progress has been made on this issue , because Parliament has always indicated that we should be very thorough on these measures improving security for air passengers .

I want to applaud Mr Costa , my colleagues on the Committee on Transport and especially Commissioner Barrot , who has worked to ensure that the arrangements for financing the measures are properly set out and that comitology is used to scrutinise the definition of common basic standards .
EU cooperation is needed to provide consistency on this so that passengers are better informed .
As I said late last year , mutual recognition of our differing legal traditions is the way forward in an EU of 27 Member States , but basic security standards should be established in the EU .
When the Commission outlines the principle of financing later this year , I will argue strongly that Member States should be allowed to go above and beyond these , should they feel the need , as long as they are prepared to pay the costs .
This comes on the back of reports which claim that the British Airports Authority is to fingerprint and photograph all passengers checking in for domestic flights at Heathrow and several other airports .
I believe these measures should be scrutinised to make sure they are effective .
The use of biometric technology as proposed by Commissioner Frattini is in order to produce greater efficiency , and must not alienate public support .
The public have already tolerated a massive amount of inconvenience through security measures which may be desirable , but there appears to be a lack of clear objective analysis of their effectiveness .
The random nature of some of the provisions is particularly disruptive and we should surely be asking for consistency in the approach of airport authorities across Europe , if not on a global basis .
The EU should be proactive rather than reactive with regard to all these security issues .
We must be one step ahead of the threat by developing more sophisticated technology and by sharing best practice and pooling intelligence .
I believe that this report certainly takes us somewhat in that direction .
( ES ) Madam President , we are extremely pleased to reach the end of what has proved to be a protracted battle to achieve better security in a core sector such as aviation , which is essential to the economy and competitiveness of Europe , and of which the success and credibility are rooted in a high level of security .
This was demonstrated in the starkest way possible on 11 September 2001 , when security itself was one of the key aspects which was shown to need improvement both on a global scale and particularly with reference to the European zone .
All the efforts made by the Commission , not only in this dossier but in others that the Commission has worked on - the whole issue of blacklists , and of gradually improving and implementing security measures - are , I believe , essential .
We particularly congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Costa , whose tenacity , although exasperating at times , has achieved an agreement , a matter on which I congratulate him from the heart .
The best agreement possible .
Moreover , that agreement is on two fundamental topics .
First , a topic fundamental to the absolute requirement of security , and more specifically the crucial aspect of funding it .
We all agree that security is very important , but another key aspect is who pays for that security and how we try to improve transparency and a better distribution of costs .
To that end I believe that the cooperation received from the Commission in proposing the study for the precise purpose of identifying and improving transparency in the cost-sharing between taxpayers and users will help us improve future measures and implement them .
Secondly , a topic fundamental to Parliament as an institution .
From the institutional point of view Mr Costa has managed to increase comitology in relation to methods of scanning and I believe that in future this too will put right a few misunderstandings which have arisen in the past , for example in relation to liquids ; this is another area where I believe we must improve .
For the future we hope to complete all the key security dossiers for the aviation sector , having regard to the key factor , namely the human factor .
I hope also that the Commissioner will be able to update us on how things are going with the schedule for the social package both for cabin crew and for pilots as far as training and certification are concerned .
We are aware that the EASA is working on this area , but would like to see a greater number of specific measures on this matter , which will be the central factor in this increase in security .
( DE ) Madam President , Mr Vice-President , passenger security is a fundamental principle , but how is it actually protected ?
As top Italian football coach Giovanni Trapattoni would probably put it , ' Belts off , bottles empty , shoes off ! '
Do these measures actually secure anything other than additional jobs for poorly paid and poorly trained security staff ?
Besides , long queues at airports , hassle and economic disadvantages are once more being associated with Europe , even though in many cases these annoyances are the result of exercises in diligence on the part of bumped-up local and regional sheriffs .
Surely we can do better than that !
Let us revise the implementing provisions on liquids as quickly as possible , and let us replace them with more and better technology and with better cooperation between the security services .

( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , I should like in particular to draw attention to the technological modernisation that is necessary to avoid the collapse of civil aviation .
My plea is for progress to be made in the CESAR project to promote technological innovation in aviation and make sure that civil aviation is no longer held hostage by certain forces on the ground . I should like to ask what progress has been made in the Member States on transfers of rights ?
Would that not have a great many benefits for passenger safety , protection of the environment and aviation as a whole ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I have listened carefully to your speeches .
As you have all underlined , the challenge with our air security policy is to find a reasonable balance between the need to protect passengers against terrorist activity and , of course , the operational aspects at airports in order to avoid over-complicated checking procedures .
The Commission proposal was aimed at significantly improving the chances of striking a reasonable balance .
As I said before , the adoption of this regulation will enable us to establish more modern and flexible rules , using new checking technologies , to introduce the one-stop security concept for flights from non-member countries , with a high standard of security , to abolish certain duplicated requirements , to codify the participation of stakeholders in decision-making on the implementing measures and , of course , to involve the European Parliament more in the process of decision-making on the implementing rules .
I personally undertake to launch initiatives in all areas of security funding in order to improve the current situation , ensure greater transparency and make the financial commitment of the Member States more visible .
So , as I said , I shall reply to some of your comments , although I am not claiming that I will answer them all .
The general rule the Commission will follow in future is to publicise all applications of the regulation , unless it is shown that awareness of the regulation might aid terrorists .
That is very different from the present situation , in which the default rule is not to publish anything .
That point is very important , because it means that Parliament can be fully informed .
So I shall reply to a few points .
In answer to Mr Ó Neachtain , for me the duty-free issue is still important .
We have drawn up a regulation that allows for derogations .
Through negotiation with Singapore , we have managed to introduce this rule for all dealings with Singapore , and we are now continuing with a number of non-member countries in preparation for further derogations .
Obviously , though , these non-member countries have to cooperate much more actively with us and we are letting them know of our interest in that .
The Americans and Canadians are working with us , but it is absolutely vital - and , believe me , this is something I personally am very concerned about - for us to sign many more agreements with non-member countries if we are to make any progress on the duty-free issue .
Mr Kohlíček and Mrs Ayala Sender mentioned pilots and crew .
We are working with the pilots .
Consultation is under way , but I cannot prejudge its outcome .
What is true is that we are paying close attention to the problems to which we need to find the right solutions .
It is true that , as has rightly been said , we need a very coherent approach at European level .
I am obviously keeping a close watch myself on how the regulations are applied and it is true that , as Mr Kirkhope pointed out just now , we clearly have to harmonise the rules and procedures for their implementation as well .
We also have to guard against some Member States taking initiatives that are more or less improvised and unilateral .
It is not easy ; we know the battle for funding of security measures and more transparent and balanced financing will be hard .
Mr Costa has experience of that .
I should also like to express my thanks to Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou , who chaired the Parliament delegation and was a great help to us during the long and very difficult meetings .
Finally I should like to say something to Mr Costa , because his report and his work as rapporteur gave us a real feeling that Parliament was genuinely seeking the common good of Europe , the welfare of passengers , and also , of course , a system of protection that is effective but at the same time flexible enough to allow for changes .
As I said earlier , we are keeping a close eye on the new technologies that will , I hope , enable us to simplify these procedures .
The detection of explosives in liquids seems now to be well on the way .
I hope we shall be able to make use of those technologies .
They will obviously be welcome .
I thank you , Madam President , and I thank Parliament in particular for the high standard of this debate and all the contributions it has made in the course of the debate .
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the regulation is a framework regulation and the proof of the pudding will be in the eating , when it is applied .
As matters stand , we have merely compared recipes .
I believe that we are both aware that there are still two major problems .
The first is that the problem of terrorism has heightened security and the problem of terrorism cannot be considered a matter for the individual .
Imagining that every passenger has to be responsible for financing counter-terrorism activities is an idea that obviously does not work .
Passengers are jointly responsible ; and it is that line that should to some extent , sooner or later , come to the fore and make states more responsible for such activities .
The second is that unfortunately terrorism is forcing us to change the way we behave .
We must not , so to speak , shirk the task of introducing rules which place limits on each of our activities , because the terrorists cannot be allowed to win out , but we must at the same time make every effort to ensure that we do not , little by little , help terrorism to win because terrorism is forcing us to change the way we live .
This is a difficult balance .
We have fielded all the possible arms : codecision , enhanced comitology , simple comitology .
Those are all the tools we need .
We have much work to do in that direction , but I think that a good foundation has been laid .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 11 March 2008 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( RO ) The harmonisation of actions taken by Member States , airports and airlines concerning the provision of civil aviation security represents an imperative requirement in order to deal with terrorist threats .
Nevertheless , a balance must be established between the enhancement of security and the provision of comfort to the users of air transport services .
It is mandatory to take all necessary measures to enhance the technical performances of screening equipment , as well as to apply a single check in the case of transit flights , which would enable a reduction of processing time and , in the mid- to long-term , the effective decrease of actual costs .
On the other hand , the lack of transparency in the calculation and application of taxes related to security measures distorts the competence in the field of air transport , as well as understanding of the way in which the money is used in the direct financing of such measures .
The issues related to financing must be clarified as soon as possible , so that taxpayers in the European Union , as well as the users of transport services have a clear picture about the allocation of amounts collected , thus dissociating the financing of direct measures from the insurance costs , as well as from any state aid in support of additional security measures that a Member State may enact .
Sustainable European transport policy , taking into account European energy and environment policies ( debate )
The next item is the report by Gabriele Albertini , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on sustainable European transport policy , taking into account European energy and environment policies .
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the report on sustainable European transport policy has now reached the stage of debate in plenary .
The text has already been favourably received , without giving rise to major controversy , by the Transport Committee in January .
Only forty or so amendments were tabled .
My main objective was to make this own initiative report as succinct as possible , no longer than twenty or so paragraphs , so that the European Parliament can put its recommendations to the Commission and the Council as effectively as possible .
As the issues addressed are so vast - European policies on transport , energy and the environment - going into too much detail and producing an undue number of paragraphs would have weakened the report , and Parliament 's final resolution would have been less clear and incisive .
For the same reason , some issues have been left out .
An own initiative report cannot tackle all the questions raised by transport , energy and the environment in an exhaustive way .
However , this document may be of use to the Commission for future legislative proposals and to show what European citizens are expecting from the Community institutions .
Eight amendments have been tabled for this final examination in plenary .
They do not , in substance , add anything new with respect to the debate in the Transport Committee .
I should nevertheless like to comment briefly on them .
The Green Group has tabled six amendments and has called for a split vote on paragraph 16 .
That request removes the reference to the use of electricity of nuclear origin by rail transport , something with which I cannot agree .
Rail transport is the mode of transport with the smallest carbon footprint , thanks partly to the use of nuclear as a source of electricity .
Amendment 6 asks the Commission to intervene to set a single speed limit for European motorways in all countries .
Our German friends have already shown on a number of occasions that German motorways are safer and the number of accidents is lower than in many Member States of the European Union which have such a limit .
The principle of subsidiarity should undoubtedly continue to be applied in this case .
Personally , I find Amendment 2 more coherent , especially the first part relating to transparent air transport costs and ticket pricing .
Mr Blokland has tabled Amendment 8 , on behalf of the Independence / Democracy Group .
This text refers to paragraph 2 and analyses the measures that citizens need to take to improve urban and suburban mobility .
Here , I have to call for a vote against , as the amendment takes an entirely opposite line to that of the text adopted by the Transport Committee .
Lastly , my political group has again tabled an amendment - Amendment 1 relating to paragraph 11 - tabled in the Transport Committee , concerning the revision of the Eurovignette directive .
Personally , I was and am not against the possibility of looking at this issue at the appropriate time in June .
The European Commission has already announced that it will issue the proposal for revision at that time .
I consider , however , in line with what has already been proposed in the Transport Committee , that there should be a free vote on the amendments in question .
I should like to thank Members for the interest that they have shown in this report and in my work and , as I am aware that many others have asked to speak , I shall give them a chance to do so .

Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , I thank Mr Albertini for his excellent report .
Obviously there must be a broad consensus between Parliament , the Council and the Commission on the need to reduce the environmental and energy impacts of transport .
At the same time , though , we need to maintain the mobility that is essential to our competitiveness and our quality of life .
How can we achieve this sustainable mobility ?
It is an enormous challenge .
By 2020 , we have to have cut greenhouse emissions by 20 % , reduced energy consumption by 20 % and increased the renewable energy in our energy consumption by 20 % .
Obviously transport will need to play a large part in the attainment of those targets .
I shall start by trying to outline our various initiatives in this area .
The development of the Trans-European Networks , in which , as Mr Albertini has just pointed out , we are banking on the development of railways , brings about a modal shift which obviously leads in that direction .
We have the TEN-T project and the Marco Polo programme in support of highways of the sea .
We are supporting inland waterway transport with the NAIADES programme .
Obviously research will also enable us to develop greener and more effective technologies .
I would also draw your attention to the recent proposal for a clean vehicles directive , on which the Committee on Environment , Public Health and Food Safety will be starting work .
To provide a clear picture of all these measures , the Commission will be presenting an inventory of all European initiatives .
This will take stock of all the action taken and draw lessons from it for the future .
I have a very particular personal interest in this inventory .
Secondly , we are moving towards a strategy for internalising external costs for all modes of transport .
The package I shall be presenting in June will contain an external costs internalisation strategy for all modes of transport , something for which the European Parliament has been pressing .
This initiative meets a need .
The external costs for our economy and our environment - air pollution , noise , congestion - are heavy , which also has an adverse effect on transport mobility .
If we want sustainable mobility , we have to make sure that the external transport costs are integrated into what users pay .
Our 2006 proposal that aviation should be included in the European emission duties exchange system was a step towards the internalisation of external costs in the aviation sector .
I intend to couple this internalisation strategy with a proposal for amendment of the directive on charges for heavy goods vehicles .
That will allow Member States - allow , not oblige - to include external environment costs in tolls if they wish , and not just infrastructure costs , as is the case currently .
At present they cannot do so , except in a very few cases .
This amendment will allow internalisation of external costs in another sector , railways .
The Community legislation provides that external costs for the railways can only be internalised if the other modes of transport also internalise their external costs .
In short , we are moving towards intelligent tolls , educational tolls , which will make it possible to penalise more heavily the lorries that have the lowest environmental standards or use major routes at times when congestion and traffic jams are at their worst .
In addition to that , we shall be taking a series of initiatives in the second half of the year .
I shall be making an announcement on measures to reduce railway noise .
There will be improvements on the roads , too ; it will be possible to reduce congestion with an intelligent transport system .
We shall be aiming at one-box interoperability .
That will be helpful in organising the logistical rules at European level .
The Albertini report also stresses the need to establish a real Single European Sky .
Mr Albertini is right , that is the proper way .
Also , as has been said earlier , we really have to make progress on the CESAR project . It must play an essential part in developing the technology required for the attainment of that goal .
Initiatives are planned to reduce nitrogen oxide emissions in the aviation sector and noise around airports .
We are also working on shipping measures .
Obviously urban transport will also need to be involved : 40 % of CO2 emissions and 70 % of other polluting emissions come from vehicles in towns .
Within the European Parliament , I am very grateful to Mr Rack , who is working on this , and I hope that this autumn we shall be able to produce a set of instruments that towns can use .
These are a few examples of wide-ranging action which is , it must be said , one of the main priorities in my term of office : greening transport , whilst at the same time ensuring that all the citizens of Europe have access to transport .
It is true that , as Mr Albertini has said , his report comes at just the right moment .
Parliament and the Commission are more or less in agreement on sustainable mobility and I should like to thank Parliament and Mr Albertini for this excellent work , which also does a great deal to clarify our own work in the Commission .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy . - ( HU ) Madam President , Mr Vice-President , transport policy is about to undergo a paradigm change : the fuels , the technology , the regulations , and the expectations of society will all be different .
The transport sector is entering a new era .
Is there anything that is not going to change ?
Yes , mobility , because it would be wrong to restrict mobility .
If we do not want to restrict mobility , however , then we ourselves must change .
The question is , in what way ?
Technological development is unstoppable , yet we need to spend more and target spending to a greater extent on vehicle development in order to get environmentally friendly vehicles on the road as soon as possible .
Alternative fuels have already been making great and sometimes controversial strides , but we must select the second-generation biofuels and hydrogen-related options carefully so that they can come onto the market as an outcome of research and development .
As regards financing in the context of the Seventh Framework Programme , European Union funds , national contributions and private capital must all be set in the same direction .
Intelligent solutions such as the CESAR or Galileo programmes are progressing too slowly , and we must accelerate these .
In the interests of achieving our objectives we must transform the economic environment on the basis of the ' user pays ' and ' polluter pays ' principles .
Last , let us not tax vehicle ownership , but ensure payment is made for vehicle use .
Then we will be in a position to change our habits as regards driving , vehicle use and travel .
Madam President , we thank our fellow Member Mr Albertini for his work and for his thorough and circumspect report .
With these additional points , the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy supports the report and at the same time commends it to the attention of the Commission for its forthcoming green transport proposals . Thank you .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - Madam President , as we have heard from Mr Albertini and the Commissioner , this is a very timely and important report and we welcome it .
In his introductory remarks , Mr Albertini said that this gives us a chance to outline our transport policy , bearing in mind the environment and fuel efficiency , something about which this Parliament has consistently felt very strongly and expressed its views .
Mr Barrot , in his contribution , called the whole issue a huge challenge and one , I know , that all our governments are looking at .
As Mr Barrot said , we have to recognise transport 's clear contribution and the need for the ' greening ' of transport .
In this respect , I am very proud of the fact that London has led the way with a number of initiatives , be it the congestion charge , the new low-emission zone or higher charges for less environmentally friendly vehicles , something which had been opposed by London 's Conservatives .
Mr Barrot also spoke about the need to recognise the external costs of transport and Mr Albertini spoke about some of the amendments .
However , I think there is a contradiction in the PPE-DE Group 's position - one I know the PPE-DE Group has debated internally - and there is a contradiction in this report .
Recital B , for example , talks about energy consumption and highlights ' road transport , accounting as it does for 83 % [ ... ] of energy ' .
Against that , Amendment 1 , by the PPE-DE Group , and co-signed by some Members from the ALDE Group , is quite clearly trying to change the position adopted in committee to one that favours road transport over rail transport .
That does not fit in with a package that is arguing for sustainable transport over forms that are not friendly to the environment .
I ask Mr Albertini , when he winds up , and I ask the ALDE Group , which has also supported this , why they are trying to turn it round and why they are trying to favour road transport .
I suggest that perhaps the person whose fingerprints are really on this is not here to answer that tonight .
I must say that my group will be considering whether we would support this whole report were that amendment to go through .
I look forward to it .
Other than that , the principles in the report are fine .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FI ) Madam President , around a quarter of the greenhouse gas emissions in the European Union are from transport .
We therefore obviously need to reduce emissions from transport .
The pollution load from transport has to be lowered .
Air transport is entirely excluded from international treaties on climate .
It is nevertheless causing more and more emissions all the time , and should be included in all agreements .
Someone said here that the ' user pays ' principle is a good one .
I agree .
It is a good principle if one also takes circumstances into account .
In Europe there are sparsely inhabited countries and areas where there is no public transport and therefore no means of getting about other than by private car .
Then the ' user pays ' principle is not very appropriate .
It is one thing to go for a drive for pleasure and quite another to use your car because yon have to and in situations where it is not possible to use public transport .
In the future we need to try and get freight transport off the road .
Generally speaking , we need to aim to move away from means of transport reliant on the use of fossil fuels to those based on renewable fuels .
We have much to do at EU level if we really intend to reach the targets we have together committed ourselves to , i.e. to reduce emissions .
It is a matter of will , and because we have decided the matter together , all nations must together make an effort to ensure that these decisions are carried out .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , the draft resolution on sustainable European transport policy , taking into account European energy and environment policies , attempts a complex approach to a highly sensitive issue .
The rapporteur , Mr Albertini , must be complimented on his approach to the problem and his constructive proposals .
Among other things , Mr Albertini correctly points out that the role of rail transport , particularly in the transport of goods , is not properly appreciated and its development is neglected .
We must remember that road building alone will not solve the problem and rail projects are essential .
To those who have not noticed this , I would recommend a drive across Poland , which has been criss-crossed by international lorry traffic in recent years .
The second problem requiring urgent attention is traffic congestion in large conurbations and the concentration of exhaust fumes in cities and intercity transport corridors .
Here too the role of rail transport , i.e. high speed trains , is not appreciated .
The third important issue is the use , alongside rail transport , of inland waterway and sea transport , which are less polluting .
Here there are many more problems , ranging from technical , energy and cost control issues to social awareness and behaviour .
To cope with all these problems , we need a complete analysis of the transport situation in its environmental context , plus concrete integrated action .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , the report contains many fine suggestions , but it proceeds from the assumption that constant growth in the volume of traffic is something like a law of nature and that technology can solve most of the problems .
There are two particular points I would like to underline .
Firstly , calculation of the total cost of transport operations , including their social cost , must begin with the Eurovignette , because heavy goods vehicles impose the greatest burden not only on the road network but also on people and the environment .
Even though Commissioner Barrot , who is responsible for transport , has promised that the Transport Protocol of the Alpine Convention will be ratified during the period of the French presidency of the Council , I believe that we , the European Parliament , should make explicit mention of this protocol here in the report .
Time and again we hear fine words on the subject of transport .
The fact is , however , that the volume of CO2 emissions from transport increased by 32.1 % between 1990 and 2005 , and the volume emitted by air transport rocketed by 90 % over the same period , while emissions of the climate-killer carbon dioxide from all other areas of activity were reduced by 9.5 % in accordance with the aims of the Kyoto Protocol .
Too often in this report we content ourselves with lofty aims and pious hopes .
What are needed , however , are hard and fast requirements and effective measures , including sanctions , otherwise everything will carry on in a way that proves the truth of the saying , ' The road to hell is paved with good intentions ' .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Madam President , the UK should make its own laws , so I reject this proposal .
But I do not dispute the fact that more efficient cars are a good idea and that working from home cuts down pollution .
What concerns me about this report is words like ' pricing policy ' and ' tax on fossil fuels ' , because no current serious alternatives exist and these taxes are very inflationary .
The future must be about encouraging innovation and technology , not about tricking people who have no alternative into paying more tax .
Most public transport systems are good for the commuter but do not fit the needs of the businessman who must drive into work in order to use his car to visit clients later .
But the city of Strasbourg provides a first-class tram system , with a tram stop outside this very building , so why are MEPs here in Strasbourg not leading by example ?
They do not visit clients , they just come here to misrule Europe .
Yet almost all of them use chauffeur-driven limousines and ignore the trams .
If MEPs complied with their own words , then perhaps the public would listen .
In simple English , Madam President , this House is guilty of gross hypocrisy .
What were MEPs saying about sustainable transport , please ?
Because , like the no-smoking rule in the Parliament dining rooms , MEPs ignore it !
( RO ) The implementation of an integrated strategy on the development of sustainable transport must be an absolute priority , both for the Commission and for the Member States .
Investments in transport infrastructure must be accelerated , especially environmentally-friendly ones , such as : railways , inland waterway transport and Sea Motorways .
A comprehensive assessment of internal costs and in particular the negative impact of transport on the environment is compulsory .
Such negative impacts must be ascertained and assumed by their inclusion in the prices paid by users .
Consequently , it is highly important that the internalisation of external costs be carried out for all transport means at the same time .
Thus , the break-down by form of transport used would improve , favouring less polluting transport means , as well as the development of the trans-European network and intermodal freight transport .
I believe that better logistics and the improvement of management , especially via the intensification of research and application of new technologies in the field of intelligent systems , represent steps forward in better traffic planning , management of flows and elimination of traffic agglomeration and jams .
Romania is making concerted efforts coming into line with European standards , especially by attracting investments in disadvantaged areas to lay the foundation for a reduction in the development discrepancies in infrastructures .
At the same time , Romania supports and promotes actions aimed at making energy consumption more effective in order to take part in the reduction of the negative environmental impact of transport and supports investments in alternative energy sources .
I hereby ask the European Commission to reassess the multiannual financial frameworks for financial resources in the field of transport , as well as for the field-related research with a view to obtaining cost effective and energy-enhanced products and services .
At the same time , I recommend that the Member States support public - private partnerships and , by way of consequence , private investments in the said field and that they make full use the funds made available to create a sustainable transport sector , to improve traffic safety and the health of the environment in which we live .

( RO ) The European policy concerning sustainable transport , taking account of the European policies on energy and environment , concerns and directly affects approximately 490 million of European citizens .
I asked the Commission and the Member States to examine the way in which transport infrastructures and the applicable tariffs influence urban development and future demands for transport services .
I asked the Commission and the Member States to intervene in the modernisation of port infrastructure , with respect to the European Union sea ports , as well as the ports located on the inland waterways , in order to enable the rapid transfer of freight and passengers from one transport system to another , thus facilitating the reduction of energy consumption in the field of transport .
In 2007 , the European Union firmly and unilaterally committed itslef to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by at least 20 % compared to 1990 base values .
The implementation , especially in large urban concentrations , of intelligent transport systems in order to control traffic will prevent traffic jams which cost the European Union approximately 1 % per year of its gross domestic product .
At the same time , the development of the European railway system will contribute to compliance with European policies in the field of energy and tackling climate change .
In this context , I believe that one of the development priorities in the field of trans-European transport should be to design a high-speed railway network linking all the capitals of the Member States .
High speed trains should also go through Bucharest and Sofia .
( PL ) Madam President , Mr Albertini 's report deals with all the decisive factors in a sustainable European transport policy , taking account of European energy and environment policies .
Transport takes up over 30 % of energy consumption , and that figure is set to rise by 30 % in 20 years .
The transport sector uses 70 % oil , and in cities and built-up areas it accounts for 40 % of CO2 emissions and 70 % of emissions of other harmful compounds .
The rapporteur is in favour of technological innovations and other energy-saving methods .
The European Union needs swift , effective measures .
Given the huge rise in oil prices , the form of energy most beneficial for the environment and the economy is electric power .
It should play a greater part in transport , including urban transport , for example , through the production of cheap electrically powered urban motor vehicles .
The increasing demand for this form of energy should be covered by the latest generation of nuclear power stations that do not emit noxious gases .
( NL ) We are all aware of the way in which the transport sector is contributing to climate change .
To my mind Mr Albertini 's report offers a fair and succinct assessment of the practical and technical measures which may perhaps be applied to reduce that contribution .
And since one cannot make an omelette without breaking eggs , these measures will inevitably be painful to those concerned , both professional transport operators and the individual citizen .
In contrast to the belief expressed in paragraph 2 , my view is that not only the professionals but ordinary citizens too understand and support the need for extreme measures , provided they offer demonstrable benefits for the future .
The first major objective to be attained is that of the air quality standards , to be met by 2015 .
Transport will play a big part in meeting these targets , certainly in urban areas .
So available methods and measures , both at-source and end-of-pipe measures , must be applied and implemented without delay .
Madam President , my thanks to Mr Albertini for his report and I hope that everyone concerned will play their part in the efforts required .
( HU ) Thank you , Madam President .
I would like to congratulate my colleague Mr Albertini and make a few comments .
1 .
With regard to taxation as an instrument , I can accept that it needs to be applied uniformly to all modes of transport .
At the same time , we must take into account that tax cannot simply be increased ad infinitum , as this would cause serious inflation and could lead to increased costs and reduced competitiveness in the whole sector .
We cannot therefore have uniform taxation for everything , for excise duty on petrol for example .
I would like to point out that I think it is a good idea to link taxation to actual air pollution - for example in the vehicle registration tax system .
2 .
In the case of air transport , we must take into account that expansion of emissions trading represents an additional cost factor , and this will be reflected in prices .
This also needs to be taken into account regarding the idea of introducing indirect taxation that is sometimes put forward .
3 .
A genuine effort needs to be made to reduce urban congestion and thus also air-polluting emissions .
For the new Member States , however , the main challenge is not just promoting electric-powered urban public transport ; constructing bypass roads perhaps presents even more of a challenge .
In relative terms it is in this regard that they are lagging behind the most , and this should be given greater emphasis as a priority use of European Union resources .
4 .
As regards internalisation of external costs , I agree that we need to create sector neutrality .
For hauliers in the new Member States , however , the provisions of the Eurovignette already present a major challenge due to the increasingly stringent standards for vehicle emissions , etc .
In the new Member States internalisation must therefore be implemented more slowly and according to special principles .
Our hauliers should not be punished for the fact that the infrastructure is less well developed and therefore traffic jams are bigger .
5 .
It would be good if support of a practical and not just verbal nature were also given to inland waterway transport in the new Member States , especially on the River Danube and the River Tisza , and if the Commission would assist in this regard .
Transport intermodality is important , and may provide the biggest boost to modernisation of the rail network .
Let us discuss this too , rather than closing down railway lines .
Last , I hope that when the high-speed rail network is constructed , the eastern regions will at last be included on the map , because in the long term this is the only mode of transport that can compete with private cars . Thank you very much .
( PL ) Madam President , Mr Albertini has done a good job .
My thanks to him . I also identify with Commissioner Barrot 's comments .
What I particularly like is this combination of policies on technological development , market instruments and accompanying measures that are acceptable to the public and designed to achieve a more rational use of transport facilities .
I would add to this an efficient transport policy , both on the micro and the macro scale .
I am pleased to see that this combination of measures also takes account of the Baltic coastal area - an undoubtedly positive approach .
I like the idea of the Trans-European Networks , but we were expecting EUR 20 billion in 2008 and what we get is 8 billion .
I appeal to you all : let us pay more attention to efficient use of the part of the cohesion fund that is allocated to transport .
That applies to the new Member States , where the situation varies considerably but is generally not too good .
Let me also state clearly that the internalisation of external transport costs has its limits .
That limit , Commissioner , must be set by the refusal to allow a negative impact on the competitiveness of the EU economy .
Finally , the unified European rail network must become a reality .
( DE ) Madam President , I would like to thank the rapporteur for the report , and I know that in Commissioner Barrot we have a champion of sustainable transport policy .
Transport can pose a particular risk to our economic growth in Europe if it does not function properly .
In this domain we need more European responsibility , not less , for whenever Europe has fewer powers , there are national particularities and there are borders , and these are detrimental to transport operations .
This is why we must try to seek European solutions , as we have just been doing in the realm of air transport or as we did with the railway package .
I can only ask the Commission to step up a gear in the search for more and better European solutions , but success will surely also depend on our finding prices for the individual modes of transport that reflect their full cost .
Here , too , the Commission has adopted the right approach by starting with road transport , for road transport is certainly the mode that generates the highest social costs at the present time , although these are not met in full by road users .
Commissioner , you were in the Tyrol , a sensitive Alpine region , and you know what damage is caused there by heavy haulage traffic .
That impact also shows us that it is high time for action to introduce the European road-tax disc , to actually present the framework you have announced and to continue working hard to apply the principle that users should pay the true cost of road transport .
I must also direct some criticism at my own group here .
The group has come down in favour of Amendment 1 .
I wish to express my opposition to that amendment and to pledge my full support and that of my fellow Austrian Members to the effort to ensure that the Commission presents this general framework in June , beginning with road transport , and does not postpone its presentation until the next blue moon on the grounds that the package must cover all modes of transport .
There is an urgent need to act .
Let us begin with road transport .

( ES ) Madam President , Mr Albertini 's report sets out the enormous challenge we face in sustaining the low-cost mobility for all through access to new means of transport and new routes , mobility which has been made possible by the free movement of persons , goods and services , the foundation of the success of European integration , enlargement and social , economic and territorial cohesion ; at the same time , however , it must be achieved without the high environmental impact caused mainly by emissions , to say nothing of noise , congestion and safety .
The challenge lies in maintaining the positive and necessary aspects of that mobility but in the most intelligent way possible , in other words , achieving sustainable mobility and thereby minimising the impact on our environment and health .
To achieve this , as Mr Albertini says in his report , we need innovative measures and instruments .
Although included in the report , I would have liked to see more space given over to the future role of logistics as an instrument for intelligent mobility , streamlined through innovation and planning .
I am nonetheless grateful to him for including urban logistics among the aspects of urban transport and also for the support he gives to priority projects associated with logistics .
I also believe it is correct to include airports and require them to be integrated with railways and to place emphasis on developing the new concept of ' green corridors ' .
As for road-pricing , which has been much referred to here , including the Eurovignette , I would of course like the Commission to bear the social impact very much in mind .
Looking forward , following on from what some of my colleagues have said on the need to diversify fuel sources , I would like to ask the Commissioner about the possibility of including hydrogenerating networks in trans-European energy networks in the future .

( GA ) Mr President , I would first like to thank Mr Albertini for presenting us with a very important and comprehensive Report .
I believe that this Report gives a realistic overview of the challenges facing us as we try to devise a suitable transport policy .
I would like to welcome the pledge on intermodal transport .
I come from an island where the economy is dependent on sea and air routes and I believe that this infrastructure should be connected to rail transport .
However , this is not the case in Ireland .
Rail transport isn 't used to carry freight .
Since 1990 energy consumption has increased by 225 % because of road transport .
In terms of the Kyoto Agreement , we are falling short .
It is clear that there is a need for a great deal of investment in mixed transport in Ireland .
However , that will not happen until the local authorities and governments change their outlook and policies .
While these policies favour increased investment in roads , they neglect the development of rail transport in not only towns and cities , but in rural areas as well .
In conclusion , I advise the Commission to recognize the right of every Member State to set their own congestion charges and taxes .



( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in this own-initiative report Mr Albertini has emphasised the need to establish a cross-cutting policy taking all aspects into account : transport , energy and the environment .
Human movements are a source of wealth for society in various respects , economic , social and cultural , but they use energy and very often have a disastrous effect on the environment .
Every society , in particular not excluding the European Union , has to seek a balance , which is a difficult task .
It is in this context that the European Union shows its true value by playing a decisive role in the harmonious development of transport : a single European railway market , a Single European Sky , Trans-European Transport Networks , a European port policy .
By setting ambitious targets with the energy-climate package , talking about shared aims now has to be followed up by action .
To quote Plato : ' It is for us to follow the upward path and avoid the downward path ' .
Coordination and cooperation are the keywords of this cross-cutting policy .
The coordination of infrastructures at European level to obtain an overall view of transport networks , cooperation with the local actors best able to take a practical and realistic view of the issues , because that is what Europe is .
The will to harmonise by pooling all efforts , by exchanging best practice in the interests of citizens and the environment , with - not to be forgotten in this somewhat eclectic list - substantial extra financial support in order to implement the priority trans-European transport projects as quickly as possible .
Above all , though , if we focus on the local aspects , it seems to me that the integrated approach can only be efficient with an intermodal approach financially supported by Europe , especially in congested metropolitan and urban areas , to ensure safe , secure and affordable mobility , in short , ecological and sustainable mobility .
( HU ) Madam President , never before have human beings travelled as much as they do now .
The necessity of travelling , in addition to being a major waste of time , is a significant economic problem and a serious burden on the environment .
One third of the energy we use goes on transport .
In Europe , our primary mode of transport is the car .
In the past ten years , the number of cars per thousand people has increased from 400 to 460 , while car use has risen by 18 % .
In the past fifteen years , carbon dioxide emissions from the transport sector have increased dramatically , in some Member States by more than 100 % .
According to Commission forecasts , transport sector energy demand in the European Union will increase by at least 30 % between now and 2030 .
This could well spell failure in terms of meeting our Kyoto commitments .
It is a pity that road transport projects continue to receive greater emphasis in Europe than rail projects , despite the declared principles .
Bad examples are infectious : the balance has also shifted in central and eastern Europe , which used to be much more public transport-centred .
In my country , Hungary , the share of public transport had fallen to a mere 40 % in 2007 .
Reducing pollution caused by motor vehicles is a question of traffic management , of technology and of economics .
Expansion of the use of environmentally friendly technologies is a function of internalising environmental costs and introducing a taxation system based on carbon dioxide emissions .
Emissions-based differential take-off and landing charges are needed at airports .
Offering free parking , reduced congestion and road charges , a lower rate of vehicle taxation , vehicle duty and circulation tax for ' green ' cars could set in motion a spectacular shake-up .
Expenditure on transport-related health problems is enormous .
It is unfair to make the whole of society pay for these .
I believe the costs of air and noise pollution and transport accidents in this regard , too , must be borne by the transport sector . Thank you .
( DE ) Madam President , Mr Vice-President , I would like to focus on three points in Mr Albertini 's excellent report .
First of all , as your rapporteur on the subject of urban mobility , I am pleased that he has already given us some highly significant keynote messages to consider on that very important subject .
I assume that we shall pursue the discussion in that direction in our committee and subsequently in the chamber too .
Vice-President Barrot , you referred to the initiatives that the Commission will be taking on this very subject in the course of the present electoral term , and I hope we shall enjoy dealing with them .
My second point relates to another matter that has already been raised , namely the internalisation of the social and environmental cost of transport operations .
Every mode of transport must cover the costs it actually generates .
In the light of this principle , great importance attaches to the issue we spoke about at the time of the Eurovignette discussion , namely the fact that those who operate heavy goods vehicles on our roads should actually pay a reasonable price , in other words all the costs they generate must be chargeable to them .
Some of my fellow Members who expressed criticism of this principle have already slipped off into the night .
I think I can say that the PPE-DE Group comprises not only supporters of Amendment 1 but also a number of opponents .
We , for our part , shall certainly vote against that amendment .
The third point to which I attach importance is referred to in paragraph 22 , namely research .
The aim here is to give vehicle manufacturers clear targets , clear indications of the direction in which the European transport sector is meant to go . Only then will they be able to deliver what we need at affordable prices when we need it .
I would like to reiterate my special thanks to Commissioner Barrot for having planned such a busy programme for the rest of this legislative term .
We need this programme , and both the environment and our transport system will be the better for it .
Let me finally say to the Parliament-basher in the back row that I have a half-hour walk every day to and from the hotel here in Strasbourg , and so I have no need of either limousines or trams .
( FI ) Madam President , Commissioner , I would like to congratulate Mr Albertini on his excellent work and excellent proposals .
The matter under discussion is extremely important , and the public expects clear answers to the problem .
It is not a very simple issue , when we consider that the European Union 's basic pillars incorporate the notion of the free movement of people and goods .
Both are bound to grow in the future .
Obviously , too , we need to think about where we are going , how we are getting there and what sort of means we are using to do so .
The decisions we take will be enormously important .
As Mrs Jäätteenmäki has mentioned , it is very hard to imagine , in my country , for example , a situation in which movement in itself is dramatically restricted .
The distances are long , and people have to use their cars to get to work as there is no public transport .
When we come to consider how Parliament should behave , I agree that Parliament could set an example .
We have to think about whether we are travelling needlessly .
Can we cut back on unnecessary travel ?
How are we travelling ?
Parliament has an official car service which most of us use and which works very well .
We need to think , however , about what sort of cars we travel in .
What sort of fleet do Parliament , the Commission and the Council have at their disposal ?
Hybrid cars could be acquired for use by Members of Parliament .
The example we set is immensely important .
We cannot expect the public or European companies to do something which we do not do ourselves .
We therefore have to set a good example .
Madam President , while the details of some individual proposals in this report require careful study in relation to the principle of subsidiarity - especially any tax-related matters - the overall aims of the report deserve , nonetheless , to be supported .
From July 2008 , Ireland will see major changes to our existing annual motor tax regime and to the vehicle registration tax ( VRT ) system .
The new VRT system will see the introduction of a seven-band system based on carbon dioxide emissions and not on engine size .
Despite ongoing gridlock in our capital city , the Irish Minister for Transport , Noel Dempsey , said in the last week that congestion charges will not be considered for Dublin because the shambolic state of public transport offers little alternative to the private car .
Inadequate bus frequency , two light-rail lines that do not interconnect either with each other or with the main-line rail system , no link to the airport , no metro and still no integrated ticketing system - so much for efforts to reduce hydrocarbon use and greenhouse gas emissions !
This picture of Dublin flies in the face of the European Parliament 's efforts and proposed measures to optimise the use of public transport , especially in urban areas .
( BG ) Mme Chairperson , Mr. Commissioner , The sustainable transport policy , taking into account the energy and environmental aspects , includes transport infrastructure , employment through transport , mobility of people and free movement of goods .
The pan-European transport networks call for equal quality and environmental security .
This implies accurate stock-taking , especially of the railways , assessment of the current condition , and targeting of measures to countries that have not reached high European standards yet .
Reliable financial instruments need to be involved .
It is particularly important to put an end to the practice of turning some new Member Statses into old vehicle depots for Europe .
This is definitely environmentally undsound .
I am always concerned when EU reports mention the names of some geographic regions and omit others .
The Black Sea Region , too , is of great importance .
Sustainable intermodal schemes are needed there , as well .
Besides , it is within the framework of this report that we could possibly discuss the charges and the traffic on the Danube Bridge between Russe and Giurgiu , between Bulgaria and Romania .

( CS ) Madam President , allow me to make a comment on the debate that just took place : although most of us want to make the transport policy greener and agree that it is necessary to do so , at the same time no one wants to limit mobility .
We differ a good deal in our views of how to go about this .
We have not sorted out our priorities and that is the problem .
On the one hand we want to be sector-neutral as regards the different types of transport , and on the other hand we feel guilty for not favouring rail transport over road transport .
Can you imagine this happening without the introduction of a significant environmental tax on road freight traffic or without giving significant priority to railways ?
Objections against the internalisation of external costs are raised on the grounds that it will affect competitiveness .
There are no studies available on the social impact of the introduction of a Eurovignette in road transport .
Should we not be clear , first of all , as to what our main priority is ?
What about calling a Europe-wide referendum on these priorities ?

Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I shall be fairly brief .
I have listened with interest to the speeches on the report by Mr Albertini .
It can be said that the concerns so well expressed by Mr Albertini in his very clear and concise report are entirely in line with what the Commission and your Transport Commissioner want .
In short , it is true that mobility has to be changed rather than reduced .
That is the whole problem .
I shall not reply to each remark and observation . We have taken note of all of them .
I should , however , like to mention in passing that we need infrastructures if we are to bring about the modal shifts that are required .
I would say to Mr Albertini that that point needs to be stressed , because Europe is not sufficiently aware that it will need infrastructures and investments in order to be able to introduce the modal shifts .
Furthermore , it is true that we also need extremely advanced research into new engines and new energies if we are to meet the challenge of sustainable mobility .
I cannot let it be said , as I heard just now - although everyone was positive - that these would be pious hopes , good intentions , because I should , all the same , like to draw attention to what has already been accomplished . For instance , the classification of lorries in Euro categories based on rising standards , up to Euro 5 .
It can be said that that lorry classification has enabled CO2 emissions to be reduced by 30 to 40 % .
To take another example , in future the European Union wants emissions to be cut to 120g CO2 / km .
That is a target that the whole of the motor industry is working on at the moment .
That also leads me to repeat the very sensible remark by Mr Rack that we need to be careful , because the industry must be made fully aware of the targets and the future framework in order to adapt .
That is a point that concerns me greatly : we have to set clear objectives so that all the research and the industry as a whole comply with those objectives .
There it is , I am not going to dwell on that too much .
I shall say , of course , that the action to be taken must maintain the necessary mobility and must be effective in reducing adverse effects , whilst at the same time remaining acceptable to the public and to industry .
In June we are going to use that method to calculate the external costs and we shall see how each mode of transport - gradually , because it cannot all be done at once - can be integrated into the charges . We can then have tolls that really educate and that enlighten not just transport operators but also passengers on which modes of transport cause the most pollution and which are the most environmentally friendly .
I really hope that the Albertini report will be , if I may use that term , another Bible for everyone , because now it is absolutely essential for us to find ways to achieve this sustainable mobility .
I am grateful to Parliament for its contribution on this subject , which has been extremely valuable for the Commission .
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to take a few seconds to thank Members for their constructive comments , not just those who have supported the report and highlighted some of its aspects , but in particular those who have commented on it and the few who have criticised it on reasoned grounds .
Particular thanks to Commissioner Barrot , not just for what he has been so kind as to say , but in particular for the very vigorous action that he is undertaking in respect of the subject matter of the report and for his willingness to enter into cooperation between Parliament and the Commission so that we can play the effective part that we are all keen to play in changing mobility - as he has rightly said in his brief statement -rather than reducing it .
Mobility reflects the progress of our civilisation , and represents what is modern about us ; it represents development and progress and we should certainly not stifle it .
We simply have to improve it and use it when there is no other choice .
A final comment , one that perhaps strays somewhat from the issue that we are discussing , but one I feel I should make because it opens up prospects far greater than those we are discussing in relation to transport .
We are concerned by the pollution and all the critical problems that transport and its use entail .
We should perhaps take a more general view , especially as regards CO2 emissions and the CO2 generated by other sectors of our industrial civilisation .
I should like to quote you some figures and conclude with this simple comment : while it is true that transport accounts for 23 % of total CO2 emissions throughout Europe , electricity generation accounts for 43 % , industry for 19 % , and residential housing and commerce for 15 % .
If we want to achieve a 20 % cut in emissions of these unwanted effects of our civilisation by 2020 , we shall perhaps have to take more intensive action and pay more attention to other sectors as well which , as you are aware , lead the field in CO2 emissions , rather than just focusing on transport .
In that respect , nuclear is a term that cannot be avoided .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 11 March 2008 .
Amending budget No 1 / 2008 - Solidarity Fund - Mobilisation of the European Union 's Solidarity Fund ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on
the report by Kyösti Virrankoski , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on Draft amending budget No 1 / 2008 of the European Union for the financial year 2008 , Section III - Commission , and
the report by Reimer Böge , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council on the mobilisation of the EU Solidarity Fund in application of point 26 of the Interinstitutional Agreement of 17 May 2006 between the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission on budgetary discipline and sound financial management - C6-0036 / 2008 - .
rapporteur . - ( FI ) Madam President , the European Solidarity Fund was created in 2002 in the wake of the disastrous floods which struck in central Europe , affecting both EU Member States and candidate countries .
At the time it was agreed the fund should be EUR 1 billion a year .
This fund was meant to bring relief to those who had suffered damage due to major catastrophes .
The extent of catastrophic damage must be at least EUR 3 billion or no less than 0.6 % of the Member State 's GNP .
If the damage is restricted to a small area , it could be less , but regionally it could be relatively more .
The damage now under discussion was the result of the large-scale flooding in the United Kingdom in June and July 2007 .
The damage is put at EUR 4.6 billion , so it is eligible for compensation .
The Commission is proposing EUR 162 million .
In its budget , the Committee on Budgets is recommending support for providing finance in the manner the Commission is suggesting .
However , it requires Parliament to approve mobilisation of that support .
For that reason , Mr Böge 's report on the mobilisation of the Solidarity Fund needs to be adopted first .
In other respects , the first amending budget mainly concerns agencies and the administrative management of the Galileo Programme .
In the budget a European Research Council Executive Agency was set up .
Its creation accords with the budgetary procedure agreed for this year .
Under the amending budget a joint executive agency , the Research Executive Agency ( REA ) , is created , for the other programmes under the Seventh Framework Programme for research too .
This is also in line with the earlier budgetary procedure .
Similarly , the amendments to the staffing timetable for the border control agency , Frontex , which Parliament had called for have been made .
Parliament increased the funds for this agency by EUR 30 million in the budgetary procedure , and these now constitute the necessary additional funds .
The toughest problem relates to the Galileo satellite navigation programme .
Parliament 's great achievement was that it succeeded in the budget negotiations in guaranteeing the programme 's funding by increasing the amount set aside for it by EUR 2.4 billion for six years .
This partly came about through an adjustment to the muiltiannual financial framework .
The project thus clearly became an EU project .
Now it is a matter of administering the project .
The Commission is proposing EUR 2 million in the form of a transfer from operating appropriations to administration .
The project 's administration , however , is in a mess .
It has mainly been managed in the EU by GSA , the Galileo Supervisory Authority .
It task has been mainly concerned with permits and partnership discussions between the public and private sectors .
The private sector having been excluded in the initial phase , the GSA 's role is unclear , as is that of the Commission and the European Space Agency ( ESA ) .
It was at first thought that the ESA would be responsible for implementing the project 's technical side , which the EU would oversee and fit out .
The division of labour between the various actors , such as the Commission and the separate agencies , is , however , unclear .
The Committee on Industry , Research and Energy is therefore proposing in Mrs Barsi-Pataky 's report that the GSA should be abolished .
Given these circumstances , the Committee on Budgets could not agree to the transfer of the appropriation to the Commission , but instead simply proposes the creation of a PM line .
The Commission promised that it would effect the transfer within the scope of its competence before Galileo 's entire administration system had been agreed .
Changing the amending budget in this respect would therefore not delay the project , but it would ensure Parliament 's negotiating position .
I hope that the plenary will be able to go along with the Committee 's unanimous position as regards the first amending budget .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the rapporteur on the 2008 budget , Kyösti Virrankoski , has really covered all the essential points .
So we are speaking today on the basis of a proposal from the Commission about the mobilisation of the EU Solidarity Fund in application of point 26 of the Interinstitutional Agreement .
While it is true that the Solidarity Fund and other special instruments do not represent large sums of money in relation to the general budget of the European Union , they ultimately serve to help stricken regions and their people in the event of natural disasters , and , as we all know , these disasters - be they storms or raging fires - have become a somewhat regular occurrence .
Before we took our decision , we in the Committee on Budgets made a point of holding a hearing , to which we invited representatives of the affected regions of the United Kingdom , of local organisations and also of the national administration .
At that hearing we were reminded very clearly of the challenges facing the stricken people and regions and of the extent of the damage caused by the flooding in June and July 2007 , estimated at a total of EUR 4.6 billion .
On the basis of this hearing and our talks , we fully endorsed the Commission 's proposal that EUR 162 387 000 be made available from the Solidarity Fund for this special case .
Let me also make a point of mentioning that we can expect further mobilisations of the Solidarity Fund in the coming months .
In such cases , to be sure , it is not only the European Community that is called on to show solidarity : in view of the increased incidence of such disasters , the Member States should be giving more thought to preventive crisis management , in other words assessing the state of their civil-defence systems , checking how local fire brigades are equipped and examining how they can perhaps develop different strategies in future on issues such as building work in flood-prone areas .
These things are an integral part of any long-term strategy if we want to maintain our credibility .
Another requirement - and we are somewhat better placed in this respect on the present occasion than in other cases - is that we should all make it our common aim , as a matter of basic principle , to ensure that the processing of future claims on the Solidarity Fund is completed in a maximum of six months .
That is a challenge to everyone : the national authorities must submit all the requisite applications and documents within the prescribed period , the Commission must deal with the case in hand on the basis of the applicable provisions , and we in Parliament must also expedite matters by means of prompt deliberation .
Allow me to refer to one final point , which relates to the amending budget .
In view of the difficult negotiations and of the pending completion of the legislative procedure on the Galileo satellite navigation system , I strongly endorse the stipulation made by the rapporteur that the budget line created for expenditure on administrative management should be a pro memoria item .
That is a step in the right direction if the appropriate administrative structures are to be established within the Commission .
We are not yet satisfied , however , with the arrangements for future interaction between the Commission , the European Space Agency and the Galileo Supervisory Authority .
In the course of the legislative procedure , there is a need at least to indicate a way of avoiding duplication of effort and developing the appropriate management structures in the new circumstances of the Galileo satnav system .
There is still a certain need for discussion , which I hope we can satisfy as soon as possible .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , on 18 January the Commission adopted the proposal for the mobilisation of the solidarity fund for the United Kingdom , and we are happy and satisfied that the Committee on Budgets ' opinion is quite positive towards our proposal .
Along with amending Budget No 1 / 2008 , we also proposed the allocation of EUR 162 million from the solidarity fund for the UK in order to compensate for the serious damage caused by last summer 's floods .
As the chairman of Committee on Budgets has already said , we have recently received requests from two Member States - Greece and Slovenia - and we will probably be presenting a new proposal very soon .
Of course , this proposal is not only about the solidarity fund .
It is only the solidarity fund that will have financial implications : other elements of the proposal are more technical .
The Galileo question , of course , is very sensitive to all of us and I fully understand the concerns of the Committee on Budgets .
However , I must say that the proposal of the Committee on Budgets to change the Commission proposal will delay delivery of the solidarity fund by about one month because it will have to go back to Council for another vote , but we understand the sensitivity and we cannot argue with the decision of the Committee on Budgets on this matter .
However , I very much hope that our proposal in general will be supported this week in Parliament .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , I would like to say that I support this amending budget , and there are one or two items which I would like to comment upon .
Firstly concerning the Solidarity Fund : this , of course , was the allocation in respect of the floods in Britain in June and July last year .
Much of this flooding happened in my region , and I can testify to the appalling damage and hardship which it brought on many residents of my area .
I was interested - but not surprised - to note that this was the third largest claim in the history of the solidarity fund , the claim being EUR 4.6 billion and the allocation being to the sum of EUR 162.8 million .
I am aware that my friend and colleague Reimer Böge said that , of course , in the grand order of things it is not a great deal of money .
Perhaps it is not , but as a gesture of solidarity , please believe me that it is well and truly appreciated , and on behalf of the people of that region , I want to express my thanks : firstly to the members of the Budget Committee , who were unanimous in their support of this aid package - which is truly a gesture of solidarity .
But may I also express my appreciation to the Commissioner and her colleagues who turned this claim around in seven months .
I thought that was a remarkable achievement , Commissioner , and I thank you for your efforts to do that .
I shall , of course , watch with interest over the next weeks and months to see how the United Kingdom Government disburses those funds , but it is clear to me that , with the increasing evidence of extreme climatic events , these issues are going to occur with a greater regularity throughout the European Union , and it is clear that , when expressing solidarity , it is in fact speed of response that is the most important element in that mechanism .
On the issue of Frontex , I also wanted to say that I support the additional funding for Frontex - we doubled the funding for the Agency .
I thought that was exactly right , and I note that this request is for the creation of 25 posts .
But I do believe that it is important that we continue to monitor the distribution of funding , to ensure that it delivers value for money . In the same way , I supported thoroughly the Lisbon objectives which the Commission set for themselves , particularly in the field of research and development .
I therefore recognise the need for the research executive agencies ; but again , I express my anxiety at the proliferation of agencies which , I have to say , historically have not been renowned for their effective delivery of value for money .
Finally , on the subject of Galileo : this new budget line will do a great deal to give greater transparency and accountability .
However , I do agree with my colleagues on the Budget Committee when we say that we will proceed with caution .
If I may say so , Madam Commissioner , this is a massive undertaking , and - borrowing some space age jargon - may I say that the Commission here is ' boldly going where no Commission has ever gone before ' .
I therefore agree with my colleague Reimer Böge when he says that we support this , but we would insist on inserting the PM line .
Mr President , I support the amending budget and am happy to do so .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , I am replacing Mr Titley , the leader of the Labour MEPs , tonight , but I can speak on behalf of all those MEPs in welcoming this amending budget and the decision to grant EUR 162 million to the UK regions affected by flooding .
As Mr Ashworth has said , it is a small grant towards covering the huge costs of the damage done by the floods in the UK , but we are appreciative to our colleagues in the Committee on Budgets , who voted unanimously , and also to the Commission .
I understand it was the quickest payment ever made : within seven months .
Therefore , although many people have been suffering for a long time , it is progress compared with previous funds .
We also understand that it is one of the largest payments ever made , and we are appreciative of that .
Last year 's floods affected 48 000 UK homes and 700 businesses and the total damage is estimated at over EUR 4 billion .
My own region of Yorkshire was one of the worst affected and many people have still not returned to their homes and , therefore , this help and assistance is very much appreciated .
I am replacing Mr Titley as he is stuck in London because of the very severe storms that are battering western Europe this evening .
We cannot attribute all bad weather to climate change , but we do know that the number of extreme weather events is increasing .
We have seen severe floods , and also the fires in Greece and southern Europe last summer , and no amount of solidarity funds can actually meet the damage and the cost which we are seeing as a result of these climate-change events .
We are beginning our work as MEPs on the new package of climate change legislation .
I very much hope this House will adopt a tough stance and implement and agree good legislation which really does tackle climate change so that we do not have to come back here and ask the Commission for money to tackle these kinds of events .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , in a sense I have an easy task following the last two speakers .
I , too , wish to speak clearly in favour of the proposal from our rapporteurs , Mr Virrankoski and Mr Böge , but particularly in favour of the mobilisation of the solidarity fund for the UK .
A sum of EUR 162 million : it seems to be uncontentious , but it is hugely important on several levels .
As an MEP , I represent the area of Yorkshire and the Humber , hit , as Ms McAvan said , by floods last summer - cities , villages across our region devastated .
Many individuals , even in the village down the road from me , are still out of their homes .
Whilst we know that this payment may not change their situation overnight , it will go indirectly towards helping by relieving pressure on our Government 's own budget .
Secondly , I am extremely pleased that our Government made this application , and a successful application at that .
There were times at the beginning when we were not sure that would happen , and I hope that , having gone through this experience , our government will now become a big fan of the solidarity fund in Council and will persuade other Member States accordingly .
Lastly , the British people , my constituents , will now understand that European solidarity has a tangible and practical meaning .
And that will apply , I think , to all of us in this House .
As climate change does bite , we may all be in the situation of representing those who are victims of such natural disasters and may have , therefore , to lay claim to European solidarity .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , solidarity is the European Union 's most important and finest principle .
Without it there can be no question of joint action by independent states and nations .
The creation of the European Union Solidarity Fund followed naturally from this principle .
For the time being we have EUR 1 billion available annually .
That is not a large sum , especially as last year , and this year too , we have had to face an increase in climatic disasters .
We have been hit not only by floods and hurricanes , but by fires of unexpected magnitude .
With our limited means we are able so far to make only a small amount of help available - 3 % or 4 % of the losses incurred , or even less .
That is why , while supporting Mr Böge 's report and Mr Virrankoski 's draft amending budget , I also conclude that the resources of the Solidarity Fund need to be gradually increased .
Two euros per citizen will not suffice to wipe away the tears when such enormous losses are incurred .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , this Parliament knows many different types of solidarity .
The hardest type of solidarity is military assistance .
The solidarity clause in the Treaty of Lisbon states that Member States will be obliged to deliver military assistance to another Member State which is the victim of a terrorist threat or attack .
A harder type of solidarity is unknown in the European Union .
The security guarantee clause in the Treaty of Lisbon does not impose an obligation of military assistance .
It is therefore a milder type of solidarity than when there is a threat of terrorism .
Jutta Haug , Parliament 's rapporteur for next year 's budget , is proposing that a key principle of the Commission 's budget should be regional solidarity , i.e. a balancing of the Union 's internal development .
It would come about best via the Structural Funds .
Under the amending budget before us there is a move to use budget funds to compensate for the damage caused by the floods in the United Kingdom .
A billion euros has been reserved in the Solidarity Fund for this purpose .
Our group agrees with the mobilisation of these funds to help the United Kingdom .
It is possible that there will be more exceptional natural phenomena like flooding as a result of global warming .
The Solidarity Fund offers a sort of small-scale insurance policy against them .
The Member States pay a premium into the EU budget and they can therefore acquire help from the others when their turn comes .
Besides the Solidarity Fund , the EU budget contains a Globalisation Fund , which may spend EUR 500 million every year to ease the social problems that result from job transfers .
Last year less than EUR 20 million was mobilised for this purpose .
It seems the EU shows solidarity towards countries but not its citizens who have fallen on hard times .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , I am pleased to know that Britain should receive money to help us with the cost of last year 's floods .
We are all very happy that the EU has generously come to the aid of a Member State in difficulty .
But it is not quite like that : first , the grant is only 3.5 % of the cost of the damage - a gesture , as Mr Ashworth says - and , secondly , it is nine months after the event - and that is fast , they say !
It would have been more helpful if we had known it would be forthcoming , and then reconstruction could have been planned accordingly .
If there is one thing that gets up the nose of the British - when we realise that we are getting back a little of the cash we have paid into the European Union - is that we are obliged to beg for it and then advertise the EU 's generosity .
Please , can we not rather keep our own money and then decide how to spend it ourselves ?
That way , it could be paid out more quickly .
( FR ) Mr President , most of our States have lines of credit in their budgetary law for dealing with disasters .
Under French budgetary law , for example , there are global allocations that allow appropriations to be committed by decree in advance in emergencies .
Since November 2002 , European budgetary law has incorporated this disaster financing law with this Solidarity Fund .
For financial disasters , we have also set up the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
As regards natural disasters , we are being asked for aid of less than 4 % to repair the flood damage in the United Kingdom in June 2007 , costing over 4 billion .
Nine months to commit appropriations is a long time , because this is by definition an emergency situation .
That means that the amending budget method to authorise the commitment is not operational .
The amending budget should come into effect earlier to ratify the commitment to be made in advance , with provisional and non-restrictive appropriations for disasters , floods and fires .
That being so , EUR 162 million in solidarity for the United Kingdom of Adam Smith , Ricardo and Mrs Thatcher , who only believe in the market , Darwinism and natural selection , is an excellent lesson in pragmatism .
When the lion that roars in the economic jungle gets wet , he discovers the virtues of solidarity .
That is three times now - mad cow disease , foot-and-mouth disease and floods - and tomorrow our British Members will also have the chance to show solidarity with the European farmers who have got wet from imports .
- ( EL ) Mr President , this amending budget proves once again what is self-evident : that the EU has the mechanisms and adaptability to provide solutions to specific unexpected problems .
I should like to make three proposals for the package of two reports that we have discussed today .
Two of them concern the Solidarity Fund , and the third , the Galileo Programme .
On the issue of the floods in the UK , the time interval between July and the present response from the EU is very satisfactory .
It happens to be the quickest response throughout the operation of this fund , at least as far as I can remember .
However , it creates a precedent : in future we shall expect such an immediate response to similar disasters , and here I am referring to the environmental catastrophe that we suffered in Greece last summer only a month later , in August .
I therefore hope that next month the Commission will at last make a proposal through the competent Commissioner addressing the Greek request to activate the Solidarity Fund .
I do not need to remind you of the shocking images of the great fire disaster in Greece ; we all saw them , throughout Europe .
I hope that , mutatis mutandis , we shall at last have the Commission 's proposal in our hands within the coming month .
My second comment concerns the spectacle we are now making of ourselves .
I have no idea how Parliament manages it , but every time we have some good news , we are the only ones who know about it !
We are on our own , with no-one in the galleries , and probably not a single journalist !
When shall we finally learn to market good news properly ?
My third and last comment concerns the Galileo Programme .
I agree with all my colleagues from the Committee on Budgets and , as that committee 's rapporteur for the Galileo Programme , I wish to be quite clear that we are not going to make any payment from the very considerable package of funds we have committed , unless we agree with the Council on the wider architecture of the programme .
If we do not know who is doing what - and we are still in the dark because we are negotiating with the Council - we shall not spend anything .
We are not going to throw money down the drain .
Tomorrow morning we have a very important trilateral discussion with the Slovenian Presidency .
There are two major outstanding issues .
I hope that we can conclude these negotiations so that we can set our minds on making genuine progress .
( PL ) Mr President , I wish to draw attention to the following points in this debate .
First , it is regrettable that the Commission 's proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing the European Union Solidarity Fund has still not been adopted by Council , despite the fact that the European Parliament took a position on the matter at the first reading almost two years ago , in May 2006 .
Second , the mobilisation of EUR 162 million to help make good the damage caused by the floods of June and July 2007 in Britain and Ireland , the total cost of which amounted to almost EUR 5 billion , deserves our support .
A pity that funds for that purpose are being allocated many months after the damage was incurred , which can make the aid less effective .
As the Polish proverb says : ' He who gives quickly gives twice . '
Third , since the ceiling for the Solidarity Fund has been set at EUR 1 billion , I would hope that , in the event of damage on such a scale as in Britain , appropriate funding will be mobilised speedily and that the needs of both old and new Member States will be addressed on equal terms .
- ( EL ) Mr President , as well as thank the rapporteur for the very good work he has done , I wish very briefly to raise just one point concerning the Solidarity Fund .
Mr President , every year we have bad weather in the EU .
It is also ironic that , just when we are discussing these important reports , Northern Europe should be hit by violent storms .
Thank goodness that the EU provides financial support in the event of such disasters , as is now the case in the UK , and as it has done in the past for Cyprus .
However , we must not forget that in addition to the financial aspect , there has to be a Europe-wide organisational unit capable of providing immediate relief to the stricken areas .
- ( EL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , solidarity is a fine word , and an even finer concept .
Unfortunately , there is a very great need for it : the facts show that this need is becoming increasingly pressing because of natural disasters , which we should no longer look on as natural , but rather as increasingly frequent occurrences in our lives .
In the summer months of 2007 alone , three very serious events occurred .
Firstly , there was the UK situation that we are discussing and voting on today ; immediately afterwards there were the terrible fires in Greece , which you all know about , and not long after that , more floods in Slovenia . All this shows us how serious these phenomena are , and also how essential it is for the EU to take action .
I am surprised when fellow Members say they do not understand why the EU should provide money . It is a matter not only of money , but also of moral support and the feeling among the inhabitants of those areas that the EU is aware of their tragedy .
In many cases it is a tragedy , and the EU is doing something about it . This leads me to point out , as has been said before , that the example of the UK , which we applaud , for it elicited a relatively rapid response , should be emulated in the countries that are subsequently stricken .
It is no accident that our country , Greece , is next on the list for assistance from the Solidarity Fund , and we hope that in our case , too , help will be rapidly forthcoming .
However , I am not sure that this will happen , and I wonder whether this is due to the EU and to how it deals with requests , or to the way in which the request itself was submitted by Greece .
No matter : we hope that help will soon be given to Greece too , because I assure you that the situation in Greece is still very serious . The problem is that the money for Greece , which was put into the Fund , has not yet been announced .
( PL ) Mr President , the functioning of the EU Solidarity Fund is seen in a very positive light by the Member States , and particularly by EU citizens .
The Fund establishes the possibility of granting aid to those affected by natural disasters that cause considerable damage .
Its purpose is to help make good the losses incurred , which weigh heavily on the budgets of many families .
Such financial aid from EU funds is an example of European solidarity .
For the European families that suffer , our EU citizens , it is the best example of the advantages and benefits of membership of the European Community when such a need arises .
However , we must concentrate our action - and find the necessary funding in the EU budget - on combating the causes of such disasters and on establishing appropriate crisis management arrangements and an appropriate insurance system .
rapporteur . - ( FI ) Mr President , I wish to thank all those who have taken part in the debate for their excellent , constructive input .
The Solidarity Fund is very young and so its limits have been set very high .
It has not been possible to rely on previous information concerning how much money is needed .
Perhaps the limits can be reviewed to some extent in the future .
I agree that speed is undoubtedly an advantage in this work .
The Committee on Budgets has given much thought to the use of the Globalisation Fund to overcome the problems resulting from lost jobs .
This is obviously an area where the EU in the future will have a lot of work to do .
In the same way , many have remarked on the issue of crisis management .
This year 's budget also incorporates a pilot project to speed up the prevention of forest fires , and in that area we are aiming at new and good results .
As regards the Galileo project , there is not to be any increase in its funding .
This obviously has to be regarded as a basic principle .
The current level of funding is sufficient .
Its administration , however , needs to be efficient .
Especially now , when the levels of funding are considerable , there is a great danger that its administrative management will also become more bureaucratic .
It must be efficient , and for this reason we want to maintain Parliament 's scope for negotiation , so that we and the Commission and the Council can together agree on what the best possible form of governance is to see this European and very ambitious , major project through to the end .
I am convinced that over the weeks to come we will achieve a satisfactory result .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 11 March 2008 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( RO ) I believe that the request formulated by Great Britain is pertinent and I support the mobilisation of the Solidarity Fund in this case .
Romania was confronted with major floods over the last years ; the latest floods occurred recently .
As in the case of Great Britain , much of the damage caused by floods could have been avoided by greater involvement in the prevention effort .
The existing infrastructure , as well as the response of the national authorities was nevertheless overwhelmed by the force of the natural phenomenon .
Consequently , I support two measures which the European Union can take to enhance national and European feedback : allotment of money from the structural funds for infrastructure works designed to mitigate the effects of natural catastrophes ; secondly , the establishment -as soon as possible- of the European Intervention Force , consisting of specialist teams from all the Member States to intervene in emergency situations in any region of the European Union .
Another important aspect is the level of the funds allotted by the European Union in emergency cases .
Given that we envisage an extensive review of the European Union budget , I believe that we should consider an increase of the amounts allotted to the European Solidarity Fund .
EC / Guinea-Bissau Fisheries Partnership Agreement ( debate )
The next item is the report by Luis Manuel Capoulas Santos , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council regulation on the conclusion of the Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the European Community and the Republic of Guinea-Bissau - C6-0391 / 2007 - .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , let me start by extending my gratitude to the Committee on Fisheries and in particular the rapporteur , Mr Capoulas Santos , for his report .
On 23 May 2007 , the European Community and the Republic of Guinea-Bissau initialled a fisheries partnership agreement for a period of four years .
This agreement forms part of the series of EC ' tuna agreements ' in the Atlantic Ocean .
The financial contribution is fixed at EUR 7 million per year .
Of this financial contribution , 35 % , or EUR 2.45 million , is earmarked to support the definition and implementation of a fisheries sector policy in Guinea-Bissau , with a view to introducing responsible and sustainable fishing .
In addition , the European Union will pay an annual specific contribution of EUR 500 000 to improve sanitary conditions in the fisheries sector and to strengthen monitoring , control and surveillance in the waters of Guinea-Bissau .
In addition to the total amount of EUR 7.5 million , the protocol also contains a special financial provision for a supplementary allocation of EUR 1 million maximum per year , aiming at improving the use of fishing opportunities by ship owners .
This new protocol provides fishing possibilities for shrimps and for fish , in particular cephalopods , up to a total tonnage of 4 400 t per year for each of the two categories .
Furthermore , the agreement covers licences for 19 tuna seiners , 14 pole-and-line vessels and 4 surface longliners .
The agreement gives the Community a solid legal and political framework for monitoring the activities of the European Union fleet in the Guinea-Bissau fishing area .
It also allows the Community to support the development of the sector in that country , to the mutual benefit of both parties .
Turning to the amendments proposed , let me state that , whereas in many instances we share the objectives outlined therein , I am unable to accept them for the following reasons .
I fully share the concern that the flow of information provided to the European Parliament should be as complete as possible .
However , the Commission already provides all the requested information , in line with the current interinstitutional arrangements .
Moreover , every evaluation report , as well as the reports on the results of negotiations and of Joint Committee meetings , is immediately transmitted to the Committee on Fisheries .
In addition , I myself inform the Committee on Fisheries regularly of the state of play of international negotiations in special , restricted ' closed-door ' sessions .
The issue of reporting requirements by the fleet is also being dealt with , since we have proposed a legal basis that will allow the Commission to refuse licence requests on the grounds of poor reporting from Member States .
This draft regulation is currently going through the adoption procedure in the institutions .
Regarding the proposal to reject the fisheries agreements in general on the grounds that they are not sustainable , it should be recalled that the Council , in its July 2004 conclusions , indicated that the aim of the new fisheries partnership agreements ( FPAs ) is to contribute to the sustainable management of fisheries resources .
As a matter of fact , FPAs only provide for access to stocks that are not fully exploited by the national fleet of the particular country in question .
The Commission believes that the FPAs can and do provide a political and legal framework that assists the efforts of partner countries in implementing a policy of sustainable and responsible fishing in their waters .
Finally , with respect to the proposal that vessels should pay the total cost of the agreement in proportion to their catches , let me just say that we have established a reasonable cost-sharing balance between shipowner contributions and the Community compensation .
This approach is in line with the July 2004 Council conclusions on fisheries partnership agreements , on which Parliament gave its opinion .
In our system , the shipowner licence fees are indeed calculated on the basis of their respective catches .
rapporteur . - ( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , my report concerns the fisheries agreement signed with a small African country which , after over a decade of armed struggle for independence , has in recent years experienced serious political instability interspersed by periods of civil war .
Fishing is an important economic resource for this small country , and its financial contribution represents a very significant part of the State budget .
However , this fisheries agreement is not one that seeks to purchase fish .
According to its partnership philosophy , that is not the European Union 's position .
European Union policy is based on other values and its essential concerns are the sustainability of resources and a position of effective partnership .
It is therefore an agreement with reciprocal advantages : for the European Union , obviously , because its fleet has access to important fishing grounds , but also for Guinea-Bissau , which , besides the financial contribution , will be in a better position to ensure more sustainable management of what is perhaps its greatest economic resource through support for research , monitoring , surveillance and improving the health conditions of fishery products .
It is therefore a balanced and mutually advantageous agreement , which is why I recommend that Parliament approve my report , with the amendment introduced by the Development Committee and with my own proposed amendments , which merely seek to reinforce Parliament 's position in monitoring these areas .
I myself , meanwhile , although the Commissioner apparently claims that he is unable to accept these proposals , consider on the contrary that fishing policy can only gain from a more affirmative and more permanent stance by Parliament .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , the only purpose of the fisheries agreement is to guarantee the short-term economic interests of yet another EU industry which does not come up to scratch in international terms .
There are three reasons why we have to vote against the fisheries agreement tomorrow .
The first is the environment .
The exhaustion of West African waters will soon be a reality .
Biological diversity is seriously threatened and a continuation of this insane fisheries policy will have long-term effects on the environment , both locally and globally .
My second objection is on economic grounds .
European taxpayers are forced to subsidise unprofitable fishing fleets by millions of euros each year .
Where is the economic gain in that ?
Where is the sustainability ?
Where is the value added for Europe ?
If instead the vessels were compelled to bear their own costs , the pressure on fisheries would be reduced and both the taxpayers and the environment would be the winners .
The third reason is the importance of fishing to local development in the partnership countries .
Fishing is , for many of them , their only source of income .
The hoovering of the seas creates an unsustainable situation for the local population , who cannot compete with heavily subsidised European vessels .
It is time to put an end to these fisheries agreements , and the time is now .
Mr President , I really have to ask Commissioner Borg if he believes what he is saying now .
Has he been scripted and sent in ?
Is he really trying to say that these FPAs are sustainable ?
A very interesting article in the New York Times on 14 January 2008 talks about major fish populations collapsing in West Africa and the desire for money from foreign fleets to override concerns about the long-term health of fisheries - the desire for money from the EU also to override any concerns about the health of fisheries .
Guinea-Bissau , a nation of 1.4 million people : a prime example of how not to run a fishery .
According to Vladimir Kacyznski , a marine scientist with the University of Washington , no one has comprehensively studied the nation 's coastal waters for at least 20 years .
And for two years Sanji Fati was in charge of enforcing Guinea-Bissau 's fishing rules .
When he took the job in 2005 , he did not have a single working patrol boat to monitor hundreds of pirates and dozens of industrial trawlers , most of them foreign .
An estimated 40 % of fish were caught without licences or in violation of regulations .
Quite frankly , I wonder whether we know what we are doing here .
We have a huge conflict of interests .
These desperate economies need our money , and they are prepared to sell their fishing resources .
We should know better .
Let them have the money but let us not rape their waters .
Commissioner Borg , please think again !
( PL ) Mr President , as a substitute member of the Committee on Fisheries present in the Chamber , I would like to say a few words about the report we are discussing .
It is a specialised , detailed report , but that is in the nature of the subject matter .
It would be hard to present it in a different way .
Nevertheless , the agreement has a much broader character , since it invokes other values that are important for both sides in this partnership .
May I thank the Commissioner once again .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all I would like to say that I agree with the comments made by the rapporteur , Mr Capoulas Santos , that fisheries and the revenue that is derived from the fisheries partnership agreement form a very important part of the budget of Guinea-Bissau .
We are now working in a spirit of partnership as against the traditional fisheries agreements where the objective was to go and catch fish , pay for the fish caught and leave .
These fisheries partnership agreements are modelled on the basis of helping the country concerned to build its fisheries infrastructure and to build related sectors so that there could also be a diversion from pure fishing to fish-related activities like aquaculture , where that is possible .
The aim is also to see to it that the fishing activities that are carried out by our fleets under a fisheries partnership agreement relate only to the surplus .
For example , in this case , at our request , an evaluation study was carried out at the end of 2005 by an independent external consultant , whose recommendations in terms of management and conservation of resources have been taken into account , together with the scientific advice provided by Guinea-Bissau 's Research Institute following the 2006 trawling campaign .
Furthermore , the protocol includes a number of binding measures in its Annex III , with a view to implementing a management plan for the global fishing effort in the Guinea-Bissau exclusive economic zone .
According to the fisheries plan , Guinea-Bissau committed itself to reducing the fishing effort on shrimps and cephalopods , maintaining in 2007 the existing agreements with third countries and the European Community , preventing the mobilisation in 2008 and subsequent years of fishing opportunities granted to third countries from 1 January 2007 which have remained unused , not granting any fishing opportunities for chartering in these categories , and revoking and formally terminating all agreements with European companies , associations or enterprises .
In addition , datasheets 1 and 2 of Annex II , applicable to fin-fish , cephalopod and shrimp trawlers , provide for the possibility of biological recovery periods .
With regard to shrimp fishing , Guinea-Bissau has also undertaken to increase the mesh size from 40 to 50 mm , in keeping with existing legislation in the subregion .
I would say that it is in spite of these fisheries partnership agreements that a lot of illegal fishing activity is carried out and a lot of private licensing is granted to third countries not belonging to the European Union , and it is by virtue of these fisheries partnership agreements that we can control and manage our own fishing fleets so that they fish in a sustainable manner in Guinea-Bissau and other waters .
So I have to say that , yes , I believe that it is beneficial to the third country concerned for the European Union , for the European Community , to negotiate and enter into such fisheries partnership agreements under the new regime .
I agree with you , however , that the previous regime did exploit the resources , but the new arrangement is that we are only interested in negotiating agreements on the surplus , so that if the stock in the third-country waters is already fully exploited or overexploited we do not enter into a fisheries partnership agreement .
If it is underexploited , then we only enter into an agreement for the surplus , and we do our utmost to see to it that our own fleets , at least , do carry out and do maintain the commitments undertaken under the agreement .
rapporteur . - ( PT ) Mr President , I would like to say first of all that I deeply regret the ' moralistic ' attitude that some Members are trying to impress upon this debate , which in my view only reveals great ignorance of what is reasonably at issue .
I am reasonably familiar with Guinea-Bissau and with its political , economic and social reality and recent history , and I am well aware of the assault on Guinea-Bissau 's resources in the late 1970s by the fishing fleet of the then Soviet Union , and of the effectively predatory attitude of some of our competitors in terms of global fishing .
I believe that the philosophy underlying EU fisheries policy is a matter for pride rather than embarrassment , and it is regrettable that the other fishing powers do not follow our example .
And the proof of this is that the respective report was approved by all the members of the Development Committee , while an overwhelming majority of the Fisheries Committee approved my report .
I believe that this is the possible and politically realistic way forward , and the one that best serves the interests not only of the European Union but also of the people of Guinea-Bissau .
Therefore once again , Mr President , I urge Parliament to approve this report because it is politically balanced and it is a partnership agreement which is mutually advantageous for the parties concerned .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 11 March 2008 .
Agenda for the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 10.20 p.m. )
Closing of the session
I declare the 2007-2008 session of the European Parliament closed .
Opening of the session
I declare the 2008-2009 session of the European Parliament open .
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9 a.m. )
Statement by the President
Today we are commemorating the fourth European Day of the Victims of Terrorism .
It is a day that we must keep in our memory in order to remember all those who have been the innocent victims of terrorism .
The terrorist attacks in Madrid on 11 March 2004 -four years ago today - and in London on 7 July 2005 claimed many victims and left many families torn apart by the barbarities of terrorism .
Just last Friday , the terrorist organisation ETA assassinated again .
Isaías Carrasco , a former Socialist councillor , was shot when he left his home in Mondragón .
I wish to express our deepest condolences to all his family .
As President of the European Parliament and on my own behalf , I should like to reassure you that the victims of terrorism - wherever they are in the world - will never be erased from our memories .
Today , we shall commemorate Isaías Carrasco and all the victims of terrorism , in order to assure the victims of the madness of terrorist attacks of our respect and our sympathy .
They are and will always remain present in our hearts and in our work .
Sympathy for and solidarity with all the families of the victims is a duty for all of us .
The European Parliament is actively involved in the fight against terrorism and in supporting the victims of terrorist attacks .
I cannot repeat often enough that there is absolutely no justification for terrorism .
We must therefore take a united approach in this fight on the basis of the rule of law and with all the force of the law .
Ladies and gentlemen , please rise from your seats for a minute 's silence in memory of the victims of terrorism .
( The House rose and observed a minute 's silence . )
Action taken on Parliament 's resolutions : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( announcement of motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Annual policy strategy 2009 ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on the annual policy strategy for 2009 .
President of the Commission . - Mr President , I am very pleased to present the Commission 's annual policy strategy for 2009 , which sets out the main policy priorities envisaged by the Commission for next year .
As you know , the objective of the annual policy strategy is to spark a dialogue with the other institutions , in particular the European Parliament , on where the priorities should lie next year .
This dialogue is essential to ensuring proper preparation of the Commission work programme for 2009 .
2009 will be a special year , a transition year of great importance marked , I am confident , by the likely entry into force of the new European Treaty , the Treaty of Lisbon .
2009 will also be symbolically very important because we will have a chance to celebrate 20 years of the march of freedom since the fall of the Berlin Wall , so it is a very important opportunity to commemorate freedom and the reunification of Europe .
It will also be the year of the election of a new European Parliament and a new Commission , so what we do in the first six months of 2009 will set the mood for the European elections .
The smooth implementation of the Lisbon Treaty will ensure a European Union fit to tackle the challenges of the future .
I hope and expect that we will see the finishing touches to the most ambitious system in the world to tackle climate change and promote energy security .
And it is particularly important that we do it in the first half of 2009 at the latest , so that the European Union can be ready to make a decisive contribution to the global negotiations at the Copenhagen Conference at the end of that year .
But first a word on 2008 .
Given the institutional changes to come and , in particular , the end of the legislative term , the Commission has made every attempt to ensure that the new legislative proposals included in the 2008 work programme are scheduled for adoption by the College before the end of 2008 .
Thirty-five legislative initiatives are foreseen in the work programme .
We will work hard to try to minimise those likely to come in the closing months of the year , such as the framework directive on consumer contractual rights , the review of the Energy Taxation Directive , and the directives on the conditions of entry and residence of seasonal workers and trainees .
We will also make every effort to ensure that these proposals are presented according to the envisaged timetable to make this possible .
I very much hope that Parliament will be in a position to deliver its first-reading opinion on all the proposals flowing from the Commission work programme before the end of this parliamentary term .
I would like to underline that , as far as the Commission is concerned , we are fully on track to deliver all the strategic initiatives we have announced and , hence , to repeat our record performance of an implementation rate of 96 % , which we achieved in 2007 .
It is the highest implementation rate ever in the work of the Commission .
As regards 2009 , the Commission will stick to its ambition of delivering a Europe of results , bringing concrete benefits to citizens .
We will focus on completing what has been started since the beginning of our mandate and make every effort to achieve the strategic objectives defined in 2005 and to address the challenges ahead .
This will , of course , require close cooperation between Parliament and the Commission .
The entry into force of the Reform Treaty will also require the Commission to present a number of proposals to give force to its provisions , and I will highlight here those proposals that will promote greater democracy for , and greater participation by , Europe 's citizens , such as the citizens ' initiative .
We look forward to discussing with Parliament in the coming weeks and months how we can best progress with these proposals in the first few months of next year .
The main policy priorities which the Commission envisages for next year are structured around five pillars .
First , promoting sustainable growth and jobs will remain at the heart of our agenda and of the renewed Lisbon Strategy .
We will also pursue the implementation of the innovation strategy , the deepening of the European Research Area and the follow-up to the single market review .
In this context , I am looking forward to the second-reading adoption of the European Institute of Technology - one of our flagship actions - later today , and I would like to congratulate this House on the excellent job it has done on bringing this to fruition .
Major effort will be put into promoting the transition to a low-emissions and resource-efficient economy .
The Copenhagen meeting will be a major rendezvous to reach a global climate change agreement for the period beyond 2012 .
Europe must prepare its ground well and maintain its role as the pioneer on climate change .
Work on how to assist with adaptation to the impact of climate change will need to be pursued .
In an era of globalisation , we should strive to make a reality of the common immigration policy .
Work in this area will draw on the communication on immigration to be presented in June 2008 .
We will also focus our attention on delivering policies of direct interest to citizens through a common area of justice , fashioning a European response to chemical , biological and radiological threats , the European Union health strategy and through enforcing food and product safety rules more vigorously .
The revised and modernised social agenda will also guide our actions in a comprehensive approach to enable Europeans to realise their potential and benefit from globalisation , and will cover mobility , integration , education and non-discrimination .
The key concepts for this social agenda will be access , opportunities and solidarity .
Finally , we will pursue our objective of consolidating the role of Europe as a global partner .
Enlargement negotiations will continue and the Western Balkans association and stabilisation process will be further developed .
We will implement the neighbourhood policy and launch operational partnerships with African countries under the joint European Union-Africa strategy .
The entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty will significantly raise the Union 's external profile .
To translate this new framework into action , a major task for the Commission will be to help establish the European External Action Service - all this for 2009 , if all the timetables , as we hope , are respected .
The year 2009 will also be an important year in terms of preparing the ground for the future financing of the Union 's policies .
The results of the consultation now under way on the budget review will help us to prepare the ground for the next multiannual financial framework , to be proposed by the next Commission .
As in previous years , the APS proposes communication priorities for 2009 .
In the run-up to the European elections , the Commission will seek to maximise its work in partnership with the other institutions and to help spark a lively debate on European policies .
The annual policy strategy is only the beginning of the process , leading to the adoption of the Commission 's legislative and work programme in October .
The Commission looks forward to regular dialogue with Parliament on the priorities to be taken forward in 2009 .
I understand that Parliament intends to adopt a plenary resolution on the Commission 's legislative and work programme in September , a couple of weeks before we adopt the work programme for 2009 .
This plenary resolution will follow on from the summary report reflecting the results of our regular dialogue .
It should provide us with a fully-grounded , politically-backed indication of where Parliament thinks the Commission should focus its commitment and its policies in 2009 , in good time for the drawing-up of the work programme , focusing on European added value and in full respect of the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality .
Therefore , my message to you today is that I am very much looking forward to this possibility of working with you on this very important programme for 2009 .
Let us work together to keep up the pace of action in 2009 , so that Europe continues to deliver concrete results for the benefit of our citizens .
( Applause )

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mr Nassauer , our Commission President is not so weak ; he has already withstood many a criticism .
However , I do believe , Commission President , that our common aim - when I listen to your speeches and read your interviews - is that in 2009 we shall also continue to expand a social and ecological Europe in a globalised world .
You know that the social aspects lie especially close to our hearts and you also know that we were particularly concerned , for example , about the conclusion of the European Court of Justice in connection with the Laval case .
We hope that we - Parliament and you in the Commission - can work on this together so that citizens do not feel that the social successes we have achieved with some difficulty are being undone again by bogus quantitative competition .
We stand by qualitative competition within Europe , competition that Europe , of course , has to drive , taking account of environmental concerns .
The social element , however , is central for us as Social Democrats .
On the subject of the environment , I thank the Commission for its proposals , which are very forward-looking .
Like you , we declare our faith in the sustainable development of this continent ; sustainability for us also applies to Europe as an industrial base - one which has to adapt and take on ecological targets and for which there have to be obligations and incentives .
Together we must work to ensure that industry and the economy have a major role in future in terms of production on this continent - in the interest of jobs - because the ecological targets are perfectly compatible with Europe as an industrial base .
This is also a task that we must perform together .
We can perform this task only if we also persuade the other partners - the United States , China and India - to take on the same ecological targets .
Moreover , we can perform it only if we also reach our neighbours , if we create a common policy with our neighbours .
You know that we are not entirely happy with many of the strategies that have been developed .
With regard to the Balkans , for example , we recently proposed that , alongside the Lisbon process , there should also be what is referred to as the Ljubljana process with the Slovenian Presidency , to promote the economic and social development of this region , because the hatred and existing conflicts there can be resolved only if there is also sound economic and social development in the Balkans .
With regard to the Mediterranean Union - now on everybody 's lips , even on those of the Foreign Ministers - we want a clear position on this from the Commission .
You have already hinted at this , Commission President , but you must constantly make it clear that we will not consider any union that does not embrace the entire European Union .
It must be a community that does not cut straight through the European Union , but includes the European Union with the Mediterranean countries .
Similarly the debate should also surely be about the Black Sea region , and here we are also waiting for the Commission 's initiatives because it is not only about our Southern neighbours , of course ; it is also about our Eastern neighbours .
We cannot offer new memberships here either in the short term ; that is not possible .
However , we can offer to develop stronger cooperation , together with these countries , and we expect more Commission initiatives on this than have so far been included in the existing papers .
Commission President , you have commented that it is also an election year .
It is an election year and hopefully the year in which the Reform Treaty will enter into force .
We do not expect the Commission to interfere in the political debates of this election year , but we do expect a clear vision from the Commission of how this Europe is to function in future as an ecological and social Europe .
We expect the Commission to make it clear that it has a strong voice - including in dialogue with our partners .
Only when we speak to the United States , China , etc. with a strong voice will we be able to assert the interests of our citizens .
In an election year , we want a strong Commission with visions for the Europe of tomorrow !
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I think I should present the compliments of my group on the policy strategy that President Barroso has put forward for what , as he has said himself , will be an important and challenging year .
The Commission has produced a strategy which is good in its political , financial and management content , and it has avoided what we sometimes call in my country ' end-of-term-itis ' .
Of course , we need to concentrate to some extent on the weaknesses but , having heard Mr Nassauer , I would perhaps call them differences in points of emphasis rather than weaknesses , if I may put it that way .
Certainly , there is an issue about bridging the mandate gap .
If I look at the internal market area , issues like the European patent , patient mobility and the European private company law project are all issues which will read across .
President Barroso has perhaps mentioned one or two of them , but we need to make sure that they flow through in the next mandate , because they are all essential parts of the internal market .
In that respect I would have perhaps expected to see more of a theme emerging with regard to the need for what I would call financial security for our citizens in a world where we know there is financial turbulence at the moment and where people feel uncertain about the future - perhaps more of a theme in that respect .
It is , of course , also the year of implementation of the Treaty and , whilst we can welcome , and I do welcome , the concentration in the document on the implementation theme - and I think that the idea of working with the Member States in future to ensure implementation of law across the board in a much more coordinated fashion is excellent - I would have preferred to see something in the document about that piece of legislation that will be so central to our citizens , the citizens ' initiative , but President Barroso stole my thunder by mentioning it this morning , so that is good .
But it is central , and we need to make sure that the Commission brings forward the legislation to deal with that .
Also , perhaps , some thought should be given to the relationship with national parliaments .
Then , briefly with regard to external relations , can we have some read across with regard to external relations , energy and climate change - all of those issues ?
We know the Commission is discussing them .
They have a high priority , not only somewhere like the Arctic , but in other areas of the globe as well .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( GA ) Mr President and Vice-President of the Commission , I fully support the European Commission 's policy work programme for the coming year .
This programme seeks to develop Europe 's economic and political affairs .
This policy work programme promotes Europe and prioritizes the interests of the people of Europe .
I very much support the first policy of the programme ; the promotion of employment and development in the European Union .
As we move into the year of the ratification of the Treaty , we who support the ratification of this Treaty by referendum in Ireland are hammering home the point of view that Europe must become more efficient , that it is essential that we recognise that the Treaties that were there for six , ten or fifteen countries no longer apply to a European Union of twenty-seven countries .
In particular , we want to emphasise the necessity for greater innovation , research and technology towards creating the dynamic new economy for Europe in the 21st century .
In particular , I am delighted that the President of the Commission and the other Commissioners did not throw everything into the annual policy strategy 2009 .
It would be so easy to say that we are going to do so many things , but instead it has focused on key essential areas such as climate change , as has already been mentioned , and the issue of Europe as a world partner and as a world player - in particular when we look at the risks and dangers around the world that we face today , not just in the Middle East , not just in the Western Balkans , not just in Africa , but even in South America , where in the last week we have seen how tension can arise so quickly .
What is really required is a stabilising force , which the European Union can provide on that world stage .
Finally , the European Union must fully uphold the action required with regard to combating illegal drug importation , people trafficking and in particular the diminution of respect for individual human lives .
Please be assured that we , and my party Fianna Fáil in Ireland , will be campaigning strongly to guarantee the ratification of the Treaty to allow for the future development of Europe .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commission President , ladies and gentlemen , with an annual strategy we have the choice of two paths .
The first would be maximum clarity and consistency between statements and financial action .
This would be particularly appropriate in an election year , because we are indeed promising that we will be - I quote - ' Putting the Citizen First ' .
Citizens are entitled to clarity .
The Commission , however , has unfortunately chosen the second path instead , namely to remain as general as possible in order to cover up opposition .
First of all the context itself is interesting .
We have to expect that the Treaty of Lisbon will be implemented .
We are in an election year and we are in a year in which Europe has also very extensively committed itself internationally to climate protection .
Unfortunately , words have so far been followed by far too few actions and this has not been made sufficiently clear in strategy either .
If we remain as hesitant about practical measures as we are about car emissions , for instance , then Europe 's credibility is at stake and we cannot afford this in the long run at international level in debates with our partners on the subject of climate protection .
This is a negative example of our yielding to major lobbies , as with the implementation of the emissions trading system in air traffic , where we have also acted too hesitantly and not energetically enough and have therefore not managed to introduce the necessary measures for reducing climate damage caused by air traffic with the required efficiency .
There is also a conflict between the ambitious targets and the actual funding of research .
When we talk on the one hand about new sources of energy , but on the other hand about still assigning the lion 's share of research funds to nuclear power , to the nuclear economy , this conflict cannot be resolved , nor should we then expect any sustainable solution , because there are no opportunities here whatsoever for investing in a truly concerted manner .
What I think this strategy lacks is a clear commitment to implementing Community law in the Member States .
There are far too few mechanisms here ; there is far too little regard for the law .
In fact , the opposite is true : we are developing new plans before the old ones have been implemented .
Here I would simply refer you back to the energy action plan .
If citizens are so important to us , as you rightly stress , then their grievances , among other things , as well as the new opportunity for a referendum , must be the focus of our attention in this House .
Mr President , President of the Commission , we still have a practical work programme for 2009 , on which we could comment .
However , it is apparent that no major strategic changes can be expected to the Commission 's policy strategy in the coming year .
It reads : the Commission wants to improve its communications task , get the idea of Europe across and raise citizens ' awareness of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Would a referendum on the Reform Treaty not be the right way to involve citizens in this process ?
Do you really believe the voter turnout will increase when you continue merely to state how marvellously current policy is working and that we must therefore simply continue to pursue the existing concepts ?
What many people experience in real terms is less social security , stagnating wage levels , serious curtailment of employment rights , rising prices for basic services in local public transport , health provision , energy and water supplies , education and child care - all of this when the profits of large enterprises are rising at the same time as these enterprises are threatening to relocate .
The Commission talks about the importance of lifelong learning for employability , the importance of flexicurity - so that I am frequently left wondering where security is hiding , when the Commission puts forward legislative proposals .
The Commission writes about the need to strengthen competitiveness and talks here again specifically of those who are already strong anyway , who are to be freed from taxes - in other words , social responsibility .
You refer to it as administrative burdens .
However , if we want to have social , ecological and consumer protection standards , these must also be agreed and implemented !
Nowhere do I find in your strategy the idea that perhaps the overall concept of the Lisbon Strategy , the concept of liberalisation and privatisation , simply does not work in the interest of the majority of people in many instances , and quite specifically not in the public services sector .
The foreign policy and foreign trade sector emphasises Europe 's important role in the world in terms of peace , security and stability and talks about the priority of multilateralism and partnership .
Your paper states that the Doha Development Round remains a top priority .
However , it contains nothing that shows how the EU wishes to contribute to the success of the development round .
Instead , emphasis is placed on the familiar regional and bilateral free trade agreements , which for this reason make hardly any headway because they just do not meet the requirements of developing and emergent countries .
Moreover , the Global Europe foreign trade strategy is purely a strategy for promoting foreign trade for European conglomerates , which care little about regional and sustainable economic , social and ecological developments in partner countries .
It contains nothing about small and medium-sized enterprises , yet you wonder why states like China are fighting back with dumping measures .
Indeed you even wanted to continue cancelling the largely inadequate anti-dumping instruments !
The Commission talks about improving operational and conflict management capability in third countries .
After what has just been said , I would ask you : does it not make much more sense to fight the social , but definitely the economic , causes of crises and conflicts as well ?
Change your strategy so that we can win citizens ' support for a European Union !
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , I love coming here to the regulation factory .
It is so amusing .
I have just looked through the headings under the Commission 's annual policy strategy and it starts with ' growth and jobs ' .
To be honest , this place would be very much better served to talk about growth and jobs if at least more than 1 % of this Chamber had had any experience at all of commerce .
I am a businessman and I can understand growth and I can understand jobs .
Sadly , the more you regulate , the more you legislate , the less likely you are to produce growth and jobs , which is why GDP growth in Europe is positively dire and it is taking off in the rest of the world - China , India , the subcontinent .
We are even beaten by North America .
So , I would suggest that if we want growth and jobs , we get out of people 's faces and let them get on with it , without interference from this place .
Sustainable Europe ?
Well , fascinating , is it not ?
We talk about the global footprint , we talk about all this sort of nonsense , despite the fact that the globe has not actually warmed for 10 years - the science is thrown out of the window .
If anybody wants to take any serious look at global science and global warming and climate change , they will see that , actually , most informed , not politically-biased , scientists regard it as fact that we will actually have a colder planet by 2050 , not a warmer one .
But that does not suit our book , does it ?
Because we like to tax and we like to regulate .
Then we look at managed migration .
Well , dear , oh dear .
As an Englishman , I can tell you : managed migration ?
We have had a million people come into our tiny little overcrowded island in the last year .
Please , please , please , will this place , just for once , get real !

( ES ) Mr President , external action in 2009 should be marked by two fundamental facts : firstly the entry into force of the new Treaty which , on the one hand , establishes a new institutional framework in which , President of the Commission , Parliament will want to play its rightful role and , on the other hand , the External Action Service , which should , in our opinion , take up residence in the Commission and not be gobbled up by the Council .
Beyond this , the priorities presented by the Commission are correct : enlargement , relations with Russia on the basis of respect for human rights , and security of energy supply ; the stabilisation and association policy in the Balkans and the case of Kosovo ; the neighbourhood policy , with the Barcelona Process and the Mediterranean Union that will be presented by the French Presidency of the Union .
There is also the situation in Central Asia , with the conflicts in Iran , Iraq , Afghanistan and Pakistan .
Mr President , we will see the development of relations with China , India and the Asian countries , which are correctly set out in the Commission 's proposal ; the situation in the Middle East , in which the European Parliament unconditionally supported the Commission 's proposal at the Paris Conference .
In addition , there is the strategic partnership with the countries of Africa , the Caribbean and the Pacific and , last but not least , relations with Latin America , regarding which we hope that conclusions will be reached at the Lima Summit in time for Association Agreements to be made with Mercosur , the Andean Community and Central America .
President of the Commission , we need serious , effective and viable external action by the European Union , which needs to speak with one voice in international organisations .
We cannot allow ourselves to be an International Red Cross destined to carry the cost of major contemporary crises .
The European Union needs to carry weight on the international stage as a global player , in line with its economic , commercial , financial and industrial weight .
President of the Commission , you have our support for this programme .
Mr President , by the end of this year we will have two reports from the Commission on free movement : one on the free movement of workers - and I suppose the Commission will probably advise the Member States to lift the transitional arrangements applied to workers coming from the new Member States - and the other on the implementation of the Directive on free movement of citizens , and we may see a number of Member States being sent to the European Court of Justice in this regard .
All the fears that governed the transitional arrangements put in place with the 2004 enlargement are now starting to dissipate .
No economic security or demographic reason remains for keeping the work restrictions for another five years .
On the contrary , a free European labour market is what is needed to present Europe as a model , as a partner and as a world leader .
We are regulating access to our labour market for third-country citizens .
That is fair enough , and much appreciated .
But , first , let us sort things out in our own back yard .
Let us have a coherent and a common policy on the free movement of workers inside the Union .
If we are to be true to the fundamental freedoms enshrined in the Treaties and if we are serious about making the Lisbon Strategy a reality , the time has come to put an end to verbal action and start real action .
Finally , I would add that , from the outset , this Commission was given a green light to address the fundamental rights of citizens , and I was looking forward to seeing something very specific on those issues in the plan for next year .
( PL ) Mr President , 2009 represents a year of enlarged prospects for Europe , prospects that will be offered by the Lisbon Treaty .
It is also a year of hope for deeper unity in Europe because of the new elections to the European Parliament .
As Mr Barroso mentioned , we shall celebrate the 20th anniversary of the fall of the Berlin Wall .
May I take this opportunity to remind you that it fell in Warsaw .
This will also be the 5th anniversary of the accession of former communist states to the European Union .
This accession has not always been entirely equable : Polish farmers are still competing on unequal terms with farmers in the old Union .
In spite of this it is my belief that 2009 will erase the differences between our countries , at least on a psychological level , and will increase the sense of unity and influence of the European Union .
Mr President , I will use my speech to propose a reform of the way we deal with the annual programmes .
Until now the elected members of national parliaments and the European Parliament had no say .
The annual programme is initiated and adopted by the non-elected in the Commission .
Member States coordinate their priorities through the working programmes of the shifting presidencies .
We discuss both ; we amend nothing .
We do not represent our voters in the very important agenda-setting function .
Instead , we should insist on one joint working programme for all institutions in the next year .
The Commission could draft a detailed proposal with annexes of all proposals for laws they intend to propose , including their legal base .
Then the national parliaments should deal with it in their sectoral committees for a first reading , then in their European committees and finally in their plenaries .
National parliaments should meet in COSAC and formally adopt the working programme .
Parliament should have its own readings , and then the European Union would be governed bottom-up instead of top-down .
It would be directed by elected representatives of our peoples instead of being governed by civil servants and lobbyists behind closed doors .
When the programme is adopted , the national parliaments could then start the reading of the concrete proposals for ' subsidiarity and proportionality ' and decide the legal base .
Then the European institutions could take over , and all laws could be passed - both in the Council , with the support of 75 % of the Member States , and in the European Parliament , with the normal majority .
Then Europe would be a democracy , instead of the mixture of the ideas of Machiavelli and Mussolini we build on today .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the principal actions planned for 2009 can mainly be supported , as regards the growth and jobs provided for by the Lisbon Strategy .
Certainly , there are points under the single market and competition of which I am in favour .
There are also valuable points under the sustainable Europe heading .
Regrettably , the common visa policy should be completely rejected because , in my opinion , apart from being anti-national , it is completely outside the mandate of this Parliament and what our intentions should be .
I am also entirely opposed to the enlargement to include Croatia and Turkey , as well as to the part that talks about Kosovo , regarding which I have already had occasion to criticise the flouting of international law that occurred when its independence from a sovereign state was recognised .
For this reason , I will be voting against the policy strategy .
( HU ) Mr President , President of the Commission , we welcomed the Commission 's policy strategy in the hope that it would also be put into effect .
There is one possible obstacle to this : fiscal constraint .
This may make it difficult to undertake new things .
Member States ' willingness to contribute has fallen to less than 1 % , with the result that funds for new ideas will have to come almost exclusively from redistribution of existing resources .
Let us not do this , however , without looking closely at the programmes currently running .
Let us examine where we get more value for money , and where we get less .
Let us not allow lobby groups to decide on our behalf .
As part of the reform of Parliament , a new type of cooperation is evolving between the specialist committees and the Committee on Budgets .
One feature of this is that the rationale and usefulness of expenditures on individual programmes can be laid bare in more detail than before .
Although it may be a painful decision , it is smarter to bring some programmes to an end , or not to begin them at all , rather than under-finance them .
Scanty investment is a pointless waste of money .
The Commission , the Council and Parliament need to act in concert to ensure that only programmes that can be adequately resourced and produce genuine results are allowed to run .
Parliament looks towards this year 's policy strategy in readiness for concerted action of this sort . Thank you for your kind attention .
( FR ) Mr President , much has been said about foreign affairs in the Commission Communication , yet it leaves me feeling hungry for more .
Heading 4 is of course underfunded .
Unfortunately , we are indeed going to have to pay more for Palestine and Kosovo .
However , that is an observation , not a strategy .
I would have liked to know , for example , what political conditions are necessary for aid to be effective ; not just visible but effective .
How could we use the financial instruments to make Europe a soft power that cannot be ignored , one that provides a democratic model and is not just a cash till ?
How are we going to use conditionality ?
None of these questions , however key , is addressed .
One example , and it is not the only one , is that never before have we paid so much money to Palestine , yet the people of Gaza have never been so poor since 1967 , and violence continues to escalate in the Middle East , where we just keep rebuilding what has been destroyed .
What lesson can we learn from this ?
Until there is perfect coherence between European foreign policy and its financial instruments , with the latter at the service of the former and not the other way round , Europe will never be the global player it wants to be , and in this regard I find the Commission 's Communication singularly lacking in ambition .
( DE ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , I assume that today we are holding a debate on policy strategy for the last time in this form because we are to have a new model in the Treaty of Lisbon .
A plan is therefore already in place , at least here in this House , and I am already looking forward to this new model because it means that we can include the powers of the Council in this very important debate .
Please allow me , therefore , also to make a few comments for the last time from the point of view of budgetary control and to offer a few additional suggestions in keeping with the tone set by Mr Nassauer .
We are currently holding extensive discussions with the Commission on the protection of the Community 's financial interests and the Commission has announced significant efforts in this regard .
We would like to have seen whether these significant efforts - for which we are grateful and which we also need - would also find their way into the annual programme .
The work you have promised to do would also have merited this .
We need new methods of retrieving the funds paid out illegally and we also need stronger cooperation between the Commission and the Member States .
All this is an impressive programme from Mr Barroso 's Commission .
Our advice would therefore have been to include this , too , in the Commission 's annual programme .
It would have merited this and it would also reassure us that you think it is as important as you are now saying .
( FR ) Mr President , President of the Commission , Commissioner , as regards the European Union in the world , the Socialist Group in the European Parliament shares the Commission 's desire to continue the work begun in 2006 to improve the effectiveness of the way in which it cooperates .
I recall in this regard that there are still very many areas being looked at , whether it is a question of the definition of development itself , coherence between different EU policies , coordination between donors or complementarity of actions .
As regards the economic partnership agreements , I would like to remind you that we European Socialists believe it is essential to consider them chiefly from the point of view of development , or in other words , from the point of view of their ability to improve the lives of people in the ACP countries significantly .
It is essential that the Commission 's 2009 strategy is perfectly clear about this .
This does not seem to be entirely the case at the moment .
We all know , moreover , that additional funds will be necessary to finance the accompanying measures aimed at compensating for the announced negative impact of the economic partnership agreements on what are - I should not have to remind you - the world 's poorest countries .
We would hope that the Commission would say where these funds will come from .
We also regret that the Commission document does not contain any specific proposals for the implementation of the Millennium Development Goals prior to 2015 .
Is this through lack of ambition in this area or because 2009 will mark a radical shift in the paradigm of European development policy ?
In the annex , the Commission 's note also refers to implementation of the first Action Plan of the Joint Africa / EU Strategy .
We are delighted about this and are particularly keen that the Commission should really do everything it can so that the first actions to be taken as part of the new strategy meet the legitimate expectations of the millions of African men and women directly affected by the success of this strategy .
( NL ) As the coordinator of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats for regional policy , I have high hopes for 2009 .
Why is that ?
It is because implementation of these new programmes in all the regions , in all the Member States , has now been under way since 2007 .
What has transpired ?
Firstly , we can speak of new cohesion , and the funds are being spent to a greater degree than before on regions and cities , on the Lisbon Strategy , on growth and jobs .
It has also transpired that we are performing better in the field of innovation , whilst investment in research and innovation has more than doubled .
Indeed , in Ljubljana last week Commissioners Hübner and Potočnik announced very good figures in this regard .
Thus we can talk of a quiet revolution in the use of these funds - something that must be publicised .
This presents an opportunity to greatly improve communication - to improve communication with citizens in 2009 , which is also election year .
This is made possible by the thousands of projects being implemented in the various fields of the economy and ecology .
Failure to choose this very regional policy , this new cohesion policy , as the spearhead of communication with citizens would be a missed opportunity for the Union .
( SV ) Mr President , as a Swedish Member with a background in the trade union movement , I would like to begin by endorsing what Hannes Swoboda said : if we are to avoid criticism of the Laval judgment turning against the Treaty , the Commission must make it clear that a free market in services is not a threat to the right of the trade union movement to take action against social dumping .
I just wanted to point that out , since it is relevant in this connection .
When it comes to the policy strategy for 2009 , it is clear that we must seriously begin to discuss the mid-term review of the long-term budget .
In some areas , however , I do not think we can wait ; we must make a start on changing priorities right now , in the budget for 2009 .
I am thinking in particular of two areas .
The first one is climate .
As rapporteur for the budget in the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , I do not think it is enough to recognise that climate is a political priority .
That recognition must also have effects on budget priorities .
We must show that we are actually prepared to make concrete European contributions , even if they cost money .
That may mean addressing concrete situations when it comes to modern energy and environmental technology .
It may mean changing the use of the structural funds or the Seventh Framework Programme , but there is much that needs to be done .
The second area I want to mention is the Western Balkans , especially Kosovo .
Against the background of the new situation , we must quite simply develop a long-term strategy for our work in the Western Balkans .
It is unreasonable to have such a rigid budget model that the tightest budget margins are in precisely those areas where the needs are greatest .
( DE ) Mr President , the Commission is planning the successful introduction of the health check in the agricultural sector for 2009 .
As rapporteur on the own-initiative report , I am assuming that with tomorrow 's vote , the Commission will have a much better idea of Parliament 's position on this matter and I expect that this position will be taken into account in the legislative proposal we are expecting in May .
I welcome the fact that the Commission is making a special effort to promote the concept of quality in agricultural production , particularly with its confirmation of what is referred to as the 2009 Green Paper .
We are of the opinion that the value added through high-quality standards will become an increasingly important starting point for our farmers , even with regard to increasing competition from imports .
I have also noted that the Commission will be putting forward new proposals on the subjects of food safety , animal welfare and health , together with better supervision and better rules .
I appeal to the Commission to be reasonable .
Our farmers cannot be confronted with more regulations if , at the same time , imports from third countries are not subject to these regulations .
Mr President , the Commission intends to put forward a raft of proposals in 2009 for reducing the administrative burden that will change nothing in the level of demand for existing regulations or the political specifications .
I very much hope that this will apply to our farmers , particularly with regard to the cross-compliance rules .
I believe an important subject is missing in the annual policy strategy , and this is the issue of food supply .
The Commission has often used the term but our citizens must have a secure undertaking as to how they can organise continued supply .
( ES ) Mr President , as coordinator of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats in the Committee on Fisheries I would like to make the following comments on the Common Fisheries Policy .
Firstly , with regard to the Key Actions envisaged for 2009 , and those under item 2 of the Annex on sustainable development , we can see that fisheries policy is incorporated into the integrated maritime policy , something that our Group does not agree with . While it is true that some aspects of the CFP are part of the maritime policy , so are some aspects of the transport policy , for example , but this does not mean that it is subsumed or hijacked under this heading .
Secondly , with regard to the changes in the allocation of financial resources and , in particular , with regard to heading 2 , ' Preservation and management of natural resources ' , we do not agree that the EUR 6 million required to fund the preparatory action for the maritime policy should have to come from the already small budget for the CFP , especially given that at this point in the budgetary year there is no way of knowing what volume of outstanding appropriations could be made available for other uses .
Mr President , let me offer the Commission two promises , for a change , from Parliament .
One is that we will work with it on the package on climate change to get an effective and workable package in place as quickly as we can .
The second is that we will work to put in place , as quickly as possible , the new Commissioner for Health and , in so saying , let me ask the Vice-President to send our good wishes to Mr Kyprianou and thank him for what he achieved during his time with us .
Thirdly , let me say that the reference to health in this is remarkably thin .
It is true it talks about medical devices and other measures .
However , I want to see the other measures , including that cross-border health promise , because if we do not have that in place quickly , then the courts will go on making policy for us in this area , and that is our job as politicians .
So , please make sure that comes through as quickly as the very welcome proposal that is coming , I know , on mental health .
( NL ) I am speaking now as coordinator of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats for the Committee on Development .
I should like to compliment the Commission on its intention to put the broad strategic objectives , such as prosperity , solidarity and security , at the centre of its activities in the long term .
I find it regrettable , however , that little attention is paid to development cooperation and poverty reduction . After all , these are also very important aspects of a strong , prosperous Europe .
In 2007 we established a Joint EU / Africa Strategy for the first time in history - a milestone .
The implementation of the eight thematic partnerships has yet to get off the ground , however .
We look forward to seeing tangible progress on this score .
Finally , I have to get one more thing off my chest . European Commissioners are involving themselves increasingly often in national political campaigns .
This started with the Commissioner for Development and Humanitarian Aid .
I am concerned about the leadership vacuum arising as a result in crucial European policy areas .
My question to the Commission is whether it is prepared to draw up rules to ensure that , after the elections , the office of European Commissioner will be exercised without interruptions for national election campaigns .
Mr President , I would like to draw your attention to the fact that the annual policy strategy paper is dramatically silent on one of the most vital issues for Europe 's future : external energy security policy .
Our House , by an overwhelming majority , adopted the report recognising the need for an urgent energy supply security policy .
Since then , the situation has worsened , and we are looking at an increase in dependency , coupled with lack of progress in reducing it .
For example , the Nabucco Project - the diversification flagship of the EU , identified in 2007 by the European Council as one of the most critical projects of European interest - is , according to some , seriously threatened , if not dead .
Europe needs its common energy security policy now .
This should be reflected in the 2009 policy strategy of the Commission .
It is not , I deeply regret .
The whole strategy must not be short-sighted .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , priorities for 2009 : priorities are credible if we are able to point out how we have dealt with past priorities in a serious and efficient manner that citizens can understand .
I should therefore also like to ask you , even in the election year of 2009 , to take stock of which of the priorities of recent years were practical and implemented , and to involve citizens in developing a communications strategy on this .
Secondly , reducing bureaucracy is a permanent priority , generating confidence among citizens , as well as among small and medium-sized enterprises .
I miss the Small Business Act .
Please build up confidence so that we can also increase voter participation in the EP elections in 2009 .
This , too , must be a political priority !
( Applause )
Mr President , I welcome this statement .
But I want to draw attention in particular - and I would like some answers - in relation to page 18 and one of the key actions in relation to ' the wider world ' : ' If appropriate , implementation of the Doha Development Agreement ' .
Well , my concern is that there is a rush to do a deal , but that the only pain will be on the agriculture side of the agreement and that there will be no gain for Europe in terms of non-agricultural market access or services .
I would like some information because I believe that we are being kept in the dark about this .
Citizens in my constituency were at my door all weekend expressing their concern about 70 % tariff cuts on beef and dairy which will decimate agriculture and dump the common agricultural policy which we hold dear in this House .
This issue is part of the debate on the Lisbon Treaty in Ireland .
I wish it was not but I would like some firm comments from the Vice-President of the Commission to reassure my constituents that they will not be sold out .
( PT ) Mr President , all the signs indicate that 2009 will be a year of opportunities .
One of the most positive results of finding a way out of the institutional impasse is the chance to direct our energies towards other subjects , which will enable us to concentrate more on policies .
For several years we have been discussing globalisation , climate change , insufficient security at our borders and instability in neighbouring countries .
For decades we have been thinking about the challenge of the emergence of new economies and about Africa 's new role in the world .
It is important to theorise about major challenges and appropriate responses , but Europe cannot be a mere spectator , albeit an interactive one , as the changes take place .
Europe must play an active role , be a factor for reform , a catalyst for development .
The various political priorities indicated by the European Commission , Madam Vice-President , include communication .
There is no better communication policy than to confirm the results achieved .
Europe 's importance and relevance for its citizens must be perceived , felt and recognised .
That is the way to win their confidence , the citizens ' confidence , and to bring to our citizens what is required of us .
( HU ) Mr President , I would like to draw attention to two matters .
The first relates to strengthening the new forms of cooperation ; on the one hand we need to strengthen cooperation between the Member States and the European Union , and on the other reinforce cooperation between Parliament , the Council and the Commission , and in connection with this we need to produce positive examples representing real results .
The other important issue in this context is always a key issue as far as the European Socialists are concerned , namely the issue of social Europe , in other words ensuring welfare , solidarity and security , which we tend to refer to simply as ' social Europe ' , and achieving the Lisbon objectives as soon as possible .
In this regard I would like to highlight the fact that very little attention has been given in this programme to the situation of women , although in the majority of Member States it is women whose social security is limited , and the spread of precarious forms of employment is on the increase .
I would therefore like special attention to be given to these two areas in 2009 . Thank you very much .
( CS ) I would like to contribute to the discussion by pointing out that in the context of all policies there should be a more clearly defined space for small and medium enterprises , which represent the backbone of Europe 's employment stability .
Much still needs to be done , especially in new Member States ' parliaments , where the concept of flexicurity - a flexible labour market - is still to be put into practice so that companies can react better to new challenges and be able to offer a greater number of new positions .
Moreover , our motto should be to give priority to the small , but when it comes to individual directives and regulations , the Commission 's analysis of their impact on small enterprises is lacking .
We do usually have , on the other hand , impact studies prepared by supranational companies .
I welcome the proposed Small Businesses Act and I trust that we will move beyond the stage of ideas so that in the European elections we will be able to say to the European citizens that we have fulfilled our objective of achieving a more effective and secure economic area .
- ( LT ) In 2009 the make-up of both Parliament and the Commission will change ; nevertheless , the continuity of work will be maintained .
I would like to emphasise the importance of the common energy policy .
Since 2006 , we have been discussing the issue of EU common energy policy , and Parliament has outlined the dimension of the external energy policy .
This policy is currently of great importance in view of our efforts to procure gas from various sources , and since it is the key topic of various discussions , such as those on new energy sources , the Arctic , etc . , it will continue to be relevant in the future .
The European Union should not be the last to discover and make use of new energy sources , as is usually the case .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , I want to thank all of the Members for their contributions to the debate .
I think that , together with the resolution that you will adopt and the dialogue with committees and respective Commissioners , this will provide a very good political input into the work programme for next year .
This is what I have always argued for : a more political approach to the APS .
I would like to comment on a few issues that have been raised here , which I think are very important .
First , concerning the Lisbon Treaty : as you know , the Commission is fully committed to this new Lisbon Treaty ; we are fully committed to its implementation , and we are preparing - not anticipating , but preparing - to be ready for implementation as from early next year .
We are focusing , for example , on the citizens ' initiative , mentioned by several speakers ; the implementation of the new provisions for working with national parliaments ; the accession to the European Convention on Human Rights , and also the external action service , just to mention a few of the things that need good preparation without anticipating .
This is the balance we will have to strike .
I hope there are no doubts about our commitment to the Lisbon Treaty .
We also engage - and this is very important - in the communication and information activities concerning this new Treaty because , regardless of the method of ratification , we have a democratic obligation to engage with citizens by informing them , by listening , and also by explaining what we are doing and the content of this new Treaty .
Regarding the political agenda and the balance between the social and economic agendas , also mentioned by several speakers , I think that this is a very important debate , and these are precisely the questions we will have to take through the dialogue with the committees .
Clearly , there are different emphases and priorities here on the different sides of this House .
I think this has to be dealt with in the resolution , which we look forward to ; the results will be in the legislative and work programme in the autumn .
This is where I think we have to focus much of our attention on this political debate .
I would also like to comment on a question raised by Mr Bonde .
I am afraid I do not understand what he is saying , because for some time we have been sending our documents and proposals to the national parliaments .
This has been a very good exercise and has been very much appreciated by the national parliaments .
We have learned a lot from it , and it has increased the understanding of what goes on at European level in the European institutions at national level .
This is also good practice for what will come in the new Treaty ; not only that , we have also engaged in a dialogue with national parliaments on the annual policy strategy and on our work programme , and we have been asked to go there to explain and answer questions that the national parliamentarians have had concerning our plans and work programme .
I think this has helped us a lot : we have learned from it , and national parliaments have an opportunity to anchor better and explain better what happens at European level .
Therefore , I really hope that this will be a good experience for us .
To engage the national parliaments in this is not lobbying ; rather , it is shaping the European agenda .
This means more democracy , I would say .
Finally , concerning the financing : you will be having this discussion separately , because this is part of the problem - we already have a financial framework until 2013 , and we are all facing the limits of the financial frameworks .
After 2009 we will have no additional human resources , so we will be careful to tell you not to ask us to do a lot of new things , because we will not have the manpower to deal with it .
We have to realise that we are conducting this debate on the financial framework separately .
I also want to say to Ms Gräßle that , in the area of structural funds , the Commission has recently adopted a very ambitious action plan to ensure the integrity of the money spent in this domain .
Together with the Member States , which , as you know , spend the money on the ground , the Commission intends to undertake all the necessary controls to ensure that every euro spent is well spent .
We will regularly report on this to the Committee on Budgetary Control ; this is our definite objective with the control of the money that we spend .
Finally , let me say that we can together focus on the communication priorities , because 2009 will also be a very important year in making sure we have a lively debate before the elections in 2009 .
As you know , the communication priorities for 2009 focus on the Lisbon Treaty .
In the first chapter of this annual policy strategy , the Small Business Act is mentioned .
This is part of the Lisbon Strategy and our review of the Lisbon Strategy : to focus also on exactly the things that you have mentioned .
I think they are indeed very important .
We will deliver results from the Lisbon Treaty .
We will be reforming the budget , we will focus on growth and jobs , and we will have energy and climate change .
This will guide many of our communication priorities , and we hope for a lively debate on this European policy .
Finally , let me also draw your attention to the proposal to have an interinstitutional agreement on communication .
We hope this will provide a much better framework for our work together in this field , so thank you again for the debate .
We will have a follow-up on all of this and also the details that you have mentioned , which I think belong more to the dialogue between committees and Commissioners .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place during a later sitting .
Written declarations ( Article 142 )
in writing . - ( PL ) I read the Commission 's annual policy strategy for 2009 with great care .
In view of the fact that problems concerning small and medium-sized enterprises and the economic context of integration are of particular interest to me , I shall take the liberty of referring to several important points that are contained in the strategy .
We need to look at the European SME sector from a different angle .
We must give it back its priority significance and open up the development potential due to it .
In the document in question I was very pleased to read that the Commission is continuing to prioritise the removal of unnecessary barriers that hold back the development of SMEs .
It also considers it important to undertake to continue work on the European Charter for Small Enterprises , through which I hope we shall learn to think first and foremost along the lines of what would benefit these smallest units before we seek to fit them into the global context .
It is very important to promote and support an innovation strategy , and to show due appreciation for the need for cooperation between scientific centres and businesses .
The section in which the document talks of the priority role of the Union 's citizens , treated as consumers , is of equal importance .
There is a clear need for improvement in the way we inform and communicate with the public .
When I talk to voters I notice a general lack of knowledge among them about how the Union functions and about the benefits that all citizens derive from it .
It is important to send out a clear message to citizens on the matters they hold dear ; the European Union must become an entity that our citizens feel is close to them , friendly and easy to understand , be they consumers , business people or both .
European Institute of Innovation and Technology ( debate )
The next item is the recommendation for second reading by Reino Paasilinna , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on the European Institute of Innovation and Technology ( 15647 / 1 / 2007 - C6-0035 / 2008 - .
rapporteur . - ( FI ) Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , I want to thank you all for your excellent levels of cooperation .
In our work that is always vital in order to achieve a good result .
There has been talk about setting up an Institute of Innovation and Technology for almost three years now , and time has passed because the Commission 's original proposal has needed a good number of improvements made to it .
Parliament 's committees , especially the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , have given the proposal a new look .
Parliament and the Council have been guaranteed greater powers without , however , endangering the EIT 's autonomy .
The election of its governing board is more closely reminiscent of the election system employed with the European Research Council , which the scientific world has commended .
As someone just said , it has also been confirmed that small and medium-sized enterprises will be able to participate in the work of the EIT and enjoy its benefits .
These are where the impact on employment will be greatest and it is precisely these which have the flexibility and efficiency needed for the swift implementation of innovations .
Above all , it is the Institute 's priorities that have changed .
The European Institute of Innovation and Technology , as its name suggests , is to focus on innovation .
The two other elements in the knowledge triangle , education and research , are important , but innovation clearly represents the triangle 's apex ; it is its point of focus and its main objective .
We will need to invest in quality education and basic research in the future but , as we all know , innovation is Europe 's Achilles heel .
The Americans file over a third more patent applications with the European Patent Office than the Europeans themselves .
We need more knowledge-intensive products and services .
In 10 years China has increased its share of GNP spent on research and development from around zero to a current level of one and a half per cent .
In as many as 17 EU Member States the share is lower than in China .
The share of the EU 's GNP accounted for by investment in research and development is still significantly lower than that of the other world economic powers .
More alarming still is the fact that here we have seen our share of investment decline , not rise , in recent years .
More or less as bad is the state of venture capital .
The Lisbon Strategy calls for a dynamic approach .
Why do we not have faith in our own schemes ?
High levels of education and research produce far too few commercial and functional applications , or at least they are put into effect less often than in competitor countries .
Our patent system is also complicated .
Should the brain drain not be a serious matter for a Union aiming to be the world 's leading knowledge-based economy ?
The EIT will not eliminate these problems , but it may ease them through the example it sets .
It will provide the business sector with a new kind of link to cooperation in education and research .
It will create opportunities for the commercial exploitation of research , and it will establish closer bilateral ties .
The EIT will not become a super university which keeps the best researchers for itself ; Parliament 's amendments guarantee that .
After the initial problems which emerged with funding , the situation is now clear .
One of the Knowledge and Innovation Communities I have proposed will concentrate on information and communications technology .
We are already receiving significant amounts of money from the business world for it .
Funding is therefore not a problem .
Investigations and trials alone are not enough : we need cooperation , and for that purpose the EIT has been established .
The excellent compromise reached with the Council is such a favourable one that we can state we are in favour of it , and I would therefore ask everyone to show their support for it in the vote which is to start soon . I thank you all .
( Applause )
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I am really happy - and that is not just a diplomatic phrase - to be here today to speak on the occasion of this opportunity to boost Europe 's innovations .
I think that Parliament 's vote will be very important .
As Mr Paasilinna mentioned , we have come a long way since the beginning , but I would just like to remind the House that there was a lot of scepticism , reluctance and hesitation about the proposal to boost innovation by such an establishment and I am glad that we have been able to shift these original positions into a consensual and supportive position on the part of Member States , Parliament , the Institutions and partners .
I recall the efforts of the Finnish , then the German , Portuguese and now the Slovenian Presidencies .
In particular I would like to express gratitude here to Parliament 's rapporteur , Mr Paasilinna , because he was very instrumental and supportive , and also to the chairwoman of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , Ms Niebler , as well as Mr Böge , the chairman of the Committee on Budgets , and the rapporteur of the Committee on Culture and Education , Ms Hennicot-Schoepges .
Without these efforts and contributions we would not have been able to arrive at this moment .
I think this is an opportunity to show that Europe has the capacity and also a strong commitment to improving its innovation capacity in the globalised world .
Technological innovation is the key to growth , jobs and competitiveness , and this is the basis for the social wellbeing of our citizens .
We are proposing to fully integrate the three sides of the knowledge triangle - education , research and innovation - by the cooperation of partners from business , research and academia .
These will work together in so-called knowledge and innovation communities .
I think that now is the time to set the European Institute of Innovation and Technology ( EIT ) into motion after all the preparations .
We have already taken some steps , as you know , and I have informed the committee that we have launched a procedure for the identification of the governing board .
There is a special high-calibre , independent identification committee which is now preparing criteria .
We will then try to set up a group of 18 persons to start as the governing board .
The identification committee works totally independently and autonomously .
I think this is essential for the success of the EIT and the legitimacy of the governing board .
Parliament and the Council will be kept fully informed of the selection procedure and the outcome .
The Commission will draw up an interim report after completion of the first step of the selection procedure and a final report once the procedure is finished .
Parliament and the Council will then have one month to take note of the proposed members of the EIT governing board .
Their excellence , their undisputed reputation , total independence and ability to represent their interests from the sectors they represent - universities , research and business - will , I think , be an essential ingredient for the credibility of the Institute in the short and the long term .
Allow me to underline an element of the utmost importance .
I would like to formally state that the European Commission is fully committed to respecting the principles of the autonomy and independence of the board , which are enshrined in the regulation , and it will not have any role in the EIT 's strategic decision-making .
On this basis the Commission will provide administrative and financial support to the board at its request and to the extent that is necessary in the kick-off stage .
There must be some assistance at the beginning .
Such support is intended to enable the board to select the first Knowledge and Innovation Communities ( KICs ) within the 18-month deadline and will in no way pre-empt its strategic decision-making .
It is in our common interest to see the EIT operational within the timeframe foreseen in the regulation .
I am really looking forward to the successful establishment of the EIT and once again I would like to express my deep gratitude for Parliament 's commitment and contribution .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( SL ) Three years have already passed since the idea of establishing a European Institute of Innovation and Technology was first aired .
However , awareness of the fact that the key to greater competitiveness and innovation is appropriate care for the quality of human resources goes back much further .
The EIT offers a solution to this problem at European level .
The foundations are already in place .
Now is the time for speedy and effective implementation of the agreed measures .
I would like to thank the MEPs , the rapporteur and especially the members of my parliamentary group for enabling us to reach agreements and , in cooperation with the Commission and the Council , to prepare a good proposal containing most of our principal ideas .
Innovation is at the heart of the EIT .
Furthermore , our initiative has enabled the Institute to become a symbol of excellence and a recognisable mark of European quality .
One great achievement is the network structure of independent Knowledge and Innovation Communities , mentioned in the current proposal .
We have also been successful in finding a solution to the complex and complicated issue of the operational organisation of the Institute .
The current proposal offers a solution in the form of a strategic innovation programme that optimises the balance between responsibility for policy and independence of the specialists , and clearly defines the competences for long-term strategic planning .
We can do a lot with the financial resources mentioned earlier .
The starting points are good , but effective implementation depends as usual on us and our will and persistence .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I should like to apologise at the outset that I have to leave after my speech because I have to be at a meeting with President Pöttering .

I should like to thank my colleague Mr Paasilinna most sincerely for his commitment to this matter , and also the Commissioner , who has always strongly supported this .
I actually do believe that this EIT is an important European instrument .
Mr Paasilinna has already stated this : we spend too little in Europe on research and development and we spend too little on excellence in research .
In Europe as a whole , as in most countries - at least in most of the Member States - it could , should and must be more .
The EIT is not exactly a competitive institution , but it should be driving this research , it should be creating new initiatives .
I am thinking , for example , of how important it is in the energy sector alone that we make greater efforts in research to develop new energy technologies .
Because it is so important , I would ask the Commissioner to insist that the necessary decisions are made quickly .
One decision , of course , relates to the headquarters of the administrative office .
As someone who hails from Vienna , and as an Austrian , I would naturally want the headquarters to be in Vienna .
Whatever decision is made , however , it should be made quickly so that the EIT can start work soon .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , it is fortunate that today we are completing the legislative work involved in setting up the European Institute of Innovation and Technology .
The sitting of the Governing Board and the Knowledge and Innovation Communities will be the next step towards a common market in knowledge in the European Union .
During his recent visit to Poland , Commissioner Verheugen repeated that the inclusion of the new Member States in the structures of the common market had strengthened its potential and had been a success for all parties .
I would strongly appeal for this positive experience to serve as a pointer for us in this matter too .
Locating the Institute 's Board in Wrocław will be a step that brings benefits in terms of cohesion in Europe .
It will make it easier to gain support from the new countries for an increase in funding for research and development in the forthcoming Union budget .
Ultimately it will release innovation potential throughout Europe .
Support for Wrocław 's candidature is not just a matter of parochial self-centredness ; it is a natural consequence of reasoning aimed at serving the interests of the whole of the European Union .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( CS ) I would like to say that since Kondratiev 's long wave theory it has been known that creating innovation and implementing innovation in society is an objective process , a process with its own specific and objective patterns .
As people who are active in the political arena we can promote innovation .
I personally believe that as far as institutions go , the EIT is more important for the future of Europe than , for example , the European Commission .
I believe that there are three fundamental things that can help raise awareness in society of the importance of science and make it more popular .
Firstly , scientists should be seen as role models in society .
It is vital that scientists such as Mr Holý , an outstanding Czech chemist with dozens of patents to his name , be presented as a model of values for young people rather than sportsmen or singers .
Therefore , we should strive to achieve - to use a sort of slogan - a new ' value pattern ' .
Secondly , we should aim to achieve a renewed ' value leadership ' .
Europe has given the world more outstanding scholars than all the other continents combined .
The value of scientific endeavour has always been fundamental for Europeans .
We should make every effort to ensure that Europe regains its leading position in this respect .
Thirdly , we also need what I would like to call a ' pioneering spirit ' , which would show Europe the way forward .

( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , World Intellectual Property Organisation figures clearly show that Europe 's problem is not a lack of new ideas ; what is missing is their transformation into business opportunities .
It will not be the European Institute of Innovation and Technology that will ensure success in a global economy .
Innovative competitiveness will be helped only through a greater availability of funds , including risk capital , and by a creative environment and a true academic and entrepreneurial freedom along with an appropriate reward system for outstanding scientific results .
Ladies and gentlemen , I am fundamentally against the establishment of the European Institute of Innovation and Technology .
It will not guarantee the EU a competitive advantage .
It will be only be a superfluous structure , duplicating structures that already exist for the promotion of science , development and education .
It will be yet another place that will gobble up the taxpayers ' money without any value added .
Moreover , it threatens to follow the failure of the Galileo system .
The private sector , whose money the Commission and the Council are relying upon , does not see why it should finance a senseless dream of politicians and officials .
Mr President , science and technology are our real chances to get with the global competition .
For many centuries , our continent has been the centre of scientific and technological development , and European science has always been international .
There has been an intensive exchange of ideas and visits by scientists , even in the times of the Iron Curtain , and the scientific community is almost borderless these days .
Setting up the European Institute of Innovation and Technology is an important step to keep on with this ancient tradition of our continent .
I highly welcome it and , of course , I welcome the excellent report by my colleague Mr Paasilinna .
On behalf of my Government , nation and scientists , I offer Budapest as a seat for the EIT headquarters .
Our achievements in life sciences , in the combat against climate change and in environmental studies are the best arguments .
But my home city , Budapest , could provide a pleasant and exciting atmosphere as well .
Mr President , we want a Europe that is competitive , environmentally friendly and socially responsible .
However , there is tough competition in the world market , and to be able to participate in this competition we need European projects and we need to pool our resources , like the US did when it decided to put a man on the moon .
I think that the European Institute of Innovation and Technology can be our platform for a ' putting-a-man-on-the-moon ' project , meaning the connection between excellent researchers and the pooling of our resources .
The areas defined so far , like climate change and telecom , are areas that have importance for Europe and for European competitiveness and how we can have this future for Europe that we so much need for the European citizens .
I think that the change where we guarantee academic training is extremely important .
Finally , I would like to support Mr Chatzimarkakis in his wish to use the premises we already have .
( PL ) Mr President , in just three months ' time the decision will be taken on which European city will become the headquarters of the Governing Board of the European Institute of Technology .
This decision will be both political and based on fact .
In order to try to even the odds between the old and the new Union , a conglomerate of countries that have recently joined the European Union will appear .
Based on the facts , yet not forgetting the political criterion I mentioned , I feel that the perfect , ideal centre would appear to be the Polish city of Wrocław , whose history has been created over the centuries , in part by the Czechs , Austrians , Jews and Germans , as well as the Poles .

The arguments in favour of Wrocław are : its considerable intellectual potential ; the fact that it is already a strong academic centre ; the large concentration of capital and major companies , including foreign companies , in the Lower Silesian region , which could become partners for the EIT ; and finally the close proximity of two other EU Member States : Germany and the Czech Republic .
A number of Nobel Prize laureates in various disciplines have originated from Wrocław .
The city is currently engaged in very well-developed scientific cooperation with many educational institutions and scientific centres throughout Europe and beyond .
I believe that a decision to settle on Wrocław as the headquarters for the Governing Board of the European Institute of Technology would be optimal as regards harmonious scientific and technical development in the EU , which must do away with the divisions between the old and the new Europe .
( PL ) Mr President , there are naturally certain consequences of having one 's speaking time restricted to just one minute .
I must , for example , leave out the subject of funding .
The cement for the programme discussions , for which much credit is due to the rapporteur , was the idea of innovation , which is to become a reality through the knowledge communities .
My country , which is not concealing its direct interest in the idea of setting up the Institute , sees an opportunity for the communities to function through a shrewdly conceived bond with the Institute , though with no limitation on their wide-reaching independence .
Government organisations understandably place emphasis on the practical virtues of the communities , treating them as a kind of uplifting force for the triangles of knowledge : education , research and industry .
At the same time they confirm the willingness of European research centres to set up communities that begin by concentrating on three sectors : renewable energy , climate change and information technology .
It is my duty as an MEP , though I derive a certain satisfaction from performing it , to affirm that the city of Wrocław , well known as a centre of science in Poland , has a claim to being somewhere special in this regard .
( ES ) Mr President , I would first of all like to congratulate Mr Paasilinna on arriving at a good agreement on an issue that was not at all easy from the start .
Financing was the major outstanding issue at first reading , and we welcome the fact that a common position has been reached .
It should not be denied that the initial idea of the Institute was inspired by other models of excellence already in existence , but it should also be made clear that a great deal of effort has been made to make it viable , with the necessary adaptation to the complexity and diversity of Europe .
The result has been a new instrument with the capacity to integrate the three axes of knowledge - education , research and innovation - which should serve as a catalyst for the culture of multidisciplinary innovation that is so essential for improving competitiveness .
We are therefore convinced about establishing communities of innovation and knowledge as strategic integrated networks of universities , research centres and businesses , in which students , researchers and knowledge could circulate freely and where work could be carried out on areas of maximum scientific and strategic interest , such as renewable energy or information and communication technologies .
We hope that the EIT will , in the not too distant future , bear the fruit that we are all hoping for .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like once again to express my pleasure at the importance that the Community attaches to the need for innovation in Europe .
This is of particular importance for the new Member States , for whom innovative technologies are a great opportunity to make a leap forward in civilisation and accelerate their own development .
We therefore warmly support the excellently drafted project put forward by the city of Wrocław , which is competing to host the offices of the Institute 's Governing Board in the city .
What , besides Strasbourg , would save us having to make expensive excursions once a month ?
Well , it would be Wrocław - Wrocław , which lies on the boundary between the old and the new Europe ; not a capital , but a thriving city with excellent universities and almost 150 000 students .
The Polish national authorities , Wrocław 's local authorities and the Polish academic world are fully prepared for this assignment .
Siting the headquarters of the Institute of Innovation and Technology in Wrocław would be a symbolic gesture and would not in any way be at odds with the criterion of excellence .
The network of Knowledge and Innovation Communities that forms part of the European Institute must also be dispersed evenly throughout the European Union .
The Institute should be an instrument that mobilises the entire territory of the Community and must lend itself to an increase in competitiveness , innovation and technological progress , as the precursor to economic development for the whole of the European Union .
It is my belief that through such initiatives as the EIT we can meet the challenges of a knowledge-based global economy in realising the ambitious aims of the Lisbon Strategy .
( FR ) Mr President , we are reaching the final phase in the establishment of the EIT .
I applaud the negotiations that have taken place between the various institutions in order to reach a balanced solution to make this Institute a symbol of innovation in line with our greatest ambitions .
The stress is therefore placed on innovation , a fundamental value within Europe .
The first Knowledge and Innovation Communities will focus on key areas such as climate change and renewable energy sources , not forgetting nanotechnologies , which need proper support .
The European Union will have a definite focus on innovation .
A Europe of innovation , the innovation of Europe - the EIT is the missing link between these two concepts : a missing link that , if it is adopted in tomorrow 's vote , will enable the European Union to progress .
It is by believing in roses that you make them bloom , as Anatole France reminded us .
The EIT is like a rose in the garden of Europe .
For the EIT to bloom , all the climatic conditions have to be right .
At first reading , I expressed my regret at the meagre financial resources allocated to the EIT , at the inadequacy of this support : EUR 308 million is not a sufficient response to fulfil our ambitions .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we therefore need to change the financial climate and provide the resources necessary for our very real ambitions to take shape .
( NL ) I am pleased to be given this opportunity .
In fact , it is great to start with this gem , which starts small but has great power , particularly from the bottom up , if that is recognised in future as a special designation for quality .
My second point is as follows : together with Mr Paasilinna , I have been making efforts towards this bridge with industry , towards this nomenclature concerning innovation , and in this regard I am very happy with the name ' Institute of Innovation and Technology ' .
It strikes me on reading the documents that we still have some difficulty with this .
Sometimes Commission documents use that name but Parliament documents do not , and so it is important that , as from now , the institute be called by its proper , correct designation .
My third and final point concerns the seat .
I should like to join with the non-native speakers , the non-French speakers , such as Mrs Ek and Mr Chatzimarkakis , who have today called for us to support Strasbourg - ' Scienceburg ' , as Mr Chatzimarkakis called it .
It is a city with an administrative character , and this is an administrative establishment ; it is not the big institute .
That would also solve a lot of political problems .

( PL ) Mr President , the idea of setting up a European Institute of Technology was greeted with considerable scepticism when it was first conceived three years ago , so we should view the current compromise text of the regulation as a major success .
The Institute may begin functioning as early as this summer following the Council 's decision in June regarding its headquarters , and the proposed structure of the network of Knowledge and Innovation Communities bids fair to become an excellent stimulator of innovation throughout the EU .
As rapporteur of the Committee on Legal Affairs , providing a proper legal basis and thus enabling the Institute to be continuously funded was one of my priorities .
I am pleased that the Council has accepted these proposals .
The review of financial prospects for 2007-2013 has already enabled the Institute to receive funding of approximately EUR 309 million , and this is a good start .
I hope that the mid-term review will enable the EUR 2 billion that is still required for the project as a whole to be found .
The appearance of an elite is of particular importance for the scientific sphere in the new Member States , which possess a considerable and hitherto untapped potential .
I am therefore of the opinion that the proposal to site one of the EIT 's structures in Wrocław - a city of more than 140 000 students - will be an excellent European investment for the future .
Finally , may I warmly congratulate and thank Mr Paasilinna for his splendid cooperation .
( PL ) Mr President , my Hungarian colleague , an MEP from Budapest , has said that even during the years of the Iron Curtain there was cooperation between scientific institutions in Europe , but the truth needs to be told : the Iron Curtain also divided science into two camps in Europe - the Western camp , which developed in the free world and had financial support , and the Eastern camp .
It would be good if the European Institute of Technology , which we will establish either today or tomorrow , were not only to provide an opportunity for the European Union to take part in global innovative competition , in the global battle for knowledge , but also to serve to unite these two camps that have been divided by history .
I would join with my Polish colleagues who have recommended the city of Wrocław as a location either for the headquarters or for one of the Institute 's departments , and I would like to see the authorities in that city be prepared to invest the money that is so essential for the success of this project .

( FR ) Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Paasilinna , and the Commissioner , and I would like to mention something that was not said during the debate , namely that without the academic world and its support , we would not be here today .
If the universities had blocked the establishment of this new Institute , which is introducing cooperation between industry , the private sector , research fields and academic institutions for the first time , this Institute would not have seen the light of day .
Given that our President launched the establishment of this Institute at rather short notice without providing a suitable budget , and the Commissioner for Science and Research did not want the Institute at all , all the credit for its establishment goes to you , Mr Figel ' , because , as Commissioner for Education , you have worked to pacify those circles that were worried about the awarding of degrees and diplomas and about their own competencies .
I hope that this Institute will be a great success and that you just have to find the rare bird you are looking for , since for the Governing Board you are seeking people with experience in several domains - academic and industrial - who are not actually involved in any of them , and also who are young .
I wish you a lot of luck in finding them !
( BG ) Mr. Commissioner , The document that the European Parliament is going to adopt is very important indeed .
I commend you , I commend the rapporteur and all colleagues who have contributed to the submission and adoption of the existing proposals .
It is very important that a key policy is in the making .
The development of the European economy needs exactly technological innovation .
This is what makes the world develop .
It is particiularly significant that the knowledge-based societies working on the basis of the project principle will be able to take into consideration the priorities of the common European development policy , on the one hand , and the capabilities of individual Member States , on the other .
It is necessary to incorporate and develop the best achievements of individual research structures and universities to ensure the link to the priorities in the energy sector , the climate change , the new progressive materials that are indispensable to the development of the world .
This institute should turn into a genuine symbol of unity , as well as into the best mobility centre for the best research practices .
And perhaps it would be a good European policy to locate it in a new EU Member State .

( PL ) Mr President , we are all agreed here today that we should do everything we can to promote an open , knowledge-based society in order to catch up with the world standard , to keep pace with the developing world economy ; we should inject as much funding as we can , and as much discussion , in order to keep Europe in the running .
I would also like to make the point that the siting of the future Institute is no trivial matter .
It should be in an innovative region , a region of young and open minds , a region of great potential , a region - and this is very important - with a pioneering spirit , a region that will be suspended between Eastern and Western Europe .
All these requirements are met by the Polish city of Wrocław , which I would like to commend to you .
Finally , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur and everyone who has taken part in this inspiring debate .
( SK ) The main objective of the Lisbon Strategy is to promote competitiveness within Europe and in doing so to keep up with other global economies such as the US and the new emerging Asian centres ( China , India ) .
Part of this strategy is the establishment of the European Institute of Technology , which has gained strong support within the PPE-DE Group .
I have been following with growing interest the beginnings of this Institute , which will require significant financial support to enable it to accomplish its goals .
These goals are vital for maintaining the EU industrial , competitive and innovative base .
I therefore call for an increase in the budget which has already been approved .
I would stress that this is a project that must succeed , and in this context it is particularly important , in my view , to promote innovation , which brings with it progress and competitiveness .
In this respect , I feel that it is appropriate to include the term ' innovation ' in the Institute 's name , originally supposed to be the European Institute of Technology and Innovation .
This initiative needs to have an important mandate in the field of the knowledge-based economy and in promoting research and innovation within the EU .
I would like to express my admiration for the energy and determination of Commissioner Figeľ in his implementation of this project .

( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like first of all to congratulate Commissioner Figeľ and the rapporteur , Mr Paasilinna , for all their work on this project .
Both positive and negative views on the EIT were heard and there will undoubtedly be more discussions before the EIT comes to life .
In this forum I would like to highlight one idea in favour of the EIT : that is that all funds allocated from the EU budget to science , development and education are funds that are well allocated , not gobbled up .
This holds true particularly if the best European brains are likely to be taking part in the EIT project .
( PL ) Mr President , the creation of a coherent economic area , a single European market , was the underlying reason for the appearance of the Communities , and later the European Union .
The next stage is to give the European economy a modern and competitive dimension .
This will be possible only when we stake our money on education , research , new technologies and , in its broadest sense , innovation .
We shall not meet these challenges if industry fails to support scientific developments and new technologies , and if local authorities fail to invest in education .
Governments should become involved in education at tertiary level and in supporting basic scientific research .
The European Union , meanwhile , should concentrate on supporting and guiding innovation .
We can see that these tasks rest with both the Member States and the EU institutions .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I should like to thank the House for a very interesting and supportive debate .
Although there was some criticism of lack of money or that we again want to establish something .
I think the most important innovation starts with openness and promotion of creativity .
The result of the consultation and legislative process is really an example of openness , contribution , commitment and even a creative innovative approach .
We have shown innovation in coming to this consensus and also in the context and content of this result .
This is the most important thing .
The mission of the EIT is , first of all , innovation .
It is one of the moments or follow-ups of the Lahti Summit of October 2006 and actually we only proposed the draft text one day before the summit .
We never supported green-field investment to establish something new ; rather , we wished to come up with a new approach on how to promote , organise , motivate and mobilise resources and partners in order to make innovation in Europe more successful .
I would like to recall that the Commission never had the option to build new buildings for the EIT , but to come up with the new approach .
It took one and a half years : we started it as a part of the Lisbon Strategy in February 2005 and since then we have had many coffees and many talks that were very inspirational and very interesting - also in this building - showing that there are a lot of options or opinions on how to promote innovation .
I am happy now that we have come to this strong joint commitment .
Many people spoke of the location .
This is an issue for the Council .
I think the Slovenian Presidency will try to manage the process leading towards a decision .
Names have been mentioned already - some at Member State level .
Some cities at regional level are also aspiring to this .
It is a good signal that there are many ambitious candidates for the seat of the EIT .
There are also many universities and businesses and research and technology organisations which are keen not only on the consultation process , but in participation in the selection of the governing board and then in the work of the EIT .
As Ms Hennicot-Schoepges said , we are not going to lose identity ; we offer to share the identity between universities or existing centres and the EIT which is going to be established .
That is more or less all I wanted to add as a response to your points and support .
Once again I want to underline the importance of convergent , horizontal work .
As you did in this Parliament in your committees , we did the same in the Commission .
I was not isolated .
I am not alone .
It was achieved with the support of the President , the industry Commissioner , the research Commissioner , the budget Commissioner and many others .
I think this is a very important message for the future : Let us work together , be open-minded and promote creativity .
This month I want to propose that we declare 2009 the European Year of Creativity and Innovation .
It will link strongly with the proposals , ideas and policies we need to nurture and establish in Europe .
Once again , thank you very much .
It is not a fait accompli ; it is , rather , the beginning of the phase which means establishment , and then the real work may start - and I hope it will start successfully .
rapporteur . - ( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we should remember that when we started , a large majority were against this whole project .
Now we have developed it in collaboration with the Commission and the Council .
Now we have produced something so dynamic that it has progressed to the voting stage , and I hope that a large majority will vote in favour of the project .
This is the way we can work together .
As to location , I have no view except to say that this will be a modern networked system in which researchers and communities will be working independently .
They will not be concentrated in the capital city which is chosen as the Institute 's headquarters .
Furthermore , its administrative staff will be relatively small , less than a hundred people , so there will be no need for large premises .
One thing is , however , important .
There need to be good transport links , preferably direct flights , as we know very well indeed how awkward it is to work somewhere where there are no direct flights , with meetings even having to be held at an airport .
Next we need to consider funding .
It is important , although for one proposed theme , communications technology , the funding has already been found .
In other words , if the theme can be made to look attractive , the money will surely be found .
We certainly do not lack the capital .
Many here have said that this is a new kind of collaboration .
The Institute will not be in competition with others , therefore , but will establish cooperation , as Mrs Ek remarked .
Mr Ransdorf and certain others stated that the European model , the high point of European science for centuries gone by , should become the high point of world science .
This is one way to give expression to the sort of quality standards we need .
I wish to thank you all very much for your cooperation .
This project has to succeed , because Europe needs it . Thank you .
( Applause )
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( HU ) The information and technology revolution , the socio-economic transformation of post-industrial society , has shaken the government , the economy and politicians in most countries of the world from their Sleeping Beauty slumbers , and increasing attention is being given to understanding the reasons behind the success of particular communities , larger regions , or countries .
The things that secure success are creativity , creative energy , new ideas that can form the basis for all new development .
Creativity becomes innovation if it is transformed into reality .
Let us hope that the European Institute of Innovation and Technology ( EIT ) will be just such an innovative brainchild of the European Parliament .
The primary objective of the EIT will be to develop the innovative capacity of the European Union by linking higher education , the research community and representatives of industry .
The EIT can play an enormous role in ensuring that European innovation is once again renowned throughout the world and that European industry and researchers are a force to be reckoned with .
Hungary 's capital city has also thrown its hat into the ring to provide a home for the European Institute of Innovation and Technology .
I am certain that my country would be a good host for the Institute because of the government 's commitment to research and innovation / development , because of the country 's research infrastructure , because of Hungary 's early role in the advancement of science , and not least because of Hungary 's hospitality .
Citing the words of Hungarian scholar and Nobel laureate Albert Szent-Györgyi , I call upon you to support our bid to host the EIT : ' Hungary is a small country in terms of its population , but a great power in terms of grey matter . '
Mr President , second reading in the European Parliament is another step that bring us closer to establishing a European Institute of Innovation and Technology .
Much time has passed since José Barroso submitted the proposal to set up such an institution back in February 2005 .
The idea was that this would be an institution that would support the implementation of the Lisbon Strategy , which at that time was at the halfway stage and was not bringing the intended benefits .
I am aware that one of the cities that is hoping to host the headquarters of the EIT is the Polish city of Wrocław .
I am also aware that in Poland and in the other cities that would be pleased to welcome the Institute ( Vienna , Munich , Sant Cugat-Barcelona , Paris , Oxford , Brussels , Budapest , Nuremberg , Aachen ) exaggerated expectations persist because of the anticipated sum of EUR 2.4 billion that will be required to fund this Institute .
This is the total outlay on the Institute and the network of Knowledge and Innovation Communities ( KICs ) that are expected to absorb most of the funds .
I am , moreover , convinced that the establishment of the Institute will not be able to assist in bringing about the structural reforms that are of crucial significance for innovation and competitiveness in the European Union .
Nevertheless , knowing Wrocław 's ambitions and the quality of administration in that city , I am convinced that this is the right place for the EIT and I am satisfied with the progress that has been made towards establishing this institution .
in writing . - Education , research and innovation are windows to the future .
They are the building blocks of what is called the ' knowledge triangle ' .
We need to be competitive .
The knowledge triangle is one of the keys .
I support the text , since the Commission proposal to create a European Institute of Technology ( EIT ) aims to tackle one of Europe 's main weaknesses : the lack of innovation .
I see the EIT as an investment for the future .
Before there was some scepticism as to the added value EIT could offer .
The proposed network structure is a good solution .
The expertise lies in the participating universities and higher education institutions .
Remembering my academic years , I also support the idea of the EIT 's ' Knowledge and Innovation Communities ' ( KICs ) being autonomous .
Selection of such centres will be based on a criterion of excellence .
I support this , because this way the EIT KICs will give the best kicks to European innovation .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.15 a.m. and resumed at 11.30 a.m. )

Verification of credentials
The next item is the verification of credentials of new Members of the European Parliament .
Mr Gargani will be presenting an oral report on the matter , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , according to the Rules of Procedure the European Parliament must verify the credentials and rule on the validity of the mandate of its newly elected Members .
During its meeting of 25 February , the committee verified the credentials of 35 Romanian MEPs designated by the competent authorities .
To these names should be added three more designated by their respective national authorities .
In view of the large number of verifications to be carried out and the constraints on time , it was considered appropriate for the Committee on Legal Affairs , and therefore its Chairman , to present an oral report to Parliament .
Since the Committee has recorded that everything is in order , Parliament may ratify all the mandates .
The mandates are hereby ratified .
1 .
Management of the assets of the ECSC and the Research Fund for Coal and Steel (
2 .
EC-United Arab Emirates Agreement on certain aspects of air services (
3 .
Common organisation of agricultural markets and specific provisions for certain agricultural products (
4 .
Common organisation of agricultural markets and specific provisions for certain agricultural products (
5 .
Statistical classification of economic activities in the EC (
6 .
Identification and registration of pigs (
7 .
Marketing of vegetable propagating and planting material , other than seed (
8 .
Common rules in the field of civil aviation security (
9 .
European Institute of Innovation and Technology (
10 .
Mobilisation of the European Union 's Solidarity Fund (
11 .
Amending budget No 1 / 2008 (
12 .
EC-Guinea-Bissau Fisheries Partnership Agreement (
13 .
EC-Côte d 'Ivoire Fisheries Partnership Agreement (
14 .
Sustainable European transport policy (
( The sitting was suspended at 11.50 pending the formal sitting . )
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see the minutes )
Formal sitting - Estonia
Ladies and gentlemen , this is a wonderful day for the European Parliament , and that is because we are welcoming one of our former fellow Members here - one who is now President of the Republic of Estonia , our former fellow Member Mr Hendrik Ilves !
We would like to bid you a warm welcome to the European Parliament !
( Loud and sustained applause )
Ladies and gentlemen , when we experience an hour such as this , it is good not only to look to the present , but also to remember what a long , broad path it has been for us to acquire a fellow Member together with other fellow Members from Estonia - and from Latvia and Lithuania , if we are just confining it to the Baltic States in the first instance - who were elected Members of parliament and whose countries , free countries that were ruled for decades by totalitarian communism , have been represented here since freedom was gained in Estonia .
This fellow Member was elected by a democratic decision of the people to be President of his country .
He is a figure from Estonia who , more than most , is bound up with Europe 's future and , of course , with her present .
Initially as his country 's Foreign Minister , he led the negotiations on membership of the European Union and was subsequently an observer at the European Parliament for a year from 2003 until direct elections in 2004 and finally a Member of the European Parliament until his election as President of the Republic of Estonia in September 2006 .
President Hendrik Ilves took office as President of Estonia on 9 October 2006 .
President Ilves , it is a great joy to be able to welcome you here to the European Parliament , which is celebrating its 50th anniversary tomorrow .
Your visit is , as it were , the start of the celebrations and I should like to ask you now to address the European Parliament .
Once again , we bid you a very warm welcome !
( Applause )
Ladies and gentlemen , by having risen from your seats , by having applauded so enthusiastically , you have thanked the President of Estonia for his highly congenial and , for us as a Parliament , friendly , but above all forward-looking speech .
President Ilves , you have been talking about something that lies at the heart of Europe , and that is an understanding of one another and that we know how we think .
When we know how we think , we know how we can also act together in the end .
When you spoke of the exchange of young people , I remembered - and I believe , ladies and gentlemen , we can be proud of this - that when the Financial Perspective was to be agreed and they wanted to slash the funds for the exchanges of young people , the Erasmus Programme and life-long learning , we raised our voices and said : the Financial Perspective will produce results only if we increase rather than reduce the funds for young people to meet in order to create understanding and a sense of community in the European Union .
( Applause )
Let me say in conclusion - and I do so with some stirring deep down : if the President of Estonia reminds us of history , we have to say that the history of Europe , of our continent , has been good at many points in time , but many periods have also been shaped by tragedy .
What we are doing here today , here in the European Parliament , too , is a response to the experience of history .
The fact that you are conveying this to us is turning today into a great day for the European Parliament .
We can follow the path into the future only if we look back on history , learn from its consequences and then act together on the basis of mutual understanding and community spirit , as you have said , President Ilves , for the sake of a shared Europe .
Many thanks , President Ilves !
( Applause )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
( DE ) Mr President , I did not understand you at first .
I voted for this report because this new regulation creates a good balance between sensible anti-terrorism measures on the one hand and passenger rights on the other hand .
I should , however , like to focus on a point that has still not been satisfactorily resolved , and that is the rules on the carrying of liquids .
We know that the controls should be used for the prevention of terrorism , but these controls are causing a lot of anger among passengers owing to the individual airports ' widely differing interpretations .
Whether or not this is an effective instrument is still unresolved .
I doubt it very much , because terrorists have long been developing other strategies and finding other ways .
I expect that the following assessment will be made : either the control procedures are standardised and improved , or else these measures are stopped , with the aim of not burdening passengers with measures that are in any case not at all effective .
( PL ) Mr President , I voted in favour of the Costa report .
Almost six years have elapsed since Regulation ( EC ) No 2320 / 2002 was passed .
Two and a half years have elapsed since it entered into force .
Concern for passenger security at airports and on board aircraft continues to be very much a live issue .
Protection of civil aviation is causing a dramatic rise in the cost of flying and a decrease in travel comfort .
The cost of protection is another matter ; these costs must be as transparent as possible , and consumers need to know what the money they pay for an air ticket is being spent on and how .
Payments collected for the purposes of protection should be utilised solely and exclusively to cover protection costs .
Money obtained for this purpose must not be used for any other purpose .
( CS ) Mr President , I abstained from voting on the proposal for a regulation on common rules because I think it contains some weak points .
The most serious is the method for assessing the reliability of flight crews , which is not regulated in the regulation itself , but will be regulated separately afterwards .
It follows from the approved wording that once in force the implementing regulation will be a classified EU document and the information contained therein will not be publicly accessible .
It could therefore happen that even the people whose duties are covered by the document will not be able to access it .
This would violate the principle of legal certainty .
The same applies to the activity of the Advisory Group , which will be set up by the Commission alongside the Committee .
The Advisory Group will be composed of European organisations directly involved in aviation protection .
It is inappropriate for the Committee to merely inform those concerned without allowing them access to the classified information .
I therefore call for a solution that would respect the principles of openness and transparency .
( DE ) The new institute to be set up here seems to me absolutely justified and reasonable as far as its goals are concerned and I therefore support the report and the establishment of this institute .
The European Union - and therefore we - must work very hard to be able to hold our own successfully in technological competition with the other economic areas , but - and I now come to the crucial point - I should like to ask the Commission once again to check the 32 agencies , and this again is one of them , as to their purpose and efficiency , to carry out a sort of health check for agencies and also to shut down agencies that are no longer expedient and not working efficiently in the taxpayers ' interest .
I hope - and this is a request to the Commission , which is present this afternoon and has this subject on the agenda - that the Commission will today finally bring itself to have this health check carried out for agencies .
( CS ) I welcome the fact that after three years we are launching the European Institute of Innovation and Technology .
I am glad that the institute will not be a ' super-university ' , but will create innovation networks with a view to more extensive application of research in industry and healthcare .
Such connections should also substantially increase investment in science from the business sector .
We will know that we have succeeded once the number of European patents begins to grow and we start to catch up with the US and Japan .
The Institute should be located in a new Member State .
The Czech Republic is the best prepared candidate : it already has a sought-after conference centre for scientists and businessmen .
Charles University is , moreover , a symbol of the common educational roots of the old Europe and the new .
( CS ) I voted for the establishment of the European Institute of Innovation and Technology .
I firmly believe that it will help to improve the Member States ' competitive basis by involving partner organisations in integrated activities in the area of innovation , development and research at the highest international level .
I expect that the EIT will become a point of reference for innovation management in that it will promote new forms of collaboration among partner organisations involved in the knowledge triangle of research , universities and the private sector .
I imagine that the EIT will build a worldwide reputation and will offer an attractive environment for the most gifted people from all over the world .

( FI ) Mr President , firstly I want to thank the rapporteur , Mr Paasilinna , who has done a splendid job .
I voted in favour of this proposal .
Just as when this proposal was made the subject of debate and I had a few opportunities to discuss it with the President of the Commission , I still think it is important that the basic priority is to strengthen the position of existing universities and their opportunities for networking .
Institutes should not be established for their own sake .
It is fundamentally important to ensure that the Institute is a coordinating body and that the appropriations for research are not conducted away from existing universities and research institutes , which have done excellent work .
The new Institute could coordinate European innovation and technology and thereby generate new added value .
The Institute is needed , but as I said , its content must be the core issue , and not how it is organised .
I believe that suitable premises are available in Poland and elsewhere , but the content should not be forgotten .
Mr President , I represent London , the greatest city in the world , capital of the greatest country in the world .
In my city , we have a number of innovative universities , so you might think that I would be in favour of this report , but actually I voted against it .
I would just like to explain why .
Thomas Dolby , the lyricist , once sang , ' She blinded me with science ' .
The band 2 Unlimited once said , ' Digital revolution , technical solution ; for some it only brings more and more confusion ' .
Now , whatever the merits of the lyrics , I think that this applies to the thinking behind the EIT .
The Commission is right that Europe is successful in research but lacks innovation .
But how do you get innovation ?
You do not arrive at innovation through more structures , more bricks and mortar .
You do not arrive at innovation by duplicating existing effort .
What we see here is the EIT seeking to emulate the success of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in the United States without learning the successful business model behind the MIT .
That is why I voted against .
Mr President , firstly I would just like to put the EIT in a historical context .
The first time I heard of the EIT , we were talking about what we could do with this particular building , as Parliament has two sites and if we were to vacate this site , what would this building in Strasbourg be used for ?
The idea was to endow Strasbourg with a world-class university .
Unfortunately , Strasbourg already has a pretty good university , and they did not like that particular idea .
Strasbourg did not like losing this institution .
We have had many debates on this here , even though realistically Parliament should decide on its own seat .
But this idea was born , and we have gone into this massive budget of hundreds of millions of euros which we are now going to spend , duplicating work that already goes on ; you do wonder what the point is .
Is Europe grasping for something that it does not need because it already has it ?
Does it need this European brand over this expertise ?
Are we just going to spend lots of money on bricks and mortar in a place where we could be doing much more coordinated stuff using the fantastic examples of Oxford , Cambridge and the other good universities across the European continent ?
( CS ) Thank you , Mr President .
Though I do not represent the UK , I supported the release of assistance totalling EUR 162 million following the flooding in the UK , where the damage amounted to EUR 4.6 billion .
I have , however , two reservations .
Firstly , we are making this decision after only nine months .
Secondly , in accordance with the relevant rules there are other European countries that are reaching out for help , such as Greece .
I think that two funds should be set up : one for the needs of the EU and one for other countries in order to avoid a situation where there are no funds left for assistance to poor countries .
Secondly , the rules for drawing on the funds give preference to large-scale disasters .
However , we should also be able to assist the smaller regions .
Solidarity does not differentiate when it comes to size .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to see a revision of the rules .
Mr President , I am delighted that Parliament is going to release EUR 162 million from the European solidarity fund for aid following the flooding disasters last summer in my own region and elsewhere .
Clearly , as we know , this money is for infrastructure projects , for repairing roads , bridges , railways , hospitals and other institutions , but at the same time it will enable the Government in the United Kingdom to release money it would have had to spend on this in other ways .
There are still thousands of people who are living in temporary accommodation and many shops and factories are closed .
So I am delighted that money from the European Union 's solidarity fund has been released and hopefully that the people of Gloucestershire and elsewhere will benefit from this .
I intend to make an explanation of vote in writing , on behalf of the people of Yorkshire and the Humber , in the same vein as Mr Ford has just spoken .
( CS ) I supported the creation of the budget item for the Galileo Programme - expenditure on administrative management , as provided for in the Commission 's revised proposal .
I also supported the amendment which in the context of the Galileo budget reshuffles an amount of EUR 2 million from an operational line to a line of administrative nature .
This is to finance actions such as the definition and follow-up of risk management scheme , the definition of Intellectual Property Rights policy , but also innovative navigation markets .
I strongly support this .
What concerns me , however , is that on 29 January the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy adopted with a large majority eight amendments suppressing the Galileo Supervisory Authority from the legal basis of the amended proposal on the Galileo and EGNOS programmes .
I would like a serious debate to be held on this topic in plenary .
( PL ) Mr President , I shall be very brief with regard to this report .
I voted in favour of it because , regardless of its size , every state is powerless in the face of vis maior .
Funding of extraordinary expenditure at a time when an extraordinary situation is announced helps a state to repair the damage brought about by atmospheric conditions or a natural disaster .
That is obvious .
Mr President , in this report we do have reference to the mobilisation of the EU solidarity fund , which we talked about slightly earlier .
And part of my region did benefit , or will benefit , from that money , especially in North Lincolnshire , where we suffered huge flooding .
But I do wonder whether the people of Lincolnshire would view this as a good use of money .
We now pay so much money to the European Union and we then have to beg for money back when we have a need ourselves .
For every GBP 2 we get back , we have put GBP 5 into this pot in the first place .
I do wonder whether we could spend that money better .
I also have some major concerns , as I have stated before in explanations of vote , about how we do these draft amending budgets .
Huge sums of money are transferred between different budget lines and very , very few people have oversight over this .
Today , we are just transferring a couple of million euros here for Galileo and a couple of million euros there , but in the past it has been hundreds of millions of euros .
I do wonder whether that is the right parliamentary process to give us oversight over European taxpayers ' money .
Mr President , I constantly and always vote against fisheries agreements made by this House and the Commission for , I believe , a good reason .
I will quote a little from the reports .
The Commission 's assessment for Guinea-Bissau found that it helped the viability of the Community 's trawler and tuna industries in the Atlantic Ocean , and offered Community vessels and industries that depend upon them a stable legal environment and medium-term visibility , but actually just had , it says , ' a major impact ' on Guinea-Bissau 's budgetary and political stability .
It does not matter where we are conducting these fisheries agreements , we are , essentially , stealing fish from those who could catch them locally , sell them locally , make money locally and therefore raise themselves from poverty .
We create a solution where we actually pay for European fishermen to go and fish these waters mechanically , lift tons of fish and therefore ruin the fishing economies of these coastal countries .
The Ivory Coast document talks about the amount of money that we are spending on doing this .
We are talking about nearly EUR 600 000 which we give to EU vessels to catch more than 7 000 t of tuna .
If you speak to your average Spaniard and ask them how many people are entering their country from the Ivory Coast - because the fishing boats that used to land fish in Spain now actually transport hundreds , if not thousands , of illegal immigrants to the Canary Islands and elsewhere - you will see that we are actually making a bigger problem for ourselves and not creating a market-based solution , which we could do if we allowed those countries who have fishing rights to fish themselves and boost their own economies .
Mr President , nothing would bring me more joy than to speak on sustainable European transport .
The reason I abstained on this report is that , whilst it contains a decent amount of reasonable European policy , I do wonder if it is not best left to market solutions within individual Member States as to how we can sort out traffic problems in London .
I find it hard to believe that Europe-wide cooperation and a coordination strategy will solve the problems of parking in Nottingham or in Leicester .
Yes , swapping best practice might , but we are talking about putting lots of money into a pot where we are now going to have committees that meet at Commission and Council level to try and think of policy .
I think all these policies are best determined locally .
Therefore I abstained on the whole report .
( PPE-DE ) . - ( DE ) Mr President , I voted in favour of the report because I believe firstly that it is a good one and secondly that it points in the right direction .
The transport sector must acknowledge its overall responsibility , particularly with regard to environmental targets , but also with regard to reaching the Lisbon target .
I am particularly pleased that Amendment 5 , which demands that the European Union finally ratify , and not merely sign , the Alpine Convention , has gone through .
It is also pleasing that Amendment 1 was rejected and the original text retained , i.e. that we should begin internalising the external costs for road traffic .
It is , however , a shame that Amendment 7 was rejected .
This would have meant that the Seventh Research Programme would have had to be better integrated and geared towards transport .
Finally , I should also like to advise my fellow Members from the United Kingdom who rail so much against the Union to read the texts , therefore , with a little more care , because a great deal therein is worded in the subjunctive .
These are discretionary clauses and whether or not such a large country as the United Kingdom introduces these measures is within that nation 's discretion .
( CS ) The debate last night did not reassure me that the European Commission and the Member States are prepared in the foreseeable future to allocate funds to improving the quality of transport infrastructure in the new Member States .
The Commissioner was quite right to refer to this need for modal changes at the end of yesterday 's debate .
I would like to ask the Commission to present realistic plans for the development of the motorway and railway infrastructure in the new Member States .
Without that , we cannot realistically discuss the sustainable transport strategy , at least not from an environmentally-friendly perspective .
I also supported the ' Eurovignette ' amendment ; its review must not detract from the sustainable transport strategy .
Written explanations of vote
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the consultation procedure report by my German colleague Mr Böge , which supports the proposal for a Council decision amending Decision 2003 / 77 / EC laying down multiannual financial guidelines for managing the assets of the European Coal and Steel Community ( ECSC ) in liquidation since 2002 and , on completion of the liquidation , the Assets of the Research Fund for Coal and Steel .
It was right to take account of changing markets and financial products when bringing the possibility of managing this capital up to date , while maintaining a high degree of security and long-term stability .
in writing . - ( DE ) It may indeed be quite sensible to look for new technologies supported at Community level and financially , by which CO2 emissions from steel production can be reduced .
As a result of rising demand in emergent countries and several natural disasters that have made reduction impossible , there have been constant shortages of this raw material , reflected in record prices for coal and steel .
It is now high time we finally started looking for alternatives to coal resources , which are beginning to run out .
It is also highly debatable how former consortiums such as the European Coal and Steel Community ( ECSC ) and Euratom , which were fully absorbed into the EU a long time ago , can still have their own funds , programmes , etc . , particularly in the context of Member States opposed to nuclear power , for instance , still constantly having to finance their research etc .
We should finally get around to giving this some thought .
in writing . - ( PL ) I agree with the proposal to replace certain provisions in existing bilateral agreements with Community agreements .
Where fares and rates for air services are concerned , the rapporteur , Paolo Costa , is right to introduce a clause which prohibits third country carriers from being price leaders on air services for carriage wholly within the Community .

in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the report by my British colleague Mr Parish on the amendment of Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1234 / 2007 establishing a common organisation of agricultural markets and on specific provisions for certain agricultural products , which had been adopted on the basis of the situation at 31 December 2006 .
Having brought the 21 regulations applicable to the common organisation of agricultural markets together in a single all-encompassing regulation in order to rationalise and simplify the legal framework of market policies such as intervention , private storage , import tariff quotas , export refunds , safeguard measures , state aid and competition rules , and the communication and reporting of data , it became necessary to update this text to take account of decisions taken since 2006 in the sugar , fruit and vegetables , processed fruit and vegetables , seeds , beef and milk and milk products sectors .
in writing . - ( SV ) We are opposed to the current common agricultural policy and object to changes of little fundamental significance to the existing system .
We demand a comprehensive review and reappraisal of the entire common agricultural policy .
These two reports maintain the existing structures of the common agricultural policy .
Hence we cannot support them .
The entire common agricultural policy is an absurd contrivance and must be abolished .
in writing . - I welcome Mr. Parish 's report establishing a common organisation of agricultural markets and on specific provisions for certain agricultural products .
The proposals to provide a set of harmonised rules in various areas of the industry , such as private storage , import tariff quotas and safeguard measures are a positive move to clarify European agricultural policy .
The increase in transparency and simplification of regulation within this sector is much needed and will directly benefit Scottish farmers .
I therefore voted in the favour of the report .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the report by my British colleague Mr Parish on the amendment of Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1234 / 2007 establishing a common organisation of agricultural markets and on specific provisions for the flax and hemp sector .
The European Commission , which is to submit a report currently being written on prolonging aid for the production of short flax fibre and hemp fibre , set to end from the marketing year 2008 / 2009 , is proposing to prolong this aid while awaiting the policy reviews to be undertaken in 2008 under the health check of the common agricultural policy .
I support this proposal , which is very sensible .
in writing . - The proposal to prolong the subsidy of flax and hemp is a procedural necessity to allow for adequate reflection and potential reform under the CAP Health Check .
It is for this reason that I support the report 's recommendations and voted accordingly .
in writing . - ( PL ) I am voting in favour of the report by Mrs Geringer de Oedenberg on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the statistical classification of economic activities in the European Community .
I was particularly interested to read my colleague 's report .
I am in favour of accepting of the report because I think that Community law should be clearer and more comprehensible , and thus more transparent and accessible to each citizen .
The aim of the application is to codify Council Regulation ( EEC ) No 3037 / 90 of 9 October 1990 on the statistical classification of economic activities in the European Community .
As a lawyer I wish , in the explanation of my vote , to stress the value of codification , which is a very important process of singularly combining a large set of legal regulations in a single , systematised collection from which fundamental legal norms may be interpreted .
I attach considerable significance to the simplification and ordering of Community law .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the report by my fellow Member Mr Costa on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on common rules in the field of aviation security and repealing Regulation ( EC ) No 2320 / 2002 , adopted the day after the attacks on 11 September 2001 in the United States of America , which had to be reviewed in the light of its application .
Fortunately a compromise has been found on the financing of the security measures , which will be shared between the Member States and airport authorities , airlines and passengers .
I am pleased that the European Parliament succeeded in convincing the Council and the Commission to use the regulatory procedure with scrutiny for a whole series of measures when defining the common basic standards for aviation security , such as the screening of passengers , and articles that may be prohibited , such as liquids .
This regulation provides for ' a greater degree of harmonisation ' of common rules in the field of civil aviation security at EU level - such as , for example , on the screening of passengers and cabin baggage , access control and aircraft security checks - repealing the 2002 regulation adopted as a result of the events of 11 September 2001 in the USA .
Among the aspects we criticised was that there was no guarantee - quite the reverse - that the costs of providing security measures would not be passed on to the users of these services , which are clearly public services .
Nor is there even any guarantee that users will not be faced with a surcharge to cover those measures .
Moreover , there is no clarification about the removal of a whole set of security measures which have already been widely criticised , in particular as to whether they are actually effective .
It is also striking that , in relation to workers , limiting access to ' airside ' for security reasons has been used to restrict workers ' freedom to form a trade union .
The current text offers no guarantee that such abuse would be prevented or such rights protected .
Finally , the regulation clearly opens the door to the presence of armed personnel on flights , a measure which we consider to be mistaken , even for reasons of security .
in writing . - ( PL ) In spite of everything , I voted in favour of this report .
I would like to give a few words of explanation .
As they say , a makeshift solution lasts the longest .
We have had a year now to become convinced of the truth of this utterance .
When the ban on taking drinks and other liquid items on board aircraft was introduced , we were assured that it was only a transitory requirement .
There was shortly to be a review of procedures , and in fact special equipment was to be installed , in the form of detectors that would be able to discover hazardous substances .
None of this followed .
What of passengers , meanwhile ?
Passengers just got used to these inconveniences ... they treat them as if they have always existed and are essential .
Note that this is exactly how our freedoms and rights are gradually and almost imperceptibly restricted - in other areas , too ; not only in civil aviation .
Praise is , however , due to Parliament , and especially to Parliament 's representatives on the Conciliation Committee , who tenaciously defended these principles .
Admittedly , their success was not unalloyed , but it is worth emphasising what was achieved .
in writing . - ( DE ) I am voting in favour of the new air safety regulation , which creates greater safety in air traffic .
I am strongly advocating a joint vote on the standards and regulations at European level , since only efficient , rapid adaptation of the new directives will protect the safety of air passengers as well as their rights .
I very much welcome the possible use of accompanying safety officials , the ' sky-marshals ' , particularly based on the current threat from international terrorism on potentially vulnerable flight paths .
Furthermore , I support the safety regulations that allow weapons to be carried only in the hold and only in exceptional cases with consent issued by the state at the time .
With regard to the contentious issue of funding , I support the compromise that every Member State should make its own decision on this , in which the costs of the security measures are to be borne by the airport facilities , airlines and the users themselves .
It has been clarified , however , that costs should apply directly to the provision of security and only the actual costs should be covered .
The Commission is also being urged to submit a report by the end of the year on the financing of costs , together with a legislative proposal , if appropriate .
in writing . - Speaking as a representative of a country that was a recent victim of terrorism , Mr Costa 's report on common rules in the field of civil aviation security is one that I welcome .
Civil aviation security is something that concerns all Member States and therefore requires common basic standards across the EU .
Regarding the funding of improvements to security measures , I feel an adequate compromise has been reached that allows sufficient scope for Member States and users to share the cost .
Flexible financing rules will not only take account of the need to implement basic measures across Europe , but will allow those airports deemed to be at greatest risk from terrorist activity to take further steps to counter the threat .
I further welcome the proposal to reduce the frequency of re-screening for passengers arriving from third countries with equivalent safety standards to the EU .
I voted in favour of the report .
in writing . - ( EL ) I refused to vote in favour of the final conciliation between the European Parliament and the Council , because I oppose the measure of in-flight armed guards , given the high-level additional checks to which passengers are subjected on the ground before boarding .
I consider this measure excessive : it sacrifices passenger rights in the name of flight safety ; it does not serve the principle of proportionality , and will ultimately place a financial burden on citizens - in other words , passengers .
We call upon the governments of the Member States , and especially the Greek Government , not to proceed with this measure , and to make use of the scope already available to them .
in writing . - ( PT ) Civil aviation security has faced real , deadly and unprecedented challenges in recent years .
Every effort has been made to provide an appropriate response to the threats made against the lives of passengers and flight crews and yet we find that the rules established still cannot keep pace with the creativity of criminals .
We cannot therefore delay further or spend any more time on debates based on taking a false sense of security for granted .
The legislation we are voting on today is merely part of the legislative action that the Union has been developing in order to ensure that its citizens have greater and more evident security .
In the field of aviation security it is therefore essential that we equip ourselves with flexible instruments that make it possible to create an atmosphere of maximum protection for citizens , and that can be easily and adequately evaluated .
I shall therefore vote in favour of the agreement which this Parliament reached in conciliation , which will guarantee protection for citizens , security in civil aviation and constant surveillance against those who threaten our security , democratic institutions and the rule of law .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of the report by Mr Costa on the text on common rules in the field of civil aviation security , repealing Regulation ( EC ) No 2320 / 2002 .

In fact , I believe it is of prime importance to create a simpler and more flexible legislative framework that enhances freedom and decision-making power in the implementation phase of laws , compared with previous measures that were too detailed .
However , I believe it is right to make a few fine distinctions , in particular on linking airport charges to the cost of the services offered .
In this context , I would make a point of asking the Commission to take an initiative as soon as possible on the financing of security measures at European airports , and the transparency of security costs , in order to address possible distortion of competition in this field .
in writing . - I will be voting in favour of the compromise agreement reached in conciliation despite having reservations , not only about the financing of this legislation , but also at the attitude of the Council of Ministers during this whole procedure .
Firstly , the point has to be made that governments believe that they can introduce enhanced security measures in civil aviation and expect the industry and subsequently the passengers to pay for it .
My view , and indeed it was the view of Parliament , is that if Member States insist on enhanced security measures , they should at least contribute towards the costs .
Secondly , my understanding of conciliation is where two parties compromise their views in order to reach an agreement .
On this dossier the Council not only failed to even consider compromise or indeed conciliation , but arrogantly set about accusing Parliament of putting passenger security at risk .
This is frankly unacceptable and leaves a bitter legacy for us all to remember for future conciliations .
In the end I feel I am being blackmailed by the Council in voting for this agreement so we can at least have enhanced security measures in place to protect the public .
But my vote comes reluctantly and with anger .
in writing . - ( FR ) I am pleased about the adoption at second reading and on the basis of the report by my Finnish fellow Member Mr Paasilinna on the Council common position for adopting a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing the European Institute of Innovation and Technology , the idea for which was launched by the President of the European Commission , José-Manuel Barroso , in February 2005 , and which has aroused a certain amount of scepticism as regards the added value such a facility can provide .

As much as I share the points of view and concerns over financing a project of this kind , I do consider it essential to develop a facility like this to put knowledge at the heart of the European ideal , because it is through the development of knowledge and not the culture of ignorance that our humanistic European civilisation will progress .
I should mention , in passing , the increasing inappropriateness of our budgetary structure within the European Union , particularly for financing large projects such as this ( or Galileo , for example ) .
Finally , I cannot understand why the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance tabled an amendment , which my political group and I voted against , to reject and therefore delay the implementation of the common position .

in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I welcome and support the report by my colleague Mr Paasilinna , which aims to contribute to the EU 's economic growth and competitiveness by developing new forms of innovation through the creation of the European Institute of Innovation and Technology ( EIT ) .
The objective of the EIT is to support the key element of competitive capability : ' Knowledge ' .
Knowledge cannot , by definition , be a static concept , so it can only exist through a dynamic , structured process of research and new discoveries .
The real progress is made only through innovation .
Today , in a global market of old and new ' knowledge economies ' , competitors such as the United States , India and Japan are at work , countries that have always made innovation the cornerstone of their economic development , and have consequently enjoyed a strong competitive advantage over the EU .
The EIT will serve to strengthen the exchange of knowledge , to bring together , exchange and circulate ideas , and to collect together research from all over Europe in macro-areas that are essential for developing the future competitiveness of the EU .
The potential benefits for the competitive system of our market are almost unlimited .
It will be up to us to ensure the EUR 2.4 billion of funds committed are used properly and that the European Union can address future challenges arising from the global market more vigorously .
in writing . - ( PT ) As we already mentioned at first reading , we are very critical about establishing the European Institute of Technology especially because of the view taken by various research organisations .
In line with the positions held by scientific organisations that criticised this proposal on the European Institute of Innovation and Technology , we voted in favour of the proposal rejecting the Council common position , but unfortunately that proposal was rejected .
In the first place there is not sufficient funding .
One of the options for funding is the Community budget , including appropriations intended for research , which may end up being just another way of supporting the more developed countries , thus exacerbating inequalities .
Following pressure from various countries that wanted to host the Institute , this became virtual , a type of gateway for consulting scientific communities in different areas .
The European Parliament adopted several amendments to the Commission proposal , but in our opinion these are insufficient to straighten out something that was born crooked .
in writing . - ( PL ) I entirely support the report by my colleague Mr Paasilinna .
I am convinced that this institution is very much needed by the European Union and its Member States .
It is attracting interest not only from European researchers and groups of scientists in individual states , but also from practical people - chiefly business people .
I feel that the Institute should fulfil a mobilising function for the whole of the EU , and consequently its component parts should not leave out any Member State .
It has a particular role to play in levelling out opportunities and uniting EU economies in the new Member States .
Only by combining the research potential and efforts of scientists from the ' old ' and the ' new ' Europe will we find ourselves in a position to even out existing disproportions and move ahead while implementing the aims of the Lisbon Strategy .
With this in mind , I would like to appeal most earnestly for the headquarters of the Institute ( the Governing Board ) to be located in my country , Poland - in Wrocław .
This is a city located where the cultures of the old and the new Europe meet , lying in close proximity to three other Member States : Germany , Austria and the Czech Republic ; it has a fine scientific and research support platform , numerous higher education institutions and an enormous , nearly 200 000-strong , population of students .
I have no doubt that Wrocław is the best place to site the European Institute of Innovation and Technology .
in writing . - Mr Paasilinna 's report ' Establishing the European Institute of Innovation and Technology ' is an important contribution to achieving the goals set out by the Lisbon Strategy .
The concept of bringing together expertise from the private sector , research organisations and higher education institutions is a good one and an interesting pilot project .
We must also ensure that the Governing board of the EIT is selected transparently to preserve the integrity of its work .
Parliament and the Council should play a role in ensuring that transparency is upheld as well as assuring that the EIT is accountable and that the autonomy of the Knowledge and Innovation Communities involved is respected .
I support this report .
in writing . - ( PT ) In view of the agreement reached between the Council and Parliament , to which the European Commission raised no objections , I think that the adoption today at second reading of the recommendation for adopting a regulation establishing the European Institute of Innovation and Technology marks a particularly important moment , since it effectively symbolises the birth of this important project .
It is some years since the European Union identified Innovation and Knowledge as central aspects for meeting the challenges of globalisation and the emergence of new major economic actors .
In that context , specific support for research and development as an economic weapon is an initiative which deserves the greatest possible backing - and this lies at the core of the project .
As to whether it would be better to have a real campus or the adopted solution of Communities , only time will tell which should have prevailed .
In any event it is important - essential even - to have flexibility and the permanent ability to adapt the model to the best solutions .
Otherwise the mentor of innovation would not have the capacity to innovate , which would be an unforgivable mistake when the intention is to build models of efficiency .
I initially wanted to support the proposal for a European Institute of Technology , as it fills the existing gap between higher education , research and innovation , which is important as regards the economy and the internal market .
The EIT would seem a splendid project , therefore - if it were not for the inadequate financial arrangements .
Consequently , I cannot support the current proposal or the Council common position , mainly because the budget is inadequate .
The Commission had proposed a reasonable sum capable of providing for the needs of the KICs ( Knowledge and Innovation Communities ) for six years .
The Council has reduced the budget to such an extent that this is no longer possible .
Yet an EIT impact assessment showed that sound basic financing was an essential factor for achieving success .
As the proposal stands , KICs are forced to seek external financing from other Community programmes , which are moreover not intended for this purpose .
Therefore , Member States will have to take responsibility for providing the financing themselves , as if we can simply rely on private sponsoring .
This proposal would mean that the project was doomed to failure .
Finally , the fact that climate change as the focus of the first KICs has been explicitly removed from the proposal means that I no longer wish to support the report .
in writing . - We are obviously in favour of Britain receiving money from the European Union as a contribution to the cost of floods last year .
We therefore support this motion .
However , we take this opportunity to place on record that we do not favour this arrangement under which Britain must apply to the European Union for assistance .
The UK is a large net contributor to the EU budget .
Rather than having to plead for a small amount to be returned to us , we should prefer to retain our funds and decide for ourselves how they are spent .
in writing . - I am delighted that the European Parliament has approved the award of EUR 170m of flood aid from the EU Solidarity Fund to help towards the clean-up operations after the floods in my country , and especially in my region , last summer .
The floods affected hundreds of homes and businesses and caused misery to thousands of people .
The fact that this is the second largest payment ever from the EU Solidarity Fund is indicative of the huge financial and personal cost paid by the victims .
This money will hopefully go some way towards covering those costs .
As MEP for one of the regions most affected , I can say that every contribution is welcome .
This gesture of solidarity from the rest of Europe will be most welcome in my constituency .
in writing . - ( PT ) The text adopted today approves the mobilisation of the Solidarity Fund in favour of the United Kingdom following the flooding there in the summer of 2007 .
Since the damage declared was above the threshold for activating this mechanism with regard to the United Kingdom , approximately EUR 4 612 000 000 , the consequences of the floods were classified as a ' major disaster ' and the Commission proposed mobilising the Solidarity Fund for an amount of EUR 162 387 985 .
The opinion of the EP 's Committee on Regional Development presses the Council to reach agreement on the Commission 's proposed revision of the regulation establishing this Fund , which it has failed to do since the EP adopted its position at first reading on 18 May 2006 , with a critical vote from us , moreover .
In our opinion , among other things , the EP 's position does not safeguard the eligibility of regional disasters nor does it even allow for recognition of the specific nature of Mediterranean natural disasters or the adaptation of this Fund - as regards time limits and eligible actions - to the specific nature of natural disasters , such as drought and fire .
These are aspects which should be safeguarded .
in writing . - ( PL ) Mr President , the Solidarity Fund is the quintessence of the principle of solidarity , which is one of the cornerstones of the European Community .
The criteria for its deployment have been refined through many years of practice , and this has done away with the discretionary nature of its management , which was apparent at least in the first attempts to get the Anti-Globalisation Fund up and running , this being a new European Union budget institution established under the 2007-2013 Financial Perspective .
One major drawback , strongly emphasised in the case of the Solidarity Fund , was the long waiting time for this instrument to be brought into play , highlighted by applicant countries affected by a natural disaster .
Paradoxically , the EU was able to respond more quickly to third countries ' requests for aid than to those lodged by its own Member States .
The proposal to mobilise the Fund to help Great Britain and Northern Ireland , which were afflicted by flooding in June and July 2007 , meets all the formal requirements .
It is worth recognising the reaction of the Committee on Regional Development , which sped up Parliament 's procedures .
Meanwhile , it is difficult to interpret the delay on the part of the European Commission .
Its conclusion of 18 January 2008 appeared six months after the natural disaster and the United Kingdom 's prompt application .
This chimes with the bad tradition of delayed administration of the Solidarity Fund and demands an upgrade of the executive provisions , which Parliament has been calling for since 18 May 2006 .
in writing . - Following the devastating floods experienced in Britain last year , I would like to salute Mr Böge 's work on the Mobilisation of the European Union 's Solidarity Fund report .
The money proposed will benefit all those affected , including businesses .
I therefore welcomed the report 's recommendations .
in writing . - ( DE ) In the wake of natural disasters and the like , temporary accommodation must be provided quickly and makeshift repairs made to essential infrastructure such as , for example , power supply lines , roads , bridges and so on , so that hospitals can start running again , and the Solidarity Fund can be a great help here .
What cannot be paid for , however , are the thousands of hours of unpaid work carried out by the relief units . Nor can the suffering of those affected be compensated .
A sensible balance must be preserved in the Solidarity Fund between disbursing funds rapidly and unbureaucratically and ensuring that these are not used for purposes other than those intended .
Prevention and better intergovernmental cooperation are particularly important for preparing for future natural disasters .
Under no circumstances , therefore , should these events be used to construct an EU civil defence agency or an EU rapid reaction force for disasters , since the latter would not be in a position to provide effective protection against natural disasters , but would simply inflate costs and increase bureaucracy .
in writing . - ( SV ) I am voting against this report since it involves an increase in the EU budget .
Payments to Britain for the floods in 2007 should be found within the existing budget since there is scope for re-prioritisation , for example by not increasing the budget for Galileo .
in writing . - ( SV ) Past experience shows that the EU does not manage disaster assistance well .
Junilistan thinks that disbursement from the fund can often reduce incentives to Member States to remedy the problems which lie behind the need for aid .
As regards the introduction of a budget item for expenditure in exceptional circumstances , Junilistan considers that this paper contrivance reinforces the impression that the EU is seeking to become a superpower with influence over everything that happens in the world .
Junilistan objects to this .
Frontex takes a step too far when it comes to coordinating the border controls and immigration policies of the Member States .
Junilistan is opposed to any expansion in its activity at all .
As I cannot support the draft amending budget for the above reasons , I have decided to vote against the report in its entirety .
in writing . - ( PT ) The first amendment to the Community Budget for 2008 includes mobilisation of the EU Solidarity Fund for an amount of approximately EUR 162.4 million in favour of the United Kingdom - having regard to the floods there in 2007 - as well as the introduction of new budget lines and transfers between budget lines , not affecting the total amounts of the overall budget .
The establishment plan of the European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union ( Frontex ) is increased by 25 posts , from 69 to 94 , having regard to the budgetary increase already made for that Agency - approximately EUR 30 million - approved during the debate on the 2008 Community budget .
That Agency 's action is gradually being consolidated and it is being given competences that lie at the heart of State sovereignty .
It is an Agency which , amongst other examples , lends support to ' Fortress Europe ' and immigration policy with the accent on security promoted by the EU .
The creation of a new heading ' Exceptional crisis expenditure ' also needs to be highlighted , although it is not clear what should be understood by ' crisis ' .
in writing . - ( PL ) Mr President , the first amending budget during implementation of the budget plan for 2008 covers the items grouped under the common heading of adjustments for ' unavoidable , exceptional or unforeseen circumstances ' .
Point 1 , to wit mobilisation of the Solidarity Fund for the benefit of Great Britain , which was affected by major storm and flood damage in the summer of last year , most definitely falls under this category .
The only comment to be made is that delays in mobilising funds arising from a belated application by the European Commission are becoming a dishonourable tradition .
Point 5 , proposing the creation of the budget article 27 01 11 : Exceptional crisis expenditure , to enable the financing of exceptional expenditure linked to a declared crisis , is of a similar nature .
The three remaining items , however , which have been dumped in the common bag of the amending budget , are of a different nature .
I share the rapporteur 's doubts concerning the financing of the Research Executive Agency and the ERCEA , and also the not wholly coherent conclusion on the creation of budget item 06 01 04 12 : Galileo Programme .
The Frontex modified establishment plan deserves to be accepted .
Analysis of the whole conclusion and relating to it in a suitable way are rendered problematic by the heterogeneous nature of the budget items contained in AM 1 / 2008 .
in writing . - ( SV ) Past experience shows that the EU does not manage disaster assistance well .
Junilistan thinks that grants from the fund can often reduce incentives to Member States to remedy the problems which lie behind the need for aid .
As regards the introduction of a budget item for expenditure in exceptional circumstances , Junilistan considers that this paper contrivance increases the impression that the EU is seeking to become a superpower with influence over everything that happens in the world .
Junilistan objects to this .
Frontex takes a step too far when it comes to coordinating the border controls and immigration policies of the Member States .
Junilistan is opposed to any expansion in its activity at all .
However , the report also states that resources should not for the present be moved from the operational to the administrative line of the Galileo allocation .
Added to this , the report supports the creation of a budgetary structure for the Research Executive Agency and the European Research Council Executive Agency .
I think that these questions are of considerable importance and have therefore voted for the report in its entirety , despite objections in principle to the other amendments proposed by the report .
in writing . - In Kyösti Virrankoski 's report ' Amending budget No1 / 2008 ' regarding the Solidarity Fund , we can see that the EU is prepared to put fresh money into the mobilisation of the Solidarity Fund in the UK .
I hope this is something that we will look to do for other Member States that are victims of natural disasters , such as Greece .
I voted in favour of this report .
in writing . - ( RO ) As a deputy elected in Romania , I praise the approval of the European Parliament 's draft resolution on the European Union Draft Amending Budget no .
1 / 2008 .
This budget amendment is relevant with respect to the amendment of the personnel chart of the European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union ( FRONTEX ) .
Romania represents the eastern outpost of the European Union and is the state in charge of the management of one of the widest external land borders of the Union .
In this capacity Romania must always support the enhancement of cooperation for better management of the borders and providing FRONTEX with sufficient means to carry out its activity , under the best conditions , be it financial means , personnel or equipment .
The drafting of the article " exceptional expenses in case of crisis ” is also much appreciated : we can never be too prepared for such undesired events .
in writing . - ( SV ) We have chosen to vote for the agreement because , unfortunately , the country is now so economically dependent on the fisheries agreement with the EU .
If the EU partnership agreement were to be terminated with immediate effect , that would have serious consequences for the country 's economy .
We take scientific reports showing that the seas are being fished out very seriously indeed .
Hence we do not see EU fisheries agreements as a viable means , in the long term , of combating poverty and supporting development .
We want to change the EU 's fisheries policy so that it leads to a recovery in fish stocks .
We also want to support sustainable development in those countries for which current fisheries agreements with the EU are a major source of income by making changes to the EU 's trade and aid policy and through various forms of partnership .
The vessel owners should be accountable for the costs arising under the agreements from which they themselves draw benefit , and we want to see continued change in that direction .
Hence we voted in favour of Amendment 8 , although that change should take place in a wider context .
Guinea-Bissau is one of Africa 's poorest countries .
We want to stress how important it is that the EU find other , longer-term and more sustainable ways of supporting Guinea-Bissau , since the fisheries agreement with the EU currently accounts for 30 % of the country 's GNP .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the report by Mr Capoulas Santos on the proposal for a Council regulation on the conclusion of the Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the European Community and the Republic of Guinea-Bissau as I think it is a balanced agreement ensuring the sustainability of fisheries and also the protection of the interests of both parties : the European Union and Guinea-Bissau .
I regard the amendments tabled by the rapporteur as an important contribution to the strengthening of the EU 's fisheries policy , insofar as they highlight the importance of enhancing Parliament 's role and the information supplied to it .
The Agreement between the EC and the Republic of Guinea-Bissau for the period from June 2007 to June 2011 , provides for the granting of 37 fishing licences , four of them for Portugal .
A total of 35 % of the EC financial contribution is allocated to the support of initiatives taken in the context of the sectoral fisheries policy drawn up by Guinea-Bissau .
The emphasis is placed upon improving the health and hygiene conditions of fishery products and the monitoring , control and surveillance of fishing activities .
That is a particularly important area for action , bearing in mind that , according to international bodies , fishery resources in that country have been noticeably affected due , amongst other things , to illegal , unregulated fishing .
The agreement also provides for the compulsory employment of local seamen , that is from Guinea-Bissau , in accordance with the vessel 's gross tonnage .
As in other agreements , the International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) Declaration will apply to those seamen .
Article 10 of the agreement also provides for the setting up of joint ventures between Community operators and Guinea-Bissau operators with a view to the joint exploitation of the resources .
That possibility is advantageous for Community vessels insofar as they will thus be exempt from the payment of licence fees .
in writing . - ( SV ) If the EU partnership agreement were to be terminated with immediate effect , that would have serious consequences for several developing countries and for the many people affected .
We cannot therefore simply say ' no ' to the agreements which the EU has with other countries on fishing .
However , we take scientific reports showing that the seas are being fished out very seriously indeed .
We therefore want to change the EU 's fisheries policy so that it will lead to a recovery in fishing stocks .
This must form part of a major review .
We do not see EU fisheries agreements as a viable means , in the long term , of combating poverty and supporting development .
We therefore want to support sustainable development in those countries for which current fisheries agreements with the EU are a major source of income by making changes to the EU 's trade and aid policy and through various forms of partnership .
The vessel owners should be accountable for the costs arising under the agreements from which they themselves draw benefit , and we want to see continued change in that direction .
We therefore voted for Amendment 8 , although that change should take place in a wider context .
in writing . - ( PT ) The main objective of the new partnership agreement between the EC and Côte d 'Ivoire is to strengthen cooperation between the two parties so as to create a partnership framework within which to develop a sustainable fisheries policy and the sound exploitation of living marine resources in Côte d 'Ivoire , special attention being given to supporting the fisheries policy of that state .
The two parties will agree on the priorities to be decided upon for such support and will identify the objectives , the annual and multiannual programming and the criteria to assess the results to be obtained , with a view to ensuring sustainable and responsible management of the sector .
The agreement respects the fundamental principles of the common fisheries policy and guarantees Portugal a fishing licence for five surface longliners .
Members of the Portuguese PSD ( Social Democratic Party ) therefore voted in favour of this report .
in writing . - ( PT ) This agreement provides for a total of 40 fishing licences to be allocated to EU Member State vessels - five of them to Portugal - for a period of six years from July 2007 .
Compared to the previous agreement , it represents a considerable reduction in fishing opportunities , but the agreement does provide for the possibility of increasing the catch .
The parties agreed that the EC financial contribution will be allocated in full to the support of initiatives taken in the context of the sectoral fisheries policy drawn up by Côte d 'Ivoire .
Shipowners benefiting from the agreement must employ at least 20 % ACP nationals among the seamen signed on .
The agreement provides for those seamen to be covered by the International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) Declaration on fundamental principles and rights at work .
That declaration provides for mandatory freedom of association and the effective recognition of the right to collective bargaining , and the elimination of discrimination in respect of employment and occupation .
The wages of the seamen will be fixed by mutual agreement between the shipowners and the seamen or their representatives , but may not be lower than the standards applied in their countries of origin , which might lead to a breach of the principle of ' equal pay for equal work ' .
in writing . - ( SV ) We have chosen to vote against the two partnership agreements on fishing between the EU and Guinea-Bissau and Côte d 'Ivoire , respectively .
The reason is that experience of this type of agreement is highly dubious .
Low-income countries are offered a lump sum payment and , in return , they open up their waters to commercial fishing by EU Member States , mainly in Southern Europe .
The resources transferred are ridiculously small in relation to the catches taken ; in addition , there is a clear risk of unsustainable fishing .
A further argument is that local inshore fishing is usually adversely affected .
We hope that it will be possible , within the context of the EU 's sustainable development strategy ( SDS ) , to assess these fishing agreements without delay and to replace them with schemes which are sustainable .
in writing . - ( SV ) We think that the proposal for a common speed limit on EU motorways may have a positive environmental effect in the sense that speed can be reduced in those Member States which do not have mandatory speed limits on their motorways .
However , it is important that no Member State be compelled to disregard subsidiarity by raising the speed limit on its roads .
It must always be possible for Member States to impose lower speed limits than the European standard .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the own-initiative report by my excellent Italian colleague Mr Albertini , which makes a number of recommendations to the players in this sector to improve a situation that is deteriorating because of growing demand for oil and diminishing oil reserves , increasingly congested towns and cities , and a negative impact on human health and climate change .
I support the three chosen areas for combining public policy : encouraging technological developments ( cars with emissions of 125 g CO2 / km maximum ) , developing market-based instruments ( Emissions Trading Scheme , tax incentives , charges / fares based on environmental impact , etc . ) and using flanking measures to enable means of transport and infrastructure to be used as efficiently as possible .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , transport undoubtedly has an impact on society 's socio-economic condition and , at the same time , it has direct implications for the environment .
Urban transport , in fact , generates 40 % of CO2 emissions and keeps Europe dependent on and ' hostage ' to the market in fossil fuels such as oil , which accounts for approximately 70 % of total demand .
These alarming data are enough to explain the urgency and necessity of shaping a new comprehensive strategy for transport in Europe that could actually be developed from this report .
Pollution caused by transport must be considerably reduced very quickly by placing restrictions on emissions of pollutants , altering the composition of fuel mixtures , and continuing to provide incentives for the purchase and use of environmentally-friendly and non-polluting forms of transport .
The EU will therefore have responsibility for implementing an integrated plan to achieve this important objective , by committing itself to providing incentives for rail transport which , where appropriate improvements are made , can guarantee a high level of efficiency with a low environmental impact .
The trans-European networks should be completed as soon as possible , and require greater financial support from the EU .
On the other hand , Member States must guarantee and watch over the completion of this construction work , except in cases where damage to the environment or to health is proven .
in writing . - ( PL ) Amendment 1 to the report on sustainable European transport policy tabled by the PPE-DE Group was a cause for justified concern - both for me and for the entire transport sphere .
This amendment is aimed at delaying a review of the Eurovignette Directive .
To accept this amendment would be to send a negative signal from the European Parliament and would contradict the report by the European Parliament 's Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety of 28 January 2008 .
This is why I voted against the amendment and against the entire content of the report .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of this report on sustainable transport policy .
It takes account of European energy and environment policies .
In the EU 70 % of demand for oil is attributable to the transport sector .
We need to put an end to our almost total dependence on fossil fuels by combining the various policies that encompass all modes of transport .
This approach should create the conditions essential for realism , such as technological innovation to reduce CO2 emissions from cars and the development of biofuels , the reform of the taxation system to take account of environmental impact , and accompanying measures to make better use of infrastructure and encourage citizens to change their habits .
Every citizen can be a player in sustainable transport by using public transport in preference to passenger cars , where this alternative is possible .
To make passenger and freight transport easier using low-emission modes of transport such as rail , river , sea and public transport , a range of new services , more competitive organisation of the sector and different ways of using certain infrastructure are needed simultaneously .
Since it is impossible to comment in this explanation of vote on all the important issues raised by this EP own initiative report , given its complexity and breadth , it is notable that the document does not address or incorrectly addresses aspects that researchers regard as essential in addressing issues of transport and energy and their impact on the environment .
For example :
there is no mention of high oil prices or to the consequences thereof ;
there is no mention of the use of methane in road transport ( in the form of CNG , LNG or biomethane ) ;
there is a lack of clarity on the use of hydrogen as an alternative fuel for road transport ;
the uncritical bias towards the use of biofuels , with their serious consequences that have already been widely demonstrated ;
there is no reference to documents such as the ' Target 2020 ' programme advocating the replacement by 2020 of approximately 20 % of the petrol and diesel consumed within the European transport sector .
Finally , I must point out that , in addition to listing problems already clearly identified , we need policies to respond effectively to those problems , such as challenging the current capitalist globalisation and the role of transport within that framework , in particular the increasing geographical distance between the point of production and the point of consumption , and the consequent rise in transport needs .
There is much more to be said on all of this ...
in writing . - I and my Fine Gael colleagues in the PPE-DE Group would like to confirm that we abstained in relation to Amendments 3 and 11 , and indeed the overall report , due to concerns over the issue of taxation and road charging .
We continue to feel that both of these issues are up to individual Member States to decide and therefore should not be included in a Parliament report .
in writing . - British Conservative MEPs voted in favour of Mr Albertini 's own-initiative report on Sustainable European Transport on the basis that it provides a clear policy framework that will increase efficiency and tackle transport 's burgeoning impact on climate change .
However , Conservatives remain concerned that the report 's call for further Commission proposals on internalising external costs should not begin until the impact assessment is fully completed , and the Parliament has properly debated the issue .
We are also keen to see that this policy option , if it is introduced , should be applied uniformly across all transport modes , so that no market distortion takes place .
in writing . - ( DE ) I am voting in favour of the harmonisation of transport , environmental and energy policy within the European Union , because only coordinated efforts in these three sectors can bring about a lasting improvement in each one individually .
With my vote I should like to support in particular the development of a generally applicable , transparent and sustainable model for evaluating the external costs of all modes of transport .
I am therefore voting against Amendment 1 which , in my opinion , is aimed at delaying the internalisation of internal costs for road traffic .
Acceptance of the amendment would hinder the EU 's efforts to achieve a sustainable transport policy and would furthermore create conditions for unfair competition between modes of transport .
Owing to the constantly increasing volume of traffic and the resulting ecological impact , intensive Europe-wide cooperation in the field of new technologies and alternative fuels should be strongly encouraged in order to stem greenhouse gas emissions and enhance the quality of life even in congested areas .
In this regard I am also calling for the average emissions for new vehicles to be reduced to 125g CO2 / km through technological improvements in the transport sector and the use of biofuels .
in writing . - I welcome the recommendations contained within Gabriele Albertini 's report on sustainable European transport policy .
Safe and affordable means of mobility should be a right afforded to all EU citizens .
Indeed , the sustainability of such transport is also a very pressing issue .
In encouraging technological innovation and market-based instruments , such as the Emissions Trading Scheme or tax incentives , particularly in large cities and environmentally sensitive areas , there is an opportunity to ensure that means of transport and infrastructure are used efficiently .
I support the call for increased investment in infrastructure and intelligent transport systems to tackle issues such as congestion .
I voted for the report 's recommendations .
in writing . - ( DE ) In order to detract from the fact that we are marking time despite innumerable action plans , car drivers are now to be driven to their bikes by congestion charges , vehicle tolls and the like , or politely asked to walk or make greater use of public transport .
We must , however , get something straight here : this is the result of badly coordinated , local public transport that has been economised to death , the boom in shopping centres on the edges of towns whilst local shops are in decline , the falling quality of living conditions in the inner city , the rising crime rate , neighbourhoods that are home to large numbers of foreigners turning into ghettoes and , last but not least , longer journey times to work owing to urban sprawl and greater flexibility in working hours and employment relationships and the associated role of the car as a prerequisite for gainful employment .
In these terms and in view of the fact that cars in themselves cause only around 10 % of particulate emissions , the EU is wanting , ' just ' wanting , here , to grab more competences for itself and set up futile monitoring systems .
It should instead be taking the bull by the horns itself and fighting causes instead of symptoms , by revising its policy on subsidies , for instance , so as not to abet the exploding volume of heavy goods vehicles any further , for which the proportion of emissions produced is much greater .
Piggy-back transport systems should finally become economically advantageous and the euphoria of privatisation should not be allowed to reduce public transport to an unattractive patchwork rug .
in writing . - ( PT ) Over the past decades the transport sector has successfully made substantial investments to enhance energy efficiency , and has brought onto the markets intelligent technology with environmental and security benefits .
Nevertheless , these efforts do not appear to be sufficient , since the parallel constantly increasing demand in this sector almost cancels them out .
We therefore need to take a fresh look at this difficult equation so as to enable us to respond to the challenge .
The transport sector is a dynamic economic sector ; it is technologically advanced and ever more competitive .
Industry has made extensive investments in research and development in close consultation with institutional and private partners .
Greater coordination is , however , necessary for us to draw all the added value from our efforts .
Specific action in terms of informing citizens and raising their awareness , including as far as their behaviour is concerned , is essential .
Moreover , we should be pursuing collaboration and coordination regarding progress in the field of fuel efficiency , investment regulation , stimulating a dynamic market for safer and less polluting vehicles and supporting technological innovation .

in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of the excellent report by my fellow Member Mr Albertini on sustainable European transport policy , taking into account European energy and environment policies .
I believe it is of fundamental importance for the EU to coordinate its policies to develop urban public transport and alternative transport systems while protecting the environment and reducing greenhouse gas emissions .
As regards infrastructure , I note that the emphasis is continuing to be placed on road transport projects at the expense of rail projects .
Completion of the trans-European networks still seems a remote prospect , and the EU 's contribution is minimal compared to the burden to be shouldered by Member States individually .
In order to reduce gas emissions and improve the efficiency of freight and passenger transport , I would also stress the need for the EU to provide financial support for the implementation of priority projects in the framework of the trans-European networks .
in writing . - ( DE ) The Albertini report states that better internalisation of external costs can help to eliminate market disturbances and an increase in emissions .
I therefore voted against Amendment 1 because its aim is to delay the internalisation of external costs for road traffic .
This is the wrong signal , since road traffic is primarily responsible for emissions from the transport sector .
I hope that the review of the Infrastructure Charging Directive announced by the Commission will bring rapid progress in this sector .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 12.55 and resumed at 15.00 )

Agenda : see Minutes
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Common organisation of agricultural markets and specific provisions for certain agricultural products as regards the national quotas for milk ( debate )
The next item is the report by Elisabeth Jeggle , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1234 / 2007 establishing a common organisation of agricultural markets and on specific provisions for certain agricultural products ( single CMO Regulation ) as regards the national quotas for milk - C6-0015 / 2008 - .
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) Let me first say that the Presidency welcomes the report by Mrs Jeggle on the proposal to increase the milk quota and is of the opinion that it is a constructive and balanced contribution to the debate that has been running for more than a few weeks now .
Based on the favourable market conditions , the European Commission has proposed in its report , or analysis , a 2 % increase in national milk quotas starting with the next quota year , that is to say on 1 April 2008 .
Milk quotas are not simply a matter of percentages ; they are a wider issue linked to the review of the common agricultural policy .
That is why the Council did not restrict itself to this issue but entered into a wider , simultaneous debate on the overall package of the common agricultural policy health check .
I must say that there were some very similar thoughts or doubts about this proposal in the Council and Parliament .
For example , there were calls for more anticipation and stability in the milk sector .
There was concern about areas with less favourable farming potential where there are few alternatives to traditional dairy production .
On the other hand , there were resolute calls to enable European farmers to take advantage of the opportunities offered by the developing international and European markets .
Despite the complexity of this problem , we are convinced that we can find balanced answers and solutions to it within the framework of the common agricultural policy health check .
I would like to add here that the Council supports Parliament in the suggestion that the Commission prepare a general , long-term strategy , that is to say a proposal for a strategy , for the European dairy sector .
We think that the essential part of that strategy should be a so-called soft transition to the elimination of milk quotas , which would secure an unhindered transition to a more market-orientated dairy policy and predictability in this sector .
To this end the Council intends to call on the Commission to study all the appropriate means of achieving this .
However , we think that the Commission 's proposal for a 2 % increase in the quota for the next quota year should be treated as part of a package and that the other parts should be appropriately debated within the common agricultural policy health check .
I would also like to add that the proposal will be on the agenda for the session of the Agriculture and Fisheries Council that is to take place next week .
I hope it will be adopted .
So , if the conditions are satisfied , implementation will begin in the present quota year , that is to say 2008 .
Finally , allow me to thank everyone who contributed to the debate on this report , above all the rapporteur .
In our opinion it is a balanced and well-founded observation .
Thank you for your efforts .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I think it is a very good signal from the Presidency that the Minister for Agriculture is present here today to participate in this very important discussion .
I shall start my speech in the traditional way , by thanking the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and especially the rapporteur for the very constructive report on the proposal to increase the milk quota system by 2 % , as was stated by the Minister , for the coming milk year starting on 1 April 2008 .
Many people have pushed the Commission to alleviate the very tight dairy situation .
In the Council , a large majority of Member States invited the Commission to put a proposal on the table on increasing quotas .
A resolution here in the European Parliament , adopted in October 2007 , on rising food prices also called on the Commission , as a matter of urgency , to propose a temporary increase in milk quotas .
In December 2007 the Commission presented a market outlook report that showed that there clearly is , and will be in the future , a growing demand for dairy products .
Your report also confirms that we should increase the possibilities for producing more milk .
I think everybody would agree that the Commission 's proposal is fairly prudent and clear , with a predictable and equal outcome for all the Member States .
May I respectfully suggest that your amendments seem not to pay full attention to the need for predictability and equal treatment for farmers ?
The amendment to make the increase of 2 % voluntary for Member States , if applied , would be likely to create some difficulties .
Firstly , I think we would all agree that we are looking for more market orientation and higher productivity .
Therefore , I personally feel that the producer should be given the choice of whether or not to produce more milk .
I think we would also agree that dairy farmers need predictability - certainty about their production possibilities within the quota system - and I do not think that a voluntary system would contribute to this .
As a solution , Member States have the opportunity to decide not to distribute the quota but to keep it in the national reserve .
This is a possibility , although I would push the Member States and I would be happy to see the quota distributed , because I think it is the most proper way .
The amendment to use balancing-out of the quota at the end of the quota year is not a new idea .
In fact , it is something that the Commission has been looking closely into , since such a theory could facilitate the use in some Member States of the unused quota in other Member States .
But I think we would also agree that theory is one thing and practice is another .
Firstly , I think it clearly introduces uncertainty for milk producers .
They would then have to make their best guess of how the situation would look at the end of the production year and , on that basis , try to make a choice for their production , and only the following year would they know whether that production was levy free or not .
I think , with all respect , this is not to the advantage of the decision taken on the dairy farm .
It is obvious that milk production implies heavy investment , and we owe it to our farmers to have a predictable system until the quotas disappear in 2015 .
Secondly , who would benefit from this ?
I do not have to point out that it would largely benefit only a small group of Member States .
This already makes it politically difficult .
The most important thing is that it will benefit those producers who have already exceeded their quotas - those who have produced too much - and not those who have tried to keep within the limits of the quota system .
So there is no certainty that this would lead to more milk being available on the market .
Thirdly , in my view , this also goes against the idea of simplifying the common agricultural policy .
I fear that implementing rules in this area would be extremely complex , and I am not in favour of making our system more complicated in a situation where there are only seven years left of the lifetime of this quota system .
All in all , I note with pleasure that we all agree on the necessity for increasing the possibilities for the dairy sector in Europe to increase its production .
It is an extremely important political signal to me and to all the Member States that the Agriculture Committee unanimously chose this line after the very divided opinions at the beginning of this discussion .
I therefore send my biggest congratulations to the rapporteur for that achievement .
I hope I will have the same rate of success in the Council .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , as already stated , the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has unanimously rejected the Commission 's proposal to increase the quotas for the coming milk year by 2 % .
This would amount to 2.8 million tonnes .
We consider this proposal to be too rigid , too inflexible , and it is the wrong signal in the current situation , particularly for the markets .
Based on the rulings of 2003 , there will be a 0.5 % increase in quotas for 11 Member States anyway on 1 April this year - the equivalent of 700 000 tonnes more milk in the European Union .
The intensive debates with my colleagues in the Committee on Agriculture have shown that there will be no panacea , nor any comfortable way to conduct further debates .
There are widely differing opinions and all positions , from the general and fundamental rejection of any increase in quotas up to and including a 5 % increase , were represented .
We nevertheless managed to find a compromise that took account of the positions of all the groups , and this was unanimously accepted with no dissenting votes or abstentions .
My heartfelt thanks go to all my fellow Members for their constructive cooperation .
The agreed compromise has two focal points .
Commissioner , you have said as much .
I have a different opinion on this .
Firstly , the establishment of a European balancing mechanism , by which under- or over-shooting of the existing national quotas can be compensated at EU level .
This would not be very bureaucratic and would result in producers who exceed their quotas being penalised only after balancing .
Secondly , as from 1 April , the Member States can decide to raise national quotas voluntarily for the 2008 / 2009 quota year .
We want flexibility , not rigidity !
This compromise means that the quotas that already exist will be used more efficiently .
For Member States with greater potential , there is also the opportunity to use this European quota framework along the lines of a common European internal market system .
Commissioner , you always stress that the existing milk quota will expire in this system in 2015 .
A linear increase in quotas alone will not , however , create the soft landing you promise .
Just think back , if you will , to the old milk lakes !
The Committee on Agriculture has therefore unequivocally been arguing , as it has done already in the mini milk package , in favour of setting up a milk fund in order to achieve savings in costs resulting from the reforms explicitly for the milk sector .
In our view such forward-looking promotion and preservation of the entire sector can be made possible only in this way .
In particular this instrument should be used for dairy farmers in disadvantaged areas and in areas completely given over to grazing land and pasture .
I would therefore ask you , Commissioner , to include this request by the European Parliament in tangible terms in your legislative health check proposal .
In our view the application of Article 69 is insufficient because it is not clearly defined in terms of practical measures , particularly for the sector already mentioned .
It is also pure cynicism when a high-ranking Commission official announces to a gathering of farmers that they should not be complaining about producer prices already effectively falling again , since they had already been making do with 27 cents per litre of milk .
This is contempt for the legitimate interests of an entire profession , which I , as a Member of a Parliament , having taken up the cause of democracy at the highest level , do not accept !
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , I am sure that an increase in milk quotas in the 2008 / 2009 quota year will not threaten the stability of the EU milk market , and there will not be a significant fall in milk prices .
We would have expected a greater increase , but on hearing the arguments put forward by Mrs Jeggle and other MEPs we supported the package of compromise amendments that talks of a voluntary increase of just 2 % .
It transpires from information in the press that the Commissioner supports proposals for an annual increase in quotas of only 1 % from 2010 as part of what is called the soft landing .
This is rather a conservative approach , although the Commissioner is reportedly a liberal - but let us get down to business .
On the one hand low quotas limit the development of the EU milk industry by lowering its competitiveness and export potential .
On the other hand this is a guarantee of stable income for our farmers .
We shall continue to discuss the choice of the best solution in the future .
( The President cut off the speaker )

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , the truth is that the extremely low prices that were paid to European milk producers for years caused major damage to the sector . They caused large-scale abandonment of the sector , especially in some regions such as my own , Galicia , and another of their consequences was that there were huge reductions in the strategic reserves of milk , which is a basic necessity .
I would like to say that , since 2007 , the market has been developing positively , and in fact this is giving producers some respite , and even enabling them to invest in their farms , which was unthinkable until now .
There are two pieces of good news in this respect , according to the Commission 's own report : positive prospects for the future mean that additional amounts of milk are required from the market , therefore a 2 % increase is proposed for this year .
I have been in agreement with this proposal from the start , Commissioner .
I have been in agreement with this proposal and I have tried to work alongside the rapporteur , Mrs Jeggle , precisely because it is clear that there was some reticence and that there were some members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development who did not think that this proposal from the Commission should be supported .
However , from my perspective and as I understand it , Parliament should not , as you said , be curbing those producers who decided to respond positively to the demands of the market .
It was therefore I who proposed , in agreement with Mrs Jeggle , to make this measure voluntary .
As Mrs Jeggle has already said , the report was adopted unanimously in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
Although it is true , as the rapporteur said , that there is underusage of the quota at EU level , this underusage is by no means equally distributed between all the Member States , nor is the production deficit as against theoretical consumption .
Just consider that in my country , Spain , the production allocated to us is 6.1 million tonnes and our theoretical consumption is 9 million tonnes .
Spain therefore has , it has to be said , almost the largest deficit per inhabitant per year in the whole of the European Union .
Therefore , in Mr Goepel 's report , we have asked for this adjustment of the quota to be done in future , not by means of a linear increase , as in the proposal that you are putting forward now , but rather based on the gap that exists between the current structure and the structure that the sector should have , as you say , in order to be competitive and face up to the market alone .
In this respect , Commissioner , I would like to ask you whether you are considering the possibility , in relation to the adjustment mechanisms or soft landing , of designing individual models for each Member State .
I would like to make it very clear that I think that milk production should be preserved right across Europe .
With regard to quotas , before saying that we are now going to abandon them and that they are going to disappear , we need to think about their socio-economic role of protecting many fragile economies .
In many areas milk production is , as you know , the only agricultural option , therefore this system has helped ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DA ) Mr President , Commissioner , President-in-Office , the rapporteur , Mrs Jeggle , has again produced an excellent piece of work , for which I should like to thank her .
European milk producers are currently facing great challenges on account of the soaring demand for dairy products from the Far East , in particular .
This is a very positive problem .
At the same time , the production economy is being undermined by soaring feed prices , as the EU is preventing the import of feed , which our competitor countries need .
In order to survive we need to give permission for quota increases now .
Otherwise , if we wait until 2015 , when quotas are hopefully to be abolished , we shall miss a unique opportunity for the European dairy industry .
My group wants to see the liberalisation of milk production in Europe by means of market economy and free competition , and the quota system is at odds with this .
Increasing production by at least 2 % and reassessing at a later stage whether further quota increases are needed will support and maintain strong , forward-looking milk production in Europe and create a smooth transition to the abolition of the quota system , which was introduced in 1983 - incidentally as a transitional arrangement - owing to the development of whole milk powder and butter mountains .
Fortunately , these no longer exist - now the market wants more milk products .
Let us give European milk producers the opportunity to provide these .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I shall be no exception in congratulating our rapporteur on a solid piece of work , which I think is best viewed as part of a wider picture of how we ensure long-term stability for Europe 's farmers and growers .
I have two points to make .
We accept and we welcome the proposals from the Commission for quotas to be done away with by 2015 .
We would , however , like to see a system of production controls , and we disagree with the point in the report that there should be a voluntary opt-in mechanism for the Member States .
We in the UK in particular have seen voluntary modulation which , of course , is not voluntary at all for the farmers who are stuck with it , and we disagree with that principle .
We do not believe that asymmetric deregulation makes sense .
In the longer term as well , I would stress to our Commission colleagues that one of the major points , as we see a much more liberal and much freer market in milk products , will be the impact of competition law on how farmers , in particular , have to deal with long-term private contracts and the abuse of certain producers and purchasers , in particular , within the milk market .
But , on the whole , this is a solid piece of work and we are happy to broadly support it .
( BG ) The condition of dairy production in Bulgaria is an example that there is something wrong in the economic system of the European Union .
The increase of the quotas is of little relevance since 30 % of the cows in Bulgaria have died of starvation for the first year of the EU membership alone .
This is due to the huge inflation rates brought about by the EU , as well as the new regulations , quotas , and higher prices of feeds and fuels .
How much more time will have to pass ?
Perhaps it will be some two years before the country that is the homeland of the yoghurt , the homeland of Lactobacillus bulgaricum , remains without a single living cow thanks to the EU .
Mr President , first of all I welcome the recommendation that the rapporteur has put before us here today of 2 % for the 12 months as a voluntary measure .
I think it is a measured position to take .
I am opposed to opening the floodgates on production as this , I believe , would solve nothing .
Let us see how the market develops over the next 12 months .
Then we can come back next year , re-visit the situation and take a much broader view .
Everyone talks about a ' soft landing ' for quotas but no one can tell me what that soft landing will be .
It is a word that we use - the President-in-Office has used it and the Commissioner has used it - but what are we really talking about here when we hit 2013 ?
I know that it is a long way away , but there are many dairy farmers out there at the moment who are really wondering what the situation is going to be as we lead into that time ?
So , while the returns for the dairy sector have changed dramatically during 2007 , we cannot guarantee that this will continue forever .
Let us be very honest about it .
It was not what the Commission did .
It was not what we , the politicians , did .
It was not what any national government did or even the dairy sector did .
It was market forces in the world that drove market price up and that is exactly what happened .
Cereal prices have been driving the price up .
But we have also got to understand that , coming into the next 12 months , the cost of cereals , the cost of fertiliser , the high cost of energy , the forage cost this summer , is going to mean that lots of the extra money that has gone to the dairy sector will in actual fact be absorbed in these extra costs .
So let us not get carried away in believing that everything is so rosy and everything is wonderful in the dairy sector - because it is not .
The extra 2 % will produce a substantial amount .
But I do agree with the Commissioner - let us not make the situation more complicated .
Let us make it easier for the producer .
The milk and dairy farming sector , regardless of where you are in Europe , is the backbone of the small family farm structure , and we must support it .
( HU ) Mr President , Commissioner Fischer Boel , the 2 % milk quota increase proposed in the report affects numerous Member States .
Hungary is not affected by this , since it uses only 70 % of its milk quota allocation , but we are nevertheless in solidarity with Member States such as Poland and others which need to increase their milk quota .
In addition to the quota increase , we must prepare for the abolition of the milk quota regime altogether in 2015 , as the Commissioner proposes , and so we need to devise support mechanisms that will provide real help in promoting quality milk production .
A particular problem in some countries is the lag in technical and technological development .
It would therefore be good if Community resources could be used to foster technological development in countries such as Hungary or other new Member States that have not been able to use their entire quota allocation .
When increasing the quota , it is also important to develop innovation in the agricultural sector .
The increase in fodder crop prices is a problem , and there is a particular problem that neither Commissioner Fischer Boel nor anyone else can do anything about , namely that in Hungary the dairy processing industry is unfortunately not owned by the milk producers , and this puts them at an enormous competitive disadvantage . Thank you for your attention .
( DA ) Mr President , as the Commissioner knows , the general debate in Denmark is very unfavourable towards agricultural subsidies .
We are very much aware that , if it is attractive to produce milk in Europe , this can be attributed in great part to artificially high prices and the restriction of competition from third countries .
The conditions resulted in overproduction , which we have endeavoured to ration via quotas .
I shall not go into all of the misfortune this has entailed , but merely point out that , if the Commission wants to increase quotas to take into account the growing demand , this is of course insufficient .
Quotas must be abolished completely , and the distortions in the market must be eliminated .
Therefore , there must be a thorough reform of the common agricultural policy , with payment by surface area being phased out much more quickly than is the case at present .
The market must be liberalised properly , and this should be the main objective of the reform .
In addition , we can examine the possibilities for continuing support to selected small areas where there are good arguments for milk production despite the economic conditions .
Liberalisation must form part of the EU 's agricultural policy : a policy that incorporates environmental sustainability into the general market conditions and ensures free access to EU markets under fair conditions for developing countries .
There is still a long way to go before we can take pride in the EU 's agricultural policy .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , President-in-Office , I should also like to thank Elisabeth Jeggle for having worked so ably on the report .
The present quota system has been agreed up to 2015 .
It will therefore remain in force for a further seven years and a few days , to be exact .
I think it is wrong , Commissioner , to raise the milk quota now by 2 % .
I would have understood completely if the quota had been raised by 2 % for the new Member States because consumption of milk products there is way below the EU average .
Commissioner , however much I may respect you , I think the Commission 's proposals are wrong .
Over the last few months our dairy farmers have been obtaining a fair milk price for the first time in many years .
Our dairy farmers , who milk their cows morning and evening , 365 days a year - 366 days this year - deserve to earn a better income than has been the case in recent years .
Increasing the quota now therefore means that milk prices will be put under enormous pressure and they are already under pressure without any increase .
We talk here of a soft landing , which for me means pulling the wool over the milk producers ' eyes .
There will be no soft landing ; there will be a rough landing when it is realised what the Commission has in mind as regards quotas .
I believe the Hoelgaards and Rasmussens in the Commission , who would like to see a sudden fall in milk prices , must be stopped .
You should not let them get away with this .
Even without any increase we have problems and we must try to counteract this here .
The Bavarian CSU Members will be voting against the report tomorrow because they are against the increase .
This is not directed against Elisabeth Jeggle , but against the increase in quotas .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to begin by thanking my fellow Member Mrs Jeggle for the enormous amount of work she has spent on drawing up this report .
What we are discussing today I presented three years ago when I first started my work in the European Parliament .
For three years we have been saying how necessary it is to increase milk quotas in the new Member States and in the European Union , to even out the unfair and disproportionate split in these quotas between the individual countries , to increase production , and primarily export , and above all to cease penalising those farmers who want to increase production and who want to produce good European milk .
The essential arguments confirming my stance of three years ago are also to be found in the Report from the Commission to the Council ' Market Outlook for the Dairy Sector ' , which announces the continuation of positive trends in the world milk market .
Milk quotas allocated to individual countries are not being fully taken up .
On the other hand a 2 % increase in quotas does not necessarily imply the same increase in milk production in all regions .
More and more farms in the EU are moving away from milk production , considering it to be too labour-intensive .
Consequently in all those countries that wish to produce it we should increase the quota by 5 % rather than 2 % , particularly in view of the fact that there will be an increase in the number of customers worldwide and , especially in Asia , an increase in demand for excellent European dairy products .
( DE ) Mr President , opinions are divided on milk quotas .
We have also seen this within our Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , which has nevertheless accepted a unanimously agreed compromise .
If the European Parliament therefore wants to send out a signal to the Commission and the Council of Ministers , it should also be aware , however , that the farmers and their representatives are still divided .
Some are fully able to accept an increase in quotas of 2 % or more and therefore a soft landing prior to the total abolition of quotas .
They want growth opportunities through better use of their production potential , because the market opportunities in the EU and on the world market as a result of constantly rising demand are very attractive .
Others fear a slump in production prices , which have only recently become fairer , if greater quantities of milk are produced .
Opinions are also divided on the European balancing out proposed by the Committee on Agriculture .
Does this not now mean abandoning the national milk quota system when there is an undersupply of 3 million tonnes across Europe ?
Would the target not be reached too by reducing the superlevy and increasing the dairy quotas ?
Which dairy farmer has the courage to play poker in the countries where - as in Luxembourg - the superlevy for 2006-2007 will once again be falling due by overshooting the quotas ?
Because a voluntary 2 % increase in milk quotas for the 2008-2009 milk year is part of the compromise , I am able to support it .
I am particularly pleased with our report 's request to set up a milk fund restructuring programme .
I think it is extremely important that an analysis of the economic , social and ecological effects of increasing the milk quotas and a report on consumer behaviour will shortly be demanded that expressly calls for consideration of the particular factors of milk production in disadvantaged regions such as Luxembourg , with difficult production conditions .
The money planned for the milk sector must continue .
It must also be clarified that producer prices , which are fairer in the long run , are only marginally to blame for higher prices for food .
Distributors and the dominant food chains are continually counting their blessings here .
( EL ) Mr President , I would like to begin by thanking and congratulating Mrs Jeggle and all the coordinators who have really tried to achieve a balance in the particularly sensitive area of milk quotas - a policy that European stock breeders and farmers expect to bring far-reaching , radical changes .
Commissioner , it is particularly encouraging that , when faced with a change in dairy product supply and demand , the Commission responded by amending one of the key regulations and increased the national quotas by 2 % for the period 2007-2008 .
I should like to point out that it is acceptable for the Commission to show this kind of flexibility in matters of developing the market for agricultural produce , particularly foods , especially during a period when the stock-breeding sector is facing viability issues owing to the crisis on the international market .
However , it is also a matter of principle that such a crisis cannot be resolved by the same measures and policies for all types and sizes of stock-breeding operation .
For this reason , I stress that within the scope of their discussions the Commission and the Council must re-examine the question of fat content , in order to prevent distortion of competition at the expense of countries for which a low fat content has been stipulated .
( RO ) First , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur for her work and efforts made in finding a compromise in this extremely delicate matter .
In my capacity as a European deputy from a new Member State I consider beneficial the increase of 2 % , even though we wanted a significantly higher percentage , especially for the Member States with both low milk quotas and unused production potential .
The increase in national milk quotas is not a threat to the stability of the milk market .
I would like to point out the fact that an increase of the quotas by 2 % represents -in fact- an actual increase in milk production at community level by only 0.8 % .
I also believe that we need to maintain the current quota system to stimulate the consolidation of the existing farms and to stimulate new ones .
The term used in relation to the quotas from the perspective of common agricultural policy reform is " smooth landing ” , meaning a gradual elimination of quotas .
The new Member States , mainly Romania and Bulgaria , which joined the Union on 1 January 2007 and which , if I am to use the same language , " took off ” abruptly , will be facing difficulties in adapting the " takeoff ” procedures to those of a smooth " landing ” .
If this proposal had not been accepted , the quota assigned to Romania would have run out , like in 2007 , in mid-year , which in fact does not stimulate but rather completely discourages the development projects of our farmers .
I hope that the vote in plenary session for this report be as firm as the vote in the Committee on Agriculture .
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate Mrs Jeggle on her excellent report and all the hard work that went into it .
There is no doubt that the European Union needs to respond appropriately to the growing global demand that is prompting a significant increase in the milk quota .
The proposed 2 % quota increase , scheduled to take effect in every Member State at the beginning of April 2008 , will perhaps help this sector within the European Union to take advantage of the opportunity offered by global demand .
Nevertheless , we need to resolve the issue of milk quotas without creating another problem in the process .
I would like to emphasise that as well as meeting genuine market demand and expanding the range of products on offer , we must help to improve the already difficult situation of producers .
This is why we must ensure that appropriate weight is given to the social and environmental impact of the quota increase , and its impact on production , especially as regards supporting producers in less favoured regions .
Ensuring that the price is appropriate for producers and consumers alike is indispensible for internal market mechanisms .
In view of the fact that the quota system will be abolished after 2015 , we must start to think now about how to help producers make their businesses efficient and profitable . Thank you for your attention .
( HU ) Thank you .
Increasing the milk quotas in the current market climate is rash and risky for two reasons .
On the one hand , the market outlook is nowhere near as favourable as the European Commission supposes .
Recent developments demonstrate clearly the risks involved in raising the quota .
Consumers in Europe and beyond have responded sensitively to the increase in prices of dairy products .
In a number of countries consumption has decreased by 10-30 % , and imports of milk powder from China have decreased .
As a result , the purchase price of milk in Hungary , for example , has fallen by 10-20 % in the past few weeks .
The prime reason for all this may be that , while prices of other foods have risen , meat prices have not so far followed suit , with the result that consumers are meeting their protein requirements by consuming meat rather than increasingly expensive dairy products .
At the same time , in many Member States a significant proportion of the milk quota is unutilised .
Increasing the quota would impede producers in these Member States from using the opportunities available to them ; indeed , for these countries a quota increase could actually result in a drop in production because producers in Member States that are using their quota will buy up the livestock they need to increase milk production from these countries .
For the time being , therefore , there is no need to increase the quota .
Let us wait and see what happens .
If the price rise and increase in demand persist in the long term , then we should revisit this issue .
( SK ) The figures for the 2006 / 07 quota year show an under-usage of 1.9 million tonnes of milk at EU level , with 18 out of 27 Member States producing below their national quotas .
The European Commission is expecting for the 2007 / 08 quota year an under-usage of 3 million tonnes of milk .
The issue of an additional 2 % quota increase is , on the other hand , debatable .
I agree with the view that all the options should be considered based on their applicability , with emphasis on their economic , social , regional and budget impact .
In my opinion , the new Member States should receive bigger subsidies , set at 2 % as proposed , in order not to be discriminated against because of their past , as we are all aware of the higher demand as well as the higher prices .
( PL ) Mr President , my fellow Member Mrs Jeggle has put forward a good proposal for increasing milk quotas .
The case for increasing them and for creating a system of balancing out at EU level is also supported both by the situation on the milk market and by dairy farmers .
In view of this situation , questions must be asked . Why has the European Commission been so slow to react to the need to increase milk quotas ?
Is it planning to secure the interests and existence of EU producers by setting a minimum price for milk at a level that guarantees a profit for all EU producers and puts an end to purchases below the cost of production ?
Does the Commission envisage an evening out of the imbalance in milk production between the old and the new Member States ?
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , two weeks ago , four and a half thousand dairy farmers descended on Brussels from all corners of Europe .
They joined forces to form a European Milk Board and are now demanding fair prices .
This has already had a considerable impact in Germany .
We have producer prices that were around 40 % and are now coming under some pressure again .
Dairy farmers are therefore demanding a volume-based market policy .
If this development were to grow , if it were to influence agricultural policy , can you imagine that a Commission in the year 2015 would be able politically to resist the demands of this movement to increase or again apply the dairy quota system in a flexible manner ?
Mr President , I share the concern of many in this House about a definitive increase in milk quotas .
I think the point we have arrived at requires the asking of fundamental questions , which includes the fact that , if we have a prevailing underproduction and sub-quota situation in Europe , then what really is the underlying justification for increasing quotas ?
This year , we expect three million tonnes ' under-usage , so what is the great rush in this regard ?
Secondly , in terms of the much talked-of soft landing , we need to have particular regard for those regions which have built their structure and their strategy supplying other regions which are currently limited in their production - regions such as my own constituency , which supplies across the border to the Republic of Ireland .
In terms of a soft landing , we need to find a long-term strategy and alternative outlets for regions such as this .
Mr President , I am wondering what producers who might be listening to this debate would think - it is so complex .
I congratulate Ms Jeggle for miraculous work in getting consensus .
However , those of you who have flown into the storms this week know that a soft landing depends on which way the wind is blowing and none of us know which way the wind will be blowing in a few years ' time .
I would think that giving a 2 % increase in quota - and the voluntary bit in my view does not rest with the Member States , it is the producers who decide whether to take it or not - will allow us to test the market , and we need to do that .
2 % is not a massive increase for individual producers .
As for the concerns - and perhaps the Commissioner has thought too deeply about the balancing mechanism - you are heavily taxing producers who can produce while at the same time Member States do not want to produce .
We have had this argument already from other colleagues , so we need to do something about it .
Lastly , the WTO deal might make ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , I would like to thank Ms Jeggle very much for getting a difficult report together .
Can I just quickly say that ' faint heart never won fair maiden ' , and I think we need to be much bolder here .
Milk quotas are like a pressure cooker : you cannot keep the pressure on right to the end and then take it off , because it just bursts .
I am quite clear what a soft landing means , and that is to increase quotas significantly before we get to 2015 , so I very much welcome this 2 % .
I would say to the Commission and to the Council that we should be much bolder when we get to 2010 .
Let us not look just to 1 % , let us look to 2 % and make sure that we do have a genuine soft landing for milk quotas .
Young farmers and new entrants have all been restricted over the years .
Now is our opportunity to give them this production .
At last milk trade is increasing in the world ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( DE ) Mr President , milk is a highly sensitive product and I should like to thank Mrs Jeggle most sincerely for an effective compromise .
I particularly welcome the voluntary increase in milk quotas in the Member States .
I should like to point out the following , however . Anyone who continually cites the price of food as justification for an increase in quotas or overproduction completely overlooks the fact that dairy farmers do not receive even 30 % of the sale price in the shops .
I believe we ought to be discussing this .
It is also essential that milk production can continue in mountainous regions and disadvantaged areas because it is often the only form of production taking place there .
We need a special programme here .
( NL ) I shall skip the words of thanks and move on to saying that I welcome the proposal to increase the quota by 2 % .
Personally , I would have preferred 3 % , as the European Commission itself admits that 2 % amounts to a mere 1 % in practice , as not all countries make full use of their quotas , but I shall in any case support Mrs Jeggle 's compromise of 2 % .
To the European Commission I would say that this is not before time , as we were overtaken on the world market by New Zealand back in 2006 .
Demand increased , so there was scope for exploiting opportunities , but we could not exploit them as we were constrained by the quota system .
This system had a role to play when there was overproduction but , now that demand has increased , we should develop another system that enables us to exploit those market opportunities .
In this context , I also think it a shame that the Health Check is evidently now looking at four 1 % increases .
In my opinion , a real soft landing requires more of an increase than 1 % .
Let us have the courage to do that .
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) I would first like to thank all those present at the debate .
As always in Parliament , it was very complex and rich and highlighted all the problems and differences that exist among the Member States .
I would like to stress that the Presidency , and of course the European Parliament , undoubtedly gave this proposal enough time to be looked at from all sides .
If the conditions for adoption of this proposal are satisfied , taking into account the opinion of the European Parliament , this 2 % increase will be used as from the next quota year , that is to say from 1 April 2008 .
However , I would like to emphasise that this will not end the debate on the future of the dairy sector in the European Union .
Without doubt , it will continue in great depth within the framework of the so-called common agricultural policy health check .
I can guarantee here that the Presidency is firm in its decision to lead this debate and to reach our common goal , that is to say - and this has my assurance - a balanced long-term strategy for the European dairy sector .
Thank you again for taking part in this debate and my special thanks to the rapporteur .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I think that , after the discussion here today , we can all agree that dairy production is still a very important part of our common agricultural policy .
It seems to me that today you could pick and choose between different opinions , covering the whole range from zero up to more than we have suggested in our proposal .
I think it has also shown the diversity that can be seen in different Member States , and that is perhaps a reason , in response to Mr Parish 's remarks , for not being bold enough .
But at the end of the day we need to find a compromise between the various opinions .
I would just like to make a few comments on some of the issues that have been raised .
On this increase in quota , it is voluntary for Member States either to distribute it to the producers or to keep it in the national reserve . My clear preference will be to distribute it .
Member States can give special preference to young farmers and those who are suffering as a result of the prices that they have to pay for the quotas .
I think that , if we want to introduce an increase as from 1 April , we need to do so with a fixed percentage in all Member States .
If we now start to discuss special figures or increased percentages for different Member States , there will be a battle that will go on for months .
So let us agree that what we are discussing now is a 2 % across-the-board increase .
I actually do not think that we are so fundamentally divided in our opinions on where to go .
I think we can define our goal , but there may be some differences of opinion between the Commission and Parliament on how to get there .
I think we can all agree that we should not put the sector at risk .
This is exactly why I have proposed this soft landing .
A ' soft landing ' actually means that we increase the quotas over the years and maintain a situation where , at the end of the quota system , in 2015 , we do not see a very steep drop in prices overnight , which would be the result if we did nothing .
I therefore think we have chosen a proper and acceptable approach .
I do not underestimate that there may be regions in Europe - mountainous regions , vulnerable regions - where a total abolition of the quota system could put the continuation of milk production at risk .
Therefore , we will be prepared to look , during the health check , at solutions to help those regions .
I think the most proper tool is Article 69 , a possibility for Member States to top-slice the direct payment to the farmers and use it for specific areas .
I do not consider the idea of setting up a milk fund for restructuring to be a solution .
Where do we get the money from ?
How much money do we get ?
How do we distribute the money between the different Member States ?
I think there are so many unanswered questions concerning this fund , and we have limited money .
We would have to take it from our own budget , and then other producers within the agricultural sector would have to pay for this restructuring fund .
So I do not think it would work .
In my opinion , the main reason for increasing milk production is the fact that we have emerging markets in Asia .
Why should we not take our share of those growing markets ?
We know how difficult it is when others already have a foot in the door and we come afterwards and try to get our share .
We should be there from the very beginning with our high quality products .
Those dairy producers - dairies , industries that are doing well - are those that are producing high-quality products ; here , in particular , it is cheese .
We have an extraordinary brand in Europe on high-quality cheeses , so why do we not use it and take our share ?
As the Minister said , we will look again at this issue in the health check .
I am sure that will be as animated a debate as we have had today , because I think dairy production will never be boring .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , we have heard a wide range of opinions .
We were also able to detect that , for everyone here today , this is a serious issue not to be trifled with , that everyone has many concerns and that we are all , of course , accountable at home - to consumers on the one hand and to milk producers on the other .
To come back to the markets once again : whether I ought to believe in the Chinese market , I do not know .
We see a great deal in this European Union and on this market today .
However , we have an internal market here and this internal market helps us to be strong , even in the face of globalisation and general liberalisation .
Let us therefore make a European internal market out of this milk quota .
We used to be able to do this .
The agricultural markets can face up to the challenges and particularly the routine fluctuations of the world market only from a strong , stable and organised internal market .
For sustainable management , the economy , ecology and social aspects must be in harmony .
All three components must be equally to the fore of any action we take .
The European agricultural model represents sustainability and consumer safety - and that still applies !
Farmers do both very well .
They look after the landscape and therefore form the basis of tourism , contribute to energy security , produce top-quality food and maintain the economic basis for rural areas by providing employment .
The social benefits are offset less and less for farmers by what are referred to as compensatory payments .
Foodstuffs must increasingly have their fair price !
Our overall political responsibility is greater than merely treading the path of liberalisation with open markets !
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( RO ) The report drafted by Mrs Jeggle is extremely important not only in terms of the proposals concerning the increase in milk quotas , but also in terms of defining certain principles that we must take into account when discussing agricultural policy as a whole .
Following the discussions of the Commission on agriculture and rural development we agreed that an increase in milk quotas is necessary for the Member States starting as soon as 1 April 2008 .
In the EP , I represent Romania , a new Member State which was confronted even from the first year of accession with a crisis in the milk quota , which quota was insufficient to satisfy market demand and inconsistent with current realities .
The milk sector in Romania recorded major progress from the negotiation of the milk quota in 2004 to accession , through investments in modern technology , extension of production capacities and employment of new personnel .
Maintaining a milk quota at the level now provided would mean bankruptcy for investors , unemployment in rural areas specialised in the production and processing of milk and an increase in imports and the price paid by consumers .
The report represents a turning point as the European Union shows flexibility in solving a problem that several Member States are faced with .
After all , the beneficiaries of this report are European citizens .
The health check is an important process for reforming agricultural policy , particularly agricultural policy in mountainous regions .
The increase in the application of the milk quota is essential in these areas .
Special regulations must be decided here that are responsive to the particular circumstances of farming in the mountains .
The work of farmers is being made more difficult owing to reduced accessibility and steep transport routes and these must be included in the discussions .
For Austrian farmers , the milk quota regulation is essential .
EU-wide balancing out or trade in quotas should be considered .
Were it actually to come to an abolition of the dairy quota system in 2015 , appropriate financial compensatory measures would be needed with additional budget funds in order to maintain milk production and processing in mountainous regions and on grazing and pasture land .
When checking the efficiency of market support instruments and their reorganisation and adaptation to the current situation , the particular situation of farming in mountainous regions should not be disregarded in any instance .
Milk production and processing is a very important component of agriculture in these regions and has a very high value .
Particular attention must be paid to the economic , social and ecological consequences of an increase or abolition of quotas , particularly in mountainous regions .
The complete abolition of the EU dairy quota system is the wrong path for Europe 's common agricultural policy .
CAP ' Health Check ' ( debate )
The next item is the report by Lutz Goepel , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the CAP ' Health Check ' .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , the first round of parliamentary discussions on what is referred to as the health check of the common agricultural policy will conclude tomorrow .
This health check is not a fundamental reform of the common agricultural policy .
It should further update the existing policy where appropriate , based on the experience gained since 2003 , and adapt it to changed circumstances .
The Commission should take very serious note of our position .
It is a good basis for the upcoming negotiations on the legislative package , as well as for the budget review after 2013 .
We in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development have supported the continuation of the reform towards greater personal responsibility and market orientation while at the same time emphasising the aspects of food safety and of social and environmental responsibility - particularly with regard to current market development and the new challenges of climate policy - more strongly than we have done in the past .
We also want greater flexibility for the Member States when changing the system - in other words , more opportunities to introduce further decoupling and the loosening of historical reference levels .
The debates in our committee have also revealed , however , that this is not sensible in all sectors , at least not before 2013 .
For livestock premiums or for states with full decoupling , but which have a strong livestock sector , a sudden change of system would result in negative structural interruptions in view of the current market situation .
The same appears to be true with some of the smaller market regulations in the plant sector , such as , for example , the market regulations for potato starch , dry green fodder or rice , on which a regionally significant processing industry depends and has invested a great deal in recent years and has to service this with high interest rates .
The committee voted in favour of the introduction of a new , flexible instrument to promote dedicated environmental and region-specific production or particular sectors - in other words , Article 69 - and we have at the same time demanded that new measures be devised to protect the land against environmental crises and crises that are increasingly to be expected in view of the changing climate and increasing cross-linkage of agricultural markets .
A new form of public-private risk management should also be tested with this instrument , which is urgently needed in view of other instruments being returned and the new imponderables .
A few brief words on degression and modulation : our farmers expect planning to be reliable and it is simply inappropriate to once again curtail and redeploy between 8 and 53 % of direct income aid with a compulsory 5 % modulation only four years after implementation of the last reform .
By any understanding of the financing of the development of rural areas , confidence is being destroyed here and structural interruptions provoked .
These proposals specifically concern full-time farms and those that have improved their competitiveness in recent years through mergers into legal entities .
We have put forward proposals , however , for how the general policy targets and the economic requirements can be aligned with each other .
We have to break new ground in the interest of sustainability and competitiveness .
Above all we are grateful to all those who have cooperated on this own-initiative report and I would like to thank my colleagues and fellow Members across all the Groups in the Committee on Agriculture .
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) The Presidency of the Council welcomes the report by the rapporteur , Mr Goepel , as a very measured and resounding contribution to the debate .
The Council also worked hard to prepare the response to the Commission 's report .
As you know , the ministers debated it at three sessions of the Council , namely in November , January and February .
Next week we , the ministers , will attempt to reach some conclusions regarding the report on the common agricultural policy health check .
We will start from some general principles .
For example , when the reform of the common agricultural policy was adopted in 2003 , the Council clearly expressed its intention to evaluate the efficacy of the adopted reforms in the future and particularly to assess their effect on the set targets , as well as to analyse their effects on the agricultural markets .
It is also important to know that , when deciding on the common agricultural policy health check , we will take into account the conclusions of the European Council on the financial perspective for 2007-2013 and the European Council 's appeal to the Commission to carry out a comprehensive EU budget and expenditure review for 2008-2009 .
The Presidency agrees with the Commission that the common agricultural policy health check is an important part of the planned activities within the budget review for 2008-2009 and that it does not define its conclusions in advance .
We have established that the 2003-2004 reforms have largely achieved the set targets in terms of response to market conditions and in terms of making the common agricultural policy more accessible to the citizens .
Ministers are also convinced that , in its report , the Commission correctly assessed the main developments that followed the reforms adopted in 2003-2004 .
The Council will pay special attention to three key questions : the single payment scheme , the role of marketing tools in assisting the market and , of course , the response to the present and future challenges of climate change risk management .
We will work to find the right balance between adapting the policy to new challenges and changed conditions and preserving a clear and stable framework .
On the subject of simplification , I would like to say that the European Union considers this question to be of key importance and we also expect the Commission to define concrete measures to reach this target .
As I have already said , the Council will try next week to adopt conclusions on these and many other issues , such as risk management , milk quotas , transition to the elimination of milk quotas , and questions regarding the second pillar .
Undoubtedly , your report will be a valuable contribution to a future debate on this matter .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , once again I want to thank the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and Mr Goepel in particular for their hard work , resulting in an excellent report .
We are at the stage in the first round where we have consulted many stakeholders and different organisations and individuals to have their opinions and to collect different ideas .
The opinion of the European Parliament is crucial , together with the expected conclusions of the Council next week , as we work to finalise the legislative proposals scheduled to be adopted by the Commission on 20 May .
Immediately thereafter , on the same day here in Strasbourg , I will be presenting to the European Parliament the legal texts .
But , basically , I am quite happy to see that all the three institutions - the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission - although we have different ' shopping lists ' , are all in the same shop .
I will not go into detail on the different issues , but will give my view on the three most important ones .
Firstly , on direct payments : these are inevitably linked to the long-term security that we want to give to our farmers .
I therefore agree with the statement in your report that direct payments remain necessary as a basic income guarantee .
The single payment scheme gives a real lift to the competitiveness of our farmers , but we must make the system more effective , more efficient and simpler .
Therefore , I advocate further decoupling .
Our experiences with the 2003 reform show that the decoupling has been working quite well and , therefore , I think we should move further and extend the benefits of decoupling , except where coupled payments have a very solid justification .
I have also noticed that you support the idea of a more flexible Article 69 as a valuable tool .
However , we should not expect Article 69 to solve all the different problems , and I will fight any attempt to re-introduce coupled support through the backdoor using Article 69 .
I will not go into detail about the dairy sector again , as we have already had this discussion .
However , I will just mention some of the market instruments : intervention and private storage .
Like you , I recognise that some of our market instruments still have a place , but we must keep them relevant to the European Union as it is now .
I am glad that we agree that they should play their role in the future as genuine safety nets .
Risks related to bad weather and outbreaks of animal diseases , as you highlight , are certainly a focus point in our discussion .
However , we are not starting from zero : the Council discussed this issue in 2005 and concluded that new measures at EU level should not interfere with what is already available in the different Member States .
We have to be sure that new measures do not interfere with farmers ' ability to react to market signals , and they have to be compatible with the WTO system , where there has to be a loss of more than 30 % .
Concerning modulation , I have made it clear on many occasions that we need to have for the future a very ambitious rural development policy .
I was very disappointed with the fact that , during the discussions on the financial perspective at the end of 2005 , the Heads of State and Government agreed to take a significant part off the rural development funding .
However , I must say that your report is rather cool about my ideas in this area .
But I think that we can justify the fact that our rural development policy is financially overstretched .
If we have high expectations for our rural development policy , including the need , as the President-in-Office rightly said , to use it to meet new challenges , like water management and bio-diversity , then it does not work to load more tasks on to it without putting in more money .
I think modulation is the best way to provide more funding .
I have read with interest what you are proposing and I am sure we will come back to this issue .
If your report is cool on modulation , I would describe it as extremely chilly on reductions of payments to large farms - you call that ' degressivity ' .
This is not an issue that can be simply ignored .
We know that with our transparency initiative , there will be a strong focus from all sides on the large sums of money going to single farmers and single landowners .
On the other hand , I take everyone 's concerns on this issue very seriously .
And I have looked with interest at your report 's concept of ' progressive modulation ' .
I think there are some good ideas there that we would consider carefully on the legal proposals .
If I have been a little too long , it is only to show clearly my dedication and my huge interest in having the opportunity to discuss here in Parliament the future of the European agricultural policy .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety . - ( NL ) I am speaking on behalf of Mrs Buitenweg , the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , who is ill and has sent her apologies .
The Committee on the Environment drew up 17 recommendations , of which I shall highlight four .
1 . The Committee on the Environment welcomes the fact that , in its Communication , the European Commission intends to respond to the challenge of climate change and to support less intensive farming practices .
2 . The Committee on the Environment stresses the need to develop in the direction of sustainable , multifunctional agriculture , and in so doing takes a stand for conservation farming and organic farming .
3 . The European Commission is urged not to weaken the existing measures on cross-compliance - that is , measures on the environment and animal welfare and the compatibility of these - through so-called simplification .
On the contrary , in our view , cross-compliance should even be strengthened in certain areas , such as water use and management and water quality .
4 . The Committee warns the Commission to show a little more restraint regarding the concept of ' biofuels ' .
Their benefit is questionable , and they are certainly not unequivocally good in either environmental or social respects .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Goepel for his report .
I believe he has brought together the whole committee and Parliament in a very good report .
I would suggest that the reform of agriculture is evolution , not revolution , and we are carrying on very much with the Fischler reforms .
I welcome much of what the Commission has put forward , along with Mr Goepel 's report .
I think that one of the keys to the reform was to reduce bureaucracy to farmers and we still have some ground to cover .
Commissioner , yes , we are in the same shop but I think some of us believe we could spend the money on different things and that is probably what the arguments are now about .
Food security has come back on the agenda again very strongly , especially with the Far East in particular now buying more and more food .
Cereals have gone up almost two or two and a half times in price , so I believe we can start to re-evaluate as we move forward with reform how we spend the money .
We have to look again at modulation .
In my opinion we have to get rid of set-aside once and for all , because this common agricultural policy is a policy that is not supposed to be linked to production .
You cannot possibly carry on with set-aside which is exactly that .
We have to look at milk quotas and abolishing them by 2015 .
Decoupled payments : that is the whole crux of the reform , and you are quite right to push that forward .
Again , I think that now is the time when agriculture can start to look towards a market-oriented price .
Yes , the common agricultural policy is necessary , but also the market is there and we should take much more advantage of it .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PT ) Mr President , I should like also to welcome the President of the Council and the Commissioner .
The common agricultural policy always gives rise to heated debates and it is always difficult to reach consensus , but I note that we are all unanimous on the need to maintain a common agricultural policy whose objectives have just been confirmed in the Lisbon Treaty .
The PSE Group made great efforts in this debate , within the parliamentary group , in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , and with farmers ' organisations , and we tabled more than half of the 600-plus amendments to the report by Mr Goepel and signed 15 of the 17 compromises encompassing dozens of amendments .
We worked hard and made significant concessions in order to achieve as broad a consensus as possible within Parliament and I would therefore like to congratulate Mr Goepel on his willingness for dialogue and on the real spirit of compromise he showed ; I would also like to congratulate Mr Parish on the way in which he led our work in committee .


This is therefore the best compromise but it is not a socialist report .
This is not the report we would have drawn up ; we find it quite backward looking and conservative in the face of the expectations of society and of farmers .
However , the overall trend of the report does not close the door to a more in-depth debate on the legislative proposal .
I hope we can retain the same spirit of compromise but be more ambitious in setting a new direction for European agriculture .
I am referring to the most sensitive issues , such as the direction and pace of the decoupling of aid , a mechanism for a fairer redistribution of support , the responsible approach for the future of the dairy sector , the new challenges , in particular the role of agriculture in combating climate change and the production of agrofuels , etc .
We will be voting on this debate tomorrow with our eyes fixed on the future .
I call for a vote by a large majority in favour of this report as well as the improvements that the socialists will be introducing to make it a still more comprehensive report .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DA ) Mr President , Commissioner , President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , in his characteristically competent way , the rapporteur , Mr Goepel , has prepared a report that contains the instruments necessary for clarifying and simplifying agricultural policy .
The case for maintaining a common agricultural policy after 2013 also comes across strongly - for which I am obliged to the rapporteur .
We support his positions on continued decoupling , so that the 2003 reform is implemented in all Member States .
We support the rapporteur 's positions on market instruments and risk management in terms of crises , epidemics , animal welfare and the environment , modulation and degressivity .
We also support the further development of rural policy and increased focus on biofuels .
Substantial efforts should be made regarding cross-compliance and simplification , as the current situation is taking farmers out of their fields and stalls and into their studies to draw up diagrams and respond to monitoring .
Milk quotas should be abolished in 2015 , so there is cause to increase milk quotas now by at least 2 % and cushion the landing in 2009 .
The growing demand for milk products will create the basis for European milk production , so that we shall be delivering what the market wants .
The report contains plenty on liberalisation and market economy that the Commission should use as a basis for its proposals in May , when the CAP health check will be on the table .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are among those who believe in and defend the continuation of the CAP even after 2012 .
We feel that this report is a step in the right direction , but we cannot accept that the full decoupling of aid should not allow for the possibility of maintaining a partial coupling of aid for some specific sectors , to prevent the complete abandonment of production .
There are , in fact , whole sectors , such as the tobacco sector , that would disappear with the application of full decoupling , creating unemployment and various economic and environmental problems in particularly disadvantaged areas .
We consider the progressive modulation of aid rather an excessive and probably counterproductive measure if the objective is still to safeguard European agricultural production .
We recognise the importance of rural development , but we feel this cannot be achieved at the expense of the first pillar of the CAP .
Furthermore , it is necessary to continue to implement policies to support individual common organisations of the markets where this is necessary .
Mr President , Commissioner , the European Union needs a common agricultural policy that manages to ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , you have attempted in a strategy paper to carry out a health check of agricultural policy , not so much in terms of agriculture , because that is going relatively well as the moment , even if not in all sectors .
The question was : is the agricultural policy up to date ?
I have to say here : feverish displays on their own are not sufficient ; we also have to develop appropriate treatment if deficiencies are diagnosed .
In fact you have diagnosed deficiencies ; you have said as much yourself in your speech .
I do not want to go into details now , as that wastes too much time .
It now therefore depends on measures being taken that will also be socially acceptable .
What is essential is that agriculture has to contribute , of course , to the stabilisation of the climate .
It is doing so , but there are areas of agricultural production where it is becoming difficult to put forward proposals without restrictive intervention .
It is particularly important , however , that we ensure that public funds are distributed in such a way that the measures we consider necessary can be financed .
It is a disadvantage that what is referred to as the second pillar - rural development - has been curtailed in medium-term financial planning and has had to come to terms with cutbacks of more than EUR 20 billion according to the Commission 's proposal and that of Parliament .
Consequently , we urgently need to reassign funds .
We also need to do this because we need social acceptance in 2013 .
You have now put forward some proposals and here it must be to the credit of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and specifically the European Parliament 's rapporteur , Mr Goepel , that he has bestowed practical relevance on the proposals you have put forward , which will subsequently lead to equal treatment among businesses that compete with one another .
You have proposed the introduction of degressivity of up to 45 % .
On the suggestion of the rapporteur , the Committee on Agriculture has adopted this , but with the amendment that businesses with a large number of employees now also have an opportunity to evaluate their wage costs .
We were together in Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania ; we saw these businesses and you know that distortion of competition can be eliminated and justice created only if we introduce these measures .
I hope that you will also abide by this rule in your legislative proposal .
If not , we would still have the opportunity as Parliament to save ourselves in 2009 .
Commissioner , we are in a codecision process and we therefore have a quite different and , for us , very comfortable position !
Mr President , this is an important moment to evaluate the consequences of successive reforms of the common agricultural policy , whether in terms of agricultural production or consumer supply , taking as the basis the protection of Member States ' self-sufficiency in food , securing adequate supplies of healthy and safe food at low prices , respect for the environment and biodiversity , and maintaining rural areas and their populations , who need adequate incomes and access to public services that guarantee them decent living conditions .
Unfortunately the European Commission did not follow that path .
It does not acknowledge that the common agricultural policy has led to a paradoxical situation .
On the one hand , food prices are continuing to rise , and on the other hand family holdings are still being destroyed and more and more small and medium-sized holdings are abandoning production because they are not guaranteed decent incomes whereas speculation continues , driving up the prices of increasingly scarce food products .
It is therefore a mistake to insist on decoupling aid from production and employment and it is unacceptable to continue to pursue a policy of support for large-scale landowners and multinational food corporations whilst failing to value the farmers who maintain agricultural and livestock production on the basis of protecting biodiversity , food safety and product quality .
The 2003 reform exacerbated the situation .
The subsequent reforms of the common organisations of the markets in sugar , fruit and vegetables , tobacco and wine maintained the unfairness of the CAP in all areas .
We therefore call for fundamental changes that respect the specific characteristics of each country 's agriculture and support the maximum linking of aid to production , and for there to be a fairer distribution of direct aid accompanied by a ceiling and modulation .
Incentives should be set for small and medium-sized holdings as instruments of economic and social cohesion and with a view to curbing the intensive approach and supporting associations of such farmers , including agricultural cooperatives and wine cooperatives .
We are also in favour of setting up a public farmers ' insurance fund financed by the Community which would enable farmers to be paid a minimum income in the event of natural disasters such as drought , storms , hail , fire , epizootic diseases , etc .
We also stress the need for the European Commission to take account , in the context of the World Trade Organization negotiations , of the specific characteristics of agricultural production as a food production sector , and a structuring element for territorial balance , preservation of the environment and the safeguarding of adequate quantitative and qualitative levels of food safety .
Finally , we call on the Commission and the Member States to take the necessary measures to prevent speculative activity , capturing of the market in food products and the formation of cartels by food companies exploiting the lack of legislation or controls , producers ' and consumers ' lack of organisation , and the lack of suitable infrastructures , with the sole aim of boosting profits , reducing producer prices and imposing high prices on consumers , as happens now , particularly in Portugal , for basic products such as cereals , potatoes for human consumption , and milk .
Mr President , for many years now , despite its underlying principles , the common agricultural policy has been giving more support to rich farmers to the detriment of poor farmers .
The freezing of the agricultural budget in 2002 and the subsequent reforms of the CAP did not improve that situation .
On the contrary - the huge differentiation in the funding provided to farmers became yet greater .
For example , the total subsidies per hectare varied in 2005 between EUR 68 in Latvia and EUR 756 in Belgium , in other words a tenfold increase .
Unjustified differences in agricultural funding are also borne out by the proportion of direct payments , which is now some 70 % of all subsidies provided for agriculture .
In its Communication , the European Commission proposed a partial reduction in payments to beneficiaries receiving more than EUR 100 000 a year .
These amount to just 0.34 % in the EU , but include megabusinesses , food concerns and golf course owners .
Paradoxically , this timid proposal , which infringes on the interests of such a narrow group of people , was thrown out by the European Parliament 's Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
Many motions have been accepted , but they have not done away with the errors in agricultural policy .
The only amendment that offers an opportunity for a fairer split in subsidies is Amendment 19 tabled by the Union for Europe of the Nations Group , which is in line with the European Commission 's proposal .
I do not suppose , however , that it will find many adherents .
Naturally the amendments that I and my colleague Mr Wojciechowski submitted , which are aimed at a radical alteration of the CAP , were also rejected by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
The vote on Mr Goepel 's report will be an expression of your responsibility for the shape of agricultural policy for the next few years .
If you are in favour of the sustainable development of EU agriculture and protection of the interests of family farms rather than protection of the interests of a narrow group of business people , you should reject this report , otherwise you will be supporting the further depopulation of rural areas , high unemployment , loss of EU food supply security , discrimination against the new Member States and processes that constitute a threat to the natural environment .
By accepting this report you are violating the main aims of the European Union which are so often forgotten , namely : economic cohesion , social cohesion and solidarity between Member States .
( The President cut off the speaker ) .
( SK ) I very much appreciate the work of the rapporteur , Mr Goepel .
The drafting of the report was particularly difficult in part due to the absence in the background documents analysing possible solutions , relevant case studies and vital data .
The Commission proposes reductions in direct payments to large agricultural holdings , stating that such companies do not require similar assistance .
Figures , however , show otherwise .
In the Slovak Republic , my home country , most agricultural firms fall into the category of large enterprises .
More than 75 % of their machinery is over 20 years old : hence the urgent need to provide these companies with financial assistance .
The example of Eastern Germany shows that where these companies received adequate investment , they joined the ranks of the some of the best operating companies in the world .
In the post-socialist countries , on the other hand , these companies were at an administrative disadvantage , resulting in the large-scale destruction not only of agricultural sectors , but also rural areas and entire regions .
The Commission meanwhile has not responded adequately to a highly dangerous increase in the volatility of the global agrifood market .
We must be aware that a repetition of last year could have real adverse effects on food security within the EU .
Doing away with the natural instability of the agricultural market is surely the most important task of any agricultural policy and as such it should also be reflected in this report .
I cannot therefore agree with the existing situation characterised by chaotic measures implemented every year , such as the change in energy crop premiums , elimination of set-aside , production quotas changes , etc .
Speaking of examining the common agricultural ...
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , President-in-Office of the Council , I too would like to thank the rapporteur for his outstanding work .
It also appears that the vote in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development came to 82 % , even with the 17 major compromises it has created .
The reforms in 2003 / 2004 were important stages in the CAP reform process .
An exhaustive check of the CAP , which does not involve any fundamental reform of the existing policy , however , is another important step towards securing a modern , multifunctional and competitive common European agricultural policy .
It has been scientifically documented that good agricultural practice is the basis of this , regardless of whether large or small enterprises are involved .
The first priority is still food production , the second priority animal feed production and the third priority the supply of energy .
As regards the environmental relevance of biomass energy , it can be said that Austrian agriculture , for example , has reduced CO2 output by 14 % since 1990 and has therefore actually reached the Kyoto target .
I also welcome the abolition of degressivity .
The model of progressive modulation is the right path and I also support the figures here .
I would like to thank the Commissioner for her statements on milk .
I should therefore like to say on this that we need not only a soft landing and a gentle transition towards 2015 , but also sustainable solutions after 2015 .
For mountainous regions and disadvantaged and peripheral regions , we have to ensure that a form of agriculture involving dry-feed livestock units is able to exist beyond 2015 .
I therefore eagerly await the Commission 's legislative proposal on 20 May , Commissioner , and I hope that we rediscover a great deal therein that the Goepel report now delivers , so that we do not have a repeat of this long discussion ...
( The President cut off the speaker )

( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , President-in-Office of the Council , I would like to thank Mr Goepel for his work , because it is important for the European Parliament to express its opinion on the general guidelines arising from the CAP ' Health Check ' .
Personally , I have serious reservations about full decoupling , which carries high risks of the abandonment of production for stockbreeding and even for certain crops .
I do not share the optimism of some people who believe that the current situation on world markets guarantees a steady and secure future for European agriculture and that we should continue heading for complete liberalisation .
Furthermore , not all agricultural sectors are benefiting equally from price rises , as the particularly serious crisis currently being experienced by European livestock farmers shows .
The total abandonment of any market regulation mechanism would seem to me to be hazardous for our food security and that of the world .
I think we need to make sure that we maintain intervention stocks so that we can react in the event of food shortages and speculation , maintain common market organisations ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I should like to congratulate Mr Goepel most sincerely on his balanced report .
We should not be penalising emergent , competitive structures in agriculture .
We in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development have therefore rejected the Commission 's proposal on degressivity in this form .
We should not be discriminating according to the size of the business in the case of direct payments , otherwise jobs would be jeopardised on a large scale .
Furthermore , I would argue that a final phasing-out of the milk quota system in 2015 is still right .
In view of rising milk prices on the world 's booming agricultural markets and the associated export opportunities , this system no longer appears up to date .
A sensible review of the 2003 reform in this regard must not only offer European farmers dependability and reliability in planning , but also be a further step towards the market-based continuing development of our agricultural system .
( PL ) Mr President , what is agriculture in the European Union ?
For some it is a thing of great value that needs to be protected , but for others , and sadly there are many in this group , it is ballast that they would like to be rid of .
We read in Mr Goepel 's report that agriculture is one of the biggest industries in the EU .
That is good , but it is not enough .
Agriculture is not an industry and it is not just one of many sectors of the economy .
Agriculture is a pillar of food security .
We spend vast sums on the army and the police to guarantee physical security in our states and in our homes .
We pay large sums for energy security - we are seeking energy supplies that are more expensive but secure .
We must also spend large sums on protecting our agriculture , which offers us food security , and it is a shame that not everyone in the EU understands that .
Mr President , I also congratulate our rapporteur on an excellent compromise package before us today .
I would like to draw attention , in particular , to three measures which were our successful amendments , which are to be particularly welcomed .
In paragraph 21 of the report , we recognise that decoupling direct payments has largely been successful , and we are firmly of the view that should be rolled out .
Yes , it has to be done properly and sensitively , but it should be pushed forward .
In paragraphs 37 and 38 we explicitly recognise that set-aside is an anachronism and should be fully swept away , and where there are spin-off environmental benefits , they be properly dealt with under Pillar 2 .
In paragraphs 86 to 91 we recognise the importance of niche products for Europe 's agriculture internationally .
I could certainly produce a shopping list of quality Scottish products for our Commissioner , so I would be grateful for a few words from her on how she plans to take that forward , with the promotion of a European mark for international quality .

( NL ) With this Health Check , the Commission has taken a good - if very modest - step towards a slightly less unfair agricultural policy .
I would urge my fellow Members not to support Mr Goepel 's report , as it dilutes the Commission proposals on a number of very important points , and in my view the most important point is the imposition , at long last , of cautious limits on the size of the subsidies it is possible to receive .
It is difficult to explain to the European public why , for example , the Prince of Monaco or large multinationals such as Heineken and Nestlé receive hundreds of thousands of euros in income support in the form of agricultural subsidies merely because they own some land , whilst real farmers often struggle to make ends meet .
Income support in agriculture is intended to give farmers a decent existence and not to line the pockets of multinationals and large landowners .
( CS ) The reform of the CAP was aimed at making it less cumbersome and more market-oriented .
Taking into account the average size of Czech farms the system proposed in the report is unacceptable .
The outcome for the Czech Republic would be that by the year 2013 it would become one of the states with the largest share ( part of the speech could not be heard ) transferred within the framework of modulation from the first to the second pillar .
Nearly 40 % of direct payments in the Czech Republic would then be subject to degressivity compared with 6.5 % for France and a mere 2.5 % for Austria .
Czech holdings would , according to the existing proposal , be forced to split up senselessly and actually become less efficient .
Neither this nor a compromise proposal are acceptable to the Czech Republic because they leave us open to discrimination , reducing unjustifiably the competitiveness of Czech farmers .

( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Goepel , in Berlin - nearly 10 years ago now - Chancellor Schmidt and the French President Jacques Chirac decided to grant a reprieve to farmers until 2013 .
With the end of milk quotas , the end of a proper agricultural budget as part of the 2014-2019 financial framework , and the retirement of the majority of producers , not to be replaced , the end of the great CAP was planned for 2013 - it was as simple as that .
Today you are questioning this agreement , and in the name of the ' CAP Health Check ' you are accelerating the march towards the elimination of agriculture within the first pillar .
This is nothing new !
By dint of quotas , MGQs , Herod premiums , set-aside , decoupling and grubbing up , MacSharry , Steichen , Fischler had practised this strategy of leaving the monopoly on food production to the southern hemisphere and the Pacific countries for 30 years .
Today , in the gripping technical debates on full decoupling , modulation - whether degressive or progressive - eco-conditionality , rural development , and reference values - whether historical or non-historical - simply hide the only real issue , as China and India are about to launch a call for bids to feed the planet , as the morning comes for farmers when there is a rise in prices and demand .
Does Europe still want to be one of the world 's great farms , together with Brazil ?
Yes or no ?
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , I am glad to see such a big audience here for this debate , because it is an important one .
If we were to go on the clapometer in relation to large payments to royalty or individual farmers , they would be quaking in their boots in royal houses across Europe .
But it is a more complex debate , as we have heard from our eastern European colleagues .
As regards the health check , can I say very briefly that in relation to decoupling and modulation in Ireland , we have fully decoupled , and I think the Commissioner acknowledges that .
We want to stick with our historic payments system and we do not like increased modulation .
It is robbing Peter to pay Paul , dressed up as something else .
We do not really know where the rural development money will end up and we need to look at that very carefully .
It is not Article 69 that troubles Irish farmers at the moment , but the WTO .
I have in front of me here , and will share with colleagues , the assessment of the latest paper from the WTO .
It is in full colour and it is not pretty .
If Mr Mandelson has his way , then I am afraid that the beef and dairy , lamb and pigmeat sectors in Europe will be wiped out , and so will the common agricultural policy .
The cuts in tariffs range up to 70 % .
Now , perhaps people do not understand the impact of that , but it means that our producers will not and cannot compete with imported food products and products that are produced to very , very different standards .
The lamb sector , which Parliament is actually trying to help , will be decimated by the WTO .
Can I ask you , Commissioner , to perhaps take this analysis that the Irish Farmers ' Association has completed - and I will raise it again , because it is in full colour - and come back to me and tell me , I hope , that they have got it wrong , although I fear that they have got it right .
There is a complete lack of information for this House on the impact of the latest text from the WTO , and I think we need and deserve to have that information .
I would just like to say that Irish farmers support the European Union , but over the weekend I had many come to my door who are questioning their decisions in relation to voting on various treaties .
And that is serious , as the Commissioner knows .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , European farmers , and Spanish farmers in particular , need , and I would say that they are demanding , a minimum degree of stability .
Therefore , the first thing that I would like to ask the Commission is that this mid-term review of the common agricultural policy should not become a major , radical review .
One aspect that concerns me is the partial decoupling of aid ; the haste to move forward in decoupling aid may endanger many crops .
A total or partial level of decoupling in certain sectors is vital for maintaining production , for example in the cotton sector .
Consequently , I think that the decoupling levels should be maintained as agreed in 2003 and in any event , if that is not possible , I think that Member States should be given some room for manoeuvre , as a voluntary model for each sector , on a case-by-case basis , could create the best circumstances for agricultural production .
I think that we should send a message of calm and stability to the agricultural sector at this time .
( NL ) My compliments to Mr Goepel on his work .
In my opinion , two things are important in this debate .
Firstly , in my view , the most important aspect of agricultural policy is the common market for 500 million consumers .
Has the Commission or the Goepel report disrupted this market ?
I think not - and that is a good thing .
Secondly , I believe that authorities must be trustworthy .
We must stand by what was promised in the 2007 budget , and indeed I think the Commission is doing so .
I have mixed feelings about modulation .
I do not yet know the results of the rural policy .
The reports from the Court of Auditors have been extremely critical , but I have problems with imposing an extra financial burden on farmers , 60 % of which they would not see again .
In the Netherlands this is used to buy nature areas .
I should like to say a few words about non-trade concerns .
How can I explain to European farmers that they are not allowed to produce certain products when other countries are , and when we are allowed to import such products without restrictions ?
This leads to unfair competition .
( PL ) Mr President , in recent years many changes have been made to the common agricultural policy .
Not all of them were dictated by a need to improve the situation in rural areas or by the needs of EU consumers .
At present food prices are constantly rising but , even so , the situation for small and medium-sized enterprises is not significantly improving .
The European Commission does more to support international corporations , including those that produce genetically modified foods , than it does for local farms .
The European Community is moving ever closer to a loss of sovereignty in the area of food production .
Now , under the proposed reforms of the common agricultural policy , there is a further move to do away with another group of farmers , the tobacco growers , which is leading to economic disaster for almost 100 000 such individuals and to the loss of 400 000 jobs .
It is high time for the European Commission to begin caring more for the interests of European farmers than for those in third countries .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , the context of agriculture has changed a great deal since 2003 , and the analyses we have today are already out of date and not really up to the crucial challenges of the future .
Demand for food products is exploding , prices are rising fast and becoming unaffordable for those most hard up , and at the same time agricultural land is disappearing .
Biofuels , which are subsidised , are vastly destabilising agriculture .
Let us also underline the impact of climate change , and above all , the fact that our citizens are questioning the intensive , ultra-liberal industrial model , which means that foods travel thousands of kilometres around the world , all of which is accompanied by social and environmental dumping .
An in-depth reform of the common agricultural policy is therefore what we should now be carrying out , and not just a technical adaptation of the current instruments , which is what you are proposing today .
What we also really need now is a bearing , a clear strategic direction , which is what we lack most at the moment .
( GA ) Mr President , this Report comes before us at a very important time for farmers in the EU .
As my colleague , Ms McGuinness has already said - we saw at the World Trade Organisation talks how the Commissioner is willing to sacrifice the interests of our farmers and our rural community not for the good of the third world , but for part of an international bargaining game .
In terms of the health check , I agree that there must be a balance between simplifying matters and making them more effective and giving farmers some sort of stability as they produce food for us and maintain the countryside .
If it is implemented fairly , we should welcome a limit to large payments to large-scale farmers or to large companies as a step forward from the Common Agricultural Policy which only helps big landowners .
It is also important that only active farmers are included in payment entitlements .
The Common Agricultural Policy should ...
( The President interrupted the Speaker )
Mr President , any health check needs measurement and assessment .
For the CAP , I suggest that the measure is funding and that the assessors are the auditors .
Does the Court of Auditors find the CAP to be healthy , when 28.9 % of single farm payments are erroneous ?
Does it find it healthy for the CAP to fund farmers not to grow food ?
Does it find it healthy to turn farmland over to biofuels , just when there is a world shortage of cereals ?
Does it find the CAP healthy when genuine farmers - in the UK at least - are struggling to make a living ?
Does it know that farmers in New Zealand are not now subsidised but are doing very well and that only 3 % of them went under when subsidies were withdrawn ?
Since it sounds to me that the CAP is very unhealthy , is it not time to turn off the life-support machine and let European farmers make their own way ?
Mr President , there is much in this report that I agree with .
There are four quick points I would like to make .
Firstly , the theory of decoupling is very good but its practice has been disappointing for some in failing to command the higher market returns for producers that were promised .
Secondly , we must sustain sufficient instruments to safeguard against market and supply crises .
Imbalances in the supply chain endanger the CAP 's aim of secure food supply .
Food security is impossible without guaranteed economic sustainability for producers .
Thirdly , we can do more on CAP simplification to reduce the bureaucratic burden and , yes , to decriminalise farmers who make honest mistakes through minor breaches .
Fourthly , unused agri-budget allocations on market management measures should be available for Article 69 aid to strengthen EU agriculture , particularly where production is marginal and to deal with situations , as in my constituency , where there are high numbers of farmers over 55 years of age with no prospect of alternative employment .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Goepel report offers a good compromise between the Commission 's daring proposals and the concerns expressed by our farmers .
Well done , Mr Goepel , for providing us with this report ; it was not easy , we know .
Some good proposals have come out of it .
This is the case firstly with the system of direct aid that needs to be modified , bearing in mind that the Member States must have greater flexibility to implement this change .
If it has to go ahead , decoupling should take account of the difficulties certain sectors are currently experiencing , particularly the livestock sector and some areas of crop production that are very important for many regions , such as flax and hemp fodder , which should benefit from a suitable transition period .
The way it is proposed , modulation seems too great and makes the first pillar unbalanced .
The measures associated with set-aside must be able to be reformed , but the Commission should first clearly define instruments that enable the benefits it brings to be protected , particularly as regards biodiversity .
The revision and strengthening of Article 69 would also be a way of providing effective financial support for weakened areas , such as mountainous regions , for restructuring sectors in difficulty , such as stockbreeding and milk , or for managing risks .
Finally , Commissioner , we should really ask ourselves about biofuels , which are strongly disputed from an environmental point of view .
Perhaps the health check is the perfect opportunity to do this .
( HU ) The report we are debating is one of the most important reports on the agricultural sector in the past four years , since it is much more than just an appraisal of the current state of affairs , or a ' health check ' .
Mrs Fischer Boel is a liberal-radical , Mr Goepel a Christian democrat-liberal , while I am a socialist-liberal , and we have the job of reforming the common agricultural policy fundamentally from 2014 .
This ' health check ' puts into words a number of ideas that will come into effect from 2014 .
One example is the move to an area-based flat-rate for direct payments , another is redeployment of financing to the second pillar and the type of modulation envisaged for this ; yet another is the need to develop a risk management system .
I agree with Mrs Fischer Boel and Mr Goepel that the ceilings are also very important .
I would be happy to see the British queen getting less ; in Hungary too there are a great many large-scale holdings at present .
We must , however , devise a system that prevents circumvention of the ceiling limit ; in other words , we will have to resolve this issue in the future .
Thank you very much .
( FR ) Mr President , I would like to point out four dimensions in which the CAP should evolve .
The maintenance of direct aid , which is an essential element : it has been proven that no economy in the world lets its farmers make a decent living without financial support .
The environment , which shapes agriculture as much as agriculture shapes the environment .
It is therefore important to maintain the conditionality criteria for obtaining aid .
Any agreement in the WTO should deal with the issue of protected geographical indications , animal wellbeing and the state of health of imported products , for reasons of fair competition and because health problems do not stop at borders .
Finally , it is necessary to define agriculture 's contribution to climate change and sustainable development .
I invite the European Commission to examine more closely the question of how much arable land in the European Union can be turned over to biofuels and green chemicals .
I welcome this resolution , which is a good reflection of the future challenges for agriculture , both in terms of producing food and in terms of protecting our environment .
Mr President , I welcome the proposal to simplify the regulatory burden for farmers in the context of the CAP health check and I would urge the Commissioner to give farmers advance notice of cross-compliance inspections when she is examining how to simplify regulations and make them more flexible .
I am totally opposed to the increasing of compulsory modulation to 13 % over the next few years .
This would reduce the direct payment to farmers who have already budgeted for this money .
There is danger that sheep farming 's vital role in preserving sensitive environmental and ecological areas will be eroded through land abandonment and that husbandry skills would be lost , and this must be addressed and supported in the CAP health check .
It is now clear from the last debate that milk quotas will be abolished from April 2015 and I welcome the Commissioner 's contribution to this debate .
It is important that there is a soft landing and I would support an annual increase in milk quotas up to 2015 .
Finally , proposals on the table in Geneva regarding the future of EU agriculture in the context of the WTO are totally unacceptable , particularly from an Irish viewpoint .
I welcome the fact that many other EU Member States are also opposed to these proposals and that the Commissioner responsible will take account of these concerns .

( ES ) Mr President , I would like to start by first of all congratulating Mr Goepel on his work and saying that I am going to concentrate on talking about the future of the dairy sector .
I would like to make the following comments .
First of all I would like to say that there is a great deal of uncertainty regarding what the impact could be of eliminating the quota system in the various producing regions .
Many people fear that the trend of abandoning production will accelerate and that it will be an irreversible blow to some areas with a very low level of profitability and few alternatives for agriculture .
It is clear , however , that the current system of quotas is not having the desired result , which is achieving a balance between production and consumption .
We have gone from having milk lakes to having a deficit of more than 3 million tonnes , which is strong evidence of the ups and downs of this COM , the uneven distribution of production quotas , poor and meagre evaluation of the latest reforms and of some of the specific measures applied , such as decoupling aid , the impact of which on the future of the sector we do not know .

In addition to all of this there are the disparities that exist in the application of the quota system between some countries and others ; and , Commissioner , I have to say that in some countries , such as mine , there are obstacles to the liberalisation of the sector , and that for example the individual transfer of quotas , a fundamental element for restructuring , has been banned since 2005 .
Finally , Commissioner , I would simply like to say that I think it would be positive to combine the idea of increasing quotas by 2 % on a voluntary basis for 2008-2009 , as proposed by the Jeggle and Goepel reports , with a non-linear increase for subsequent years , as requested in paragraph 84 of the Goepel report , in order to distribute the production quotas in a more balanced way , giving priority to Member States that have traditionally been in deficit in relation to their internal consumption .
( NL ) I should like to draw attention to an aspect of our agricultural policy that is often neglected : the interests of developing countries .
We must move away from protectionism and the market-distorting measures that are built into the current system .
The very poorest countries have the right to fair access to our market and the stopping of unfair competition on their markets .
I have tabled amendments calling attention to this , and I should like to ask my fellow Members to support them .
The Commissioner will agree with me that , in addition , our policy should focus first and foremost on the consumer .
Therefore , it is vital that we support farmers in the production of sufficient safe food of the very highest quality .
Hence we must ensure sustainable agriculture , in which the maximum investment is made in protecting and improving rural areas and the environment , so that not only we , but also our children , can take pleasure in them .
We must ensure sufficient food for all , and one way of doing so is to increasingly develop our knowledge and to share our knowledge and modern technologies with the rest of the world .
( FI ) Mr President , the report by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development on a health check for agriculture is a realistic one .
The biggest problem is decoupling .
The Commission is calling for increased decoupling of aid from production .
The Committee is being very wary , and not without reason .
Decoupling in many ways is like farmers ' early retirement aid .
It favours farms which decrease or abandon production but does not motivate young farmers who are expanding their production .
In the same way it favours extensive production to the detriment of labour-intensive production .
In particular , the areas which are worse off in terms of their natural conditions seem to be losing out . For example , in the United States aid is still mainly tied to production .
It is most annoying that the social justification for aid is losing ground .
If a farmer who produces food part-time receives the same payment as another who works seven days a week , the taxpayer might well protest .
The job of farming will continue to be to produce food .
( PL ) Mr President , despite having been reformed several times , the common agricultural policy is still not living up to expectations .
The European Union 's loss of food security , the numerous crisis situations and the lack of common settlements that satisfy both sides are egregious examples of this .
The crisis situation is being enhanced by the lack of cohesion and the discrimination against farmers in the new Member States .
The fact that there are better and worse situations , depending on geographical location and the date of accession to the European Union , really demonstrates that there is no common agricultural policy and that there will not be one for some considerable time to come .
Despite the enormous amount of work that the rapporteur , Mr Goepel , has put in , the aim has not been achieved and it is not even easy to say whether we are nearer to or further away from sensible solutions .
In view of this situation , the opinion of the minority , according to which the Commission is continuing to operate a policy of support for international food industry corporations and big landowners , and that the common agricultural policy fails to meet the needs of consumers or of small and medium-sized family farms that are being forced to cease production , seems to be correct .
Therefore , we need a new , fair agricultural policy drawn up by objective experts rather than interest groups .
( BG ) Mr. Chairman , Mme Commissioner , Dear colleagues , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur Lutz Goepel for the successful work on this report .
In my capacity of a MEP from Bulgaria , I find it particularly important that the report pays special attention to the new Member States of the European Union .
They can , if they are willing to do so , apply a simplified single payment per unit of area until 2013 and they will be supported by the European Union in the application of the cross-compliance rules .
The preservation of the Member States ' right to decide on their own whether and how to change their direct aid systems will provide our countries with greater flexibility and help them adjust to the specific needs of each region and each sector .
I believe that the report on the health check of the Common Agricultural Policy is of special importance today , when the European Parliament has to show to the citizens its commitment and responsible political attitude to the development of the agricultural sector in the Community .
I think that the report of Lutz Goepel protects the interests of the European farmers and I urge you to support it .
Thank you .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to begin by congratulating my fellow Member Mr Goepel on a fine report and by thanking him for the enormous amount of work he has invested in it .
The report fully reflects Parliament 's particular interest in the issue of agricultural policy .
Even though expenditure in the current budget perspective amounts to only 33 % , compared to 80 % in the 1970s , agricultural policy continues to be , and should be , one of the most important European policies .
Since my time is limited , I shall mention just a few matters that are of importance to the new Member States .
The introduction of modulation in the new Member States should not be accepted until full payments have been obtained and should be done gradually , as it was in other countries of the Fifteen .
I cannot agree with removal of the subsidies and energy supplements that we have only just been awarded .
Quite the contrary , the EU should particularly support the new direction of biomass production .
As regards the future of milk quotas , I am holding to my belief that the decision to be taken on this requires a broader debate and much more profound analysis .
( RO ) In my capacity as vice-president of ENVI , I would like to make several remarks concerning the impact of climate change on agriculture .
The practice of intensive agriculture over the last years has made the farmers contribute , to a large extent , to global warming , and now they are facing its devastating effects .
Statistics estimate that agriculture is responsible for 17 % to 32 % of greenhouse gas emissions produced by human activities .
Agriculture is still polluting as a consequence of irrational use of fertilisers , inadequate storage of animal manure , and irrational use of land , and I am referring especially to deforestation and overgrazing .
Global warming is irreversible and the frequent occurrence of droughts or flooding in the future should no longer surprise us .
That is why I support the idea presented in the report concerning the creation of a security network at European level to help EU farmers in case of ecological , climatic or epidemiological calamities .
Consequently , I ask the European Commission to analyse the possibility of urgent establishment of an insurance fund or mechanism for multiple risks concerning EU farmers , financed from the EU budget as well as from the budgets of the Member States .
( PL ) Mr President , there are just two issues in this debate to which I should like to draw attention .
Firstly , the percentage of the total budget expenditure spent on agriculture is steadily falling and will be only 32 % in the last year of this budget perspective .
These funds constitute around 30 % of EU farmers ' income on average .
This level of support needs to be maintained in the future in order to sustain interest in agricultural activities , and above all to ensure Europe 's food security .
We should bear in mind that many of the world 's developed countries deploy a variety of instruments to support farming income at a level of over 50 % .
These countries include Japan , South Korea , Norway and Switzerland .
Secondly , a much more rapid evening out of support for farmers in old and new Member States is needed .
Experts calculate that the average level of support per hectare of farmland in 2007-2013 in the new Member States will be barely 62-64 % of that received by farmers in the old Member States .
Unless these two basic postulates are met , it will be difficult to conceive of development in European farming .
( PL ) Mr President , the aim of this review of EU agricultural policy is to improve it , in the light of experience gained in the period that has elapsed since the last reform in 2003 and the situation that has arisen in the world market .
It should be remembered , however , that the changes being made must not undermine , firstly , the community nature of this policy - we are against its nationalisation - and secondly , the European agricultural model .
There are no grounds for basing direct subsidies on historic production levels and having them differentiated in this way .
The future model for subsidies after 2013 should be based on simple principles similar to the SAPS .
However , market intervention in extreme cases should also be allowed , or even production subsidies , as in the case of tobacco or milk production in mountain areas .
- ( EL ) Mr President , I should like to begin by congratulating Mr Goepel on his report .
Since time is very limited , let me emphasise certain principles that must guide any reform of the common agricultural policy , with the aid of either a communication or a legislative instrument .
Firstly , the redefinition of the European agricultural model cannot neglect family-based small and medium-sized enterprises .
Secondly , the issue of funding , which will need to be settled later , must not be based on the principle of co-financing , which in effect renationalises the common agricultural policy .
Thirdly , the question of regionalisation , which cannot by itself resolve the issues of the market and food products , will need to be re-examined and seen in its true dimensions .
Fourthly , unfairness arising from certain reforms , such as that of tobacco , will have to be eliminated .
These products must be reinstated and treated in the same way as others .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank the rapporteur for this very important report in view of the complexity and vast scope of the subject being dealt with .
I would like to underline two points that I think are particularly important .
The first is that I consider the CAP an important instrument that should be maintained even after 2013 , because it supports enterprise .
However , for this reason it should be directed at entrepreneurs , so they can create jobs , maintain the environment and guarantee high quality products .
The second concerns the delicate issue of milk quotas .
I do in fact agree with the rapporteur on the need to protect those regions of Europe where there is no alternative to livestock farming and milk production , but we should not forget those farmers who have invested heavily in order to acquire milk quotas and who , from 2015 , could find themselves in great financial difficulties .
I hope that , with the help of the Commissioner , we can find a solution that suits everyone , partly because in 1984 , when the quota system was set up , Italy was against it and today still has a production deficit of about 40 % of the milk it consumes .
Mr President , Mr Goepel 's excellent report will lay the foundations for a sound agricultural policy for the future , but there is growing evidence that food security is going to rise to the top of our political agenda , as Mr Parish said .

Such is the panic caused by climate change that politicians and planners are in danger of creating a bigger global problem than they set out to resolve .
The rush to biofuels is taking so much land out of agricultural production that some experts are now predicting imminent global famine .
Likewise , vast tracts of the Amazonian and Indonesian rainforests are being torn up to make way for biofuel crops like palm oil and for food crops like soya , releasing millions of tonnes of CO2 into the atmosphere and threatening to destroy our global air conditioning system .
Deforestation now accounts for around 18 % of the world 's total greenhouse gas emissions and highlights the insanity of current policies .
Greed , instead of care for the environment , has become the defining feature of our strategy for tackling climate change , and the race to biofuels is potentially threatening the lives of millions of people , as the global population soars from its present six billion to an estimated nine billion by 2050 .
An extra six million people are born every month .
By 2030 , the world population will have expanded by such an extent that we will require a 50 % increase in food production to meet anticipated demand .
By 2080 , global food production would need to double !
But the reality is that an area the size of Ukraine is being taken out of agricultural food production every year due to drought and as a direct consequence of climate change .
Global food production is in decline rather than expanding .
That is why food security is now top of the agenda .
( RO ) The common agricultural policy is one of the pillars of European development and the debates on the methods of improvement of this policy should be a constant , not only for the European institutions , but also within the Member States in the communities that elected us .
I am glad that by means of the Commission Communication and the report drafted by my colleague Goepel we have identified several solutions to enhance the common agricultural policy and to make the people in rural areas believe that this policy is for their own good and not only a set of bureaucratic provisions drafted by some offices in Brussels .
However , we must be sure that the proposals made by the Commission , the Council and us are flexible and realistic enough to be efficient when implemented .
Romania , the country that I represent in the European Parliament , accounts for 25 % of the work force in agriculture and 40 % of its population lives in the rural areas .
These are figures which demonstrate the importance of agriculture and rural areas for Romania and our economy .
The solutions that we find for the CAP reform must take account of such cases as Romania , with a large agricultural sector in a full process of modernisation .

Mr President , I would like , first of all , to welcome the report by Mr Goepel and thank him for his hard work and that of all the people involved in this .
This is only the beginning of the process as we look to the future of the common agricultural policy during this year .
This is a very important step in this process and we now look forward to the Commission proposals in the near future .
The position of the second pillar of rural development and what level of modulation is set will certainly be central , I believe , to the long-term success or otherwise of the future of the common agricultural policy .
But I have to say that never has it been more important to ensure a level playing field throughout the Member States , and we cannot allow different levels of percentages among the Member States .
Decoupling has , to a large extent , been successful .
I do not think we can go back on that .
Cross-compliance has been unhelpful and bureaucratic and can be improved .
And food security must be at the top of the list .
( PL ) Mr President , solutions to increasingly serious problems are being demanded of the common agricultural policy and the structural policy that supports it .
The fundamental shape of the common agricultural policy for the years 2007-2013 that was adopted by the ministers of agriculture of the EU countries on 26 June 2003 in Luxembourg includes some solutions that benefit Poland .
Others , however , do more to protect the interests of the old Member States .
I share the rapporteur 's view that the Commission should draw up a detailed report relating to such problems as the additional costs borne by farmers in respect of observance of Community norms in the sphere of environmental protection , animal welfare and food security .
In taking a position on the report that has been presented to us , I agree that it is necessary to continue the process of reforms and further development of rural areas .
The common agricultural policy must change if it is to find answers to new challenges such as climate change , increasing energy demands , world population increases and the increasing degree of openness to world markets .
( DE ) Mr President , I welcome the Goepel report because the time is finally ripe for abolishing or thoroughly reforming instruments such as quota control , livestock premiums , export refunds and intervention prices .
Looking at the global increase in demand for foodstuffs , a greater market economy in agricultural policy also offers more opportunities in European agriculture .
I am anxious about the wording of some of the compromises .
The talk here is of headage premiums being decoupled for now , sector-related systems of protection are being demanded and a whole series of derogations - on milk , for instance - are to be funded via the first pillar .
This all runs the risk of us hanging on to the old market regulations via the back door .
We must really limit exceptions to structurally weak regions and define them for very tightly limited production quantities .
If we are too generous here it will lead to distortions of competition that we are not able to calculate in political terms .
I therefore encourage the Commission to give the market a proper chance in the upcoming legislative proposals .
Mr President , there are a number of references in this report to the WTO .
However , I have real concerns that , while we debate this report on the CAP in Parliament this afternoon , the future of European agriculture is being threatened and seriously undermined by the negotiations being undertaken in our name by Commissioner Mandelson at the WTO talks .
The report calls for the concept of qualified market access to be pursued in WTO negotiations .
Is Commissioner Fischer Boel satisfied that we are pursuing that line ?
Indeed , is Commissioner Fischer Boel confident that the line being taken by Commissioner Mandelson will not undermine the beef , dairy and other sectors and , in some ways at least , render our debate here this afternoon irrelevant ?
The report calls for European non-trade concerns to be central in WTO talks .
Is the Commissioner satisfied we are pursuing that line , or are we just having a very polite debate in Parliament this afternoon , while Mr Mandelson is attacking the very foundations of the CAP ?
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) I would like to thank you all for a very interesting debate .
In my opinion the report was also of very high quality and full of good ideas .
I would like to say that in many issues in this debate Parliament and the Council expressed very similar opinions , which are too numerous to list here .
I am convinced that this similarity will give these opinions additional weight and that it offers a good basis for future cooperation between the two institutions .
I am also sure that it will be reflected in the conclusions that ministers are to debate and adopt next week .
I am convinced that both institutions will closely study the legislative proposals which the Commission is to present at the informal session in Slovenia in May , and that we will have an interesting debate at that session .
Finally , I would like to say that the Slovenian Presidency will strive for a speedy start to the debate on these proposals in order to finish most of the work during the Slovenian Presidency .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I completely agree with Mr Nicholson that this is the first step in a discussion that is going to continue for almost the rest of this year and , therefore , I shall not go into detail on all the various questions that have been raised here today .
I shall just pinpoint a few of the more important ones .
First of all , a huge majority is in favour of the idea of more decoupling , and I am very appreciative of this idea .
The idea of giving a Member State the possibility to introduce a regional model is a chance for them to go further towards a flat rate and I have explained on various occasions why I think this is important .
In order not to raise any expectations , I will be very direct and very frank on tobacco decoupling .
It was decided in the reform of 2004 to decouple tobacco payments .
As we are now trying to go even further in decoupling , the idea that some of you raised of extending the coupled payment for tobacco would be a step in totally the wrong direction .
Therefore , do not have any expectations that the Commission will move in that direction .
Ms McGuinness said that modulation was like robbing farmers .
I do not agree with this approach .
I think the rural development policy will need more money in order to meet the new challenges - climate change and the reduction of CO2 emissions will be the most important ones .
We have to take into account , firstly , that the decoupled money will stay in the Member States and , secondly , that modulated money is co-financed by Member States and therefore you actually steer the money .
You get twice as much as you deduct from the direct payment .
This is an important message and we will come back to this in the legislative proposals .
Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf mentioned progressive modulation and the necessity , from his point of view , to include labour intensity in these discussions .
I understand his point of view , but I can only say that this will be extremely bureaucratic and very , very difficult to manage , so I am very reluctant to enter into this discussion .
I might be wrong , but , personally , I do not consider the introduction of codecision on agriculture a threat , as I heard suggested .
I consider this a huge and natural step in a situation where the agricultural sector is so important , both from an economic point of view and because this is important for quite a lot of people .
Therefore , I welcome this change , but , on the other hand , it is important that we finalise this health check before the end of the year , otherwise it will be a Health Check for 2010 and then we are too close to 2013 .
That is the reason why , but , believe me , I am very happy with the changes that have been mentioned .
Concerning developing countries , the European Union is the most open market for developing countries : we import more agricultural products than Canada , the United States , Australia and Japan put together .
This has to be taken into account when we talk about the agricultural sector .
I should like to say to Ms Harkin that I have been informed that she has tabled an oral question .
This will be answered in writing and , therefore , I am quite sure she will get all the information she has been asking for .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , with this discussion the sport of figure skating comes to mind .
When judging figure skating , we discard the highest and lowest marks and then award the score .
If I therefore remove the far right and far left views in this House , we shall then have a result with which we are all very satisfied and with which we can all live very happily .
Thank you very much for your support and cooperation .
I would emphasise this once again beyond the limits of the groups .
I am looking forward to what will be exciting cooperation on the legislative package .
I would only add , Mr Goepel , that the same principle of trimming off the highest and lowest marks also applies in ski-jumping and boxing .
If this enlarges our debate , then all well and good .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday 12 March 2008 .
Written declarations ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - Of course it is of the utmost importance to clearly stress in the framework of this report the necessity to maintain direct payments not only in the case of climate-related crisis or market failures but also to balance fairly the high European standards in terms of environmental , animal and consumer protection .
Nevertheless , it is our duty to consider seriously the situation of the least-developed agricultural producing countries while reviewing the criteria under which direct payments will be made in the future under our common agricultural policy .
Moreover , we have to acknowledge the difficult situation faced by most of the new Member States ' agricultural sectors requiring specific attention and further investments mainly in restructuring and modernisation of the sector .
Finally , I would like to point out that it is essential while addressing the CAP health check that the emphasis should - following the recent crises - be on guaranteeing food safety and supply for our citizens by ensuring sufficient food-stocks .
Follow-up after the review of the " Lamfalussy Process " ( debate )
The next item is the debate on
an oral question by Pervenche Berès , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , to the Council : Follow-up after the review of the Lamfalussy process - B6-0011 / 2008 )
an oral question by Pervenche Berès , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , to the Commission : Follow-up after the review of the Lamfalussy process - B6-0012 / 2008 )
author . - ( FR ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , thank you very much , Commissioner , for being here .
However , we were expecting Commissioner McCreevy - as I am sure you know or suspect .
You can tell him that Parliament does not really understand why he is not here today at this debate .
I have heard that he thought it was bad form to debate these issues with the European Parliament before discussing them in the European Council , or before the European Council had discussed them .
Yet this subject was on the Ecofin Council agenda and , all over Brussels , and perhaps in other European capitals , the draft conclusions are circulating .
Here in plenary , we will be having a debate tomorrow to prepare for this European Council , so why , when it comes to financial markets , can we not prepare these questions with the European Parliament too ?
This is something we do not understand , unless the Commissioner is currently campaigning in Ireland for the Treaty of Lisbon , but if he is , he could at least tell us .
If he is preparing his future , we are interested in that too .
In any case , if Commissioner McCreevy wants to advocate transparency in financial markets , I think he ought to start by being transparent about his own diary !
Financial innovation is an important issue .
I also think that , in this Parliament , it is time we acted on the need for regulation .
We are often told : if you regulate the financial markets , capital will leave the European market .
Today , as my American colleague says , I think the only thing we are seeing is not the disappearance of capital , but the disappearance of the consequences of subprimes .
When we approach this debate , we want to do so with three things in mind : obviously functioning financial markets , but also a genuine capacity to finance the economy and an ability to anticipate the needs of financial markets for stability and protection against the systemic risks .
It is in this spirit that we are tackling preparations today for the European Council , with the idea that European monetary policy probably reacted well at the start of the crisis , but that today , in a way , the European supervisor has been found out - and that is what bothers us .
When we look at the issues that will be discussed in the next European Council , we wonder : how capable are we really , at European level , of anticipating a crisis ?
People talk about an early warning system , but what we see is that , in the markets , the people who really have the ability to raise the alarm are called Goldman Sachs .
Are we therefore going to learn any lessons from this for the way Europe operates ?
I hear a lot of talk everywhere about transparency .
We are all in favour of transparency , but what of that call for transparency when , for the last eight months , all the large investment banks have been called upon to give their figures , to give their assessment of their exposure to risk ?
They cannot do it , because behind it lies a challenge in terms of reputation , and undoubtedly in terms of valuation , a challenge that is extremely difficult to deal with .
Therefore , when I hear people talking about an alternative , the early warning system - I have already said something about this ...
As one IMF councillor said to me the other day , the early warning system is a bit like when it says : ' Smoking kills ' on a packet of cigarettes .
How much does it change your behaviour ?
Not a great deal .
Of course , the IMF and the Financial Stability Forum have a role to play in this .
Who does not know this ?
However , it should be an alternative to our ability to watch how our systems are working .
I should say , on this point , that the surprises for this Parliament are just getting bigger .
When we adopted the Ehler report on deposit-guarantee schemes on 13 December , we were told that it was much too complex a business and , anyway , it would not provide any guarantees for how the systems would function .
It seems today from the main conclusions of the Ecofin Council to be a way of escaping the crisis , or in any case , a matter that should be reopened as a matter of urgency .
If you do reopen it , Commissioner , or rather if your colleague Commissioner McCreevy reopens it , we will be next in line to examine it .
At some point , you perhaps need to listen more carefully to what Parliament says about issues like this one .
Similarly , as regards the credit-rating agencies , we can only refer you - or refer Commissioner McCreevy - back to what we said before .
We know that the Commission wants to present proposals for the amendment of the Capital Requirements Directive , or CRD .
We will be examining these proposals carefully , but we do not think that this will be enough to give the European Union the system of supervision it needs , unless we take account of all the proposals that have been on the table for some months now .
This also concerns the situation of the supervisory committees - the three ' Level 3 ' committees , as we usually call them .
For these three Level 3 committees , we need a proposal for legislation that gives them a solid legal basis to act and to strengthen their capability , including in dialogue with the other supervisory authorities , because the idea that we are going to bring in the other supervisory authorities without having our own solid system of supervision does not seem very satisfactory to us .
We would like the Council and the Commission together to look at the proposals on the table , not forgetting , of course , the proposals that the Italian Finance Minister , Mr Padoa-Schioppa , made at the Ecofin Council in December .
In the same spirit , here too , we would also like to think more proactively about improving our regulation system , out of respect for the principle of subsidiarity .
We do not believe the idea of a lead supervisor would satisfy all the Member States .
What Parliament should be asking for is a solution that includes all the Member States and that enables each one to feel comfortable with the supervision system .
On all these matters , I would be grateful if you , President-in-Office , and you , Commissioner , would make your comments , bearing in mind that I am obviously merely expressing questions that are being asked in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , since we have not yet deliberated on a proper report .
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) I would like to emphasise the Council 's opinion , which is that the key response to the current situation in the financial market is consistent implementation of the three working programmes already adopted by the Council during the Portuguese Presidency .
As you may recall , last October the ECOFIN Council adopted a report and a set of decisions , as mentioned in the oral question by Mrs Berès .
A schedule is attached to those decisions .
I would like to make a brief remark regarding the principles that guide our efforts .
The first guideline concerns the procedures and principles for improving cooperation and conduct in international financial crises .
One of the key aims in this area is to finalise and sign the new memorandum of understanding which will define common principles and guidelines for strengthening cooperation in the field of crisis management .
The Presidency expects the memorandum to be finalised during the informal session of the ECOFIN Council that is to take place in Slovenia next month .
The other main guideline for the work in strengthening measures for financial stability concerns the tools for preventing , managing and resolving crises .
The October schedule deals with all the recognised deficiencies , especially the regulations on state aid , the system of guaranteed deposits , the rules on winding-up procedures , and the limitations concerning the transfer of funds , all on an international scale .
I would like briefly to touch on the decisions reached following the review of the Lamfalussy process , adopted at the December session of the ECOFIN Council , and the attached schedule .
Although in some respects this matter relates to the efforts to achieve financial stability , the long-term issues associated with the supervision of international financial groups do not have much to do with the current market situation .
They mainly concern the national supervisors , who are required to adjust to the conditions of continuously developing financial markets .
I wish to stress the Council 's opinion that we need to increase the convergence of supervision in order to ensure equal competition .
Here we are mainly concerned with the convergence of supervisory practice and not necessarily with the convergence of supervisory institutions .
As regards the response of the economic policy players to the current situation in the financial markets , let me express the Council 's conviction that the primary responsibility for correction rests with the individual sector .
We should resort to legislative initiatives only if the sector proves incapable of adopting efficient measures .
The ECOFIN Council debated the question of financial stability at its last session on 4 March .
At the end of this week the European Council will address this problem and , I hope , will agree with the progress achieved .
The ECOFIN Council will continue to follow the situation closely .
I have already mentioned the April session of the ECOFIN Council to be held informally in Slovenia .
We will of course be pleased to hear proposals from the European Parliament as well .

Member of the Commission . - Madam President , the oral question tabled by Ms Berès on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs gives me , on behalf of Mr McCreevy and on behalf of the whole Commission , the opportunity to inform you of the ongoing work on the review of the Lamfalussy process .
Throughout last year , the European supervisory model in the field of financial services was examined at the highest political level .
These discussions showed that there is a strong political will to strengthen the current supervisory architecture based on the Lamfalussy committee structure .
Last year we saw the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission each submit their assessment of the functioning of the current process .
It is now time to move forward and to present concrete proposals .
This stems from the Ecofin Council 's conclusions and the accompanying road map which were adopted last December .
This road map sets out what needs to be done to improve the Lamfalussy process and in particular to improve the committees of national supervisory authorities , the so-called ' level three ' committees .
The Commission 's work is centred on three main areas following this agreement of the road map adopted last December .
First , the Commission was requested to consider how to clarify and strengthen the role of the level three committees and to set out concrete options for the informal Ecofin Council next April in Ljubljana .
The main objective here is to bring forth the contribution that the level three committee should make to supervisory cooperation , supervisory convergence and possibly to crisis prevention and management .
The informal Ecofin , by the way , will also discuss the work of a taskforce focusing on crisis management on cross border institutions .
Second , work is ongoing by a working group of the Commission to review supervisory powers , voluntary delegation of tasks , supervisory cooperation and exchange of information .
We are working together with the three level three committees on these tasks to deliver the requested results before the end of the year .
Considering the enormous scope of these reviews , it is , however , still too early to indicate today what the outcome of this work will be .
Third , the Commission is looking into the possibility of financially contributing to the activities of the level three committees .
This is an urgent problem as these committees in general , and in particular the Committee of European Securities Regulators ( CESR ) , have reached their budgetary limits .
The Commission will be looking for a stable legislative solution which would ensure continuity in EU financing .
In our view , this could best be achieved by agreeing the modalities of EU funding in a decision adopted by the European Parliament and the Council .
I have no time to give the Parliament details of the road map adopted last December by Ecofin , but allow me in half a minute just to read some of the commitments that were sent to the Commission .
We are working on all of these things .
By April 2008 the Commission should prepare an assessment of how to clarify the role of the committees and to consider all the different options towards strengthening the working of these committees .
By mid-2008 , the level three committees should for the first time transmit to the Commission , the European Parliament and the Council draft work programmes , and thereafter start reporting annually on progress .
This committee should also explore the possibility of strengthening the national application of guidelines , recommendations and standards ; they should introduce in their charters the possibility of applying qualified majority voting coupled with a comply or explain procedure ; they should study the possibilities of introducing a common set of operational guidelines for the operation of colleges of supervisors and monitor the coherence of the practices of the different colleges of supervisors .
The level three committees and the Commission should suggest - also by mid-2008 - a timetable for the introduction of EU-wide reporting format for single data requirements and reporting dates .
By the end of 2008 , the Commission has also committed itself to conduct a cross-sectoral stock-taking exercise of the coherence , equivalence and actual use of sanctioning powers among Member States .
The Commission should consider - also by the end of 2008 - financial support under the EU budget .
And , as I said before , it should study the possibilities for EU funding under the EU budget of the development of tools to help build a common supervisory culture by the level three committees .
The Commission and the committees should review financial services directives to include provisions to enable the use of voluntary delegation of tasks , analyse the options for voluntary delegation of competences and so on and so forth .
So we are working a lot and we should work a lot in the coming weeks , months and before the end of this year .
But we are working at the same time on the financial turmoil by following the road map that was adopted in October 2007 by Ecofin .
A report on how we are working on this road map to tackle the financial turmoil consequences has been sent to the European Council for discussions in a few days in Brussels .
We contributed to this report with a communication .
The Economic and Financial Committee the other day also presented its own report to Ecofin .
We discussed both reports at Ecofin level and these reports are on the table for the discussions of the Heads of State and Government next Thursday and Friday .
These reports convey the simple message : in order to respond to the concerns of our citizens and investors we must act swiftly and in a consistent way .
We need to restore confidence and stability as soon as possible , having carefully considered all the options and in line with the better regulation principles .
I think everybody acknowledges that this road map , adopted a few months ago by Ecofin , provides the right answer to the problems identified .
Work on these road map commitments is on track .
In the months to come it will be crucial to stick to the timetable and show that the EU is responding effectively to the crisis .
Our regulatory and supervisory framework must remain robust and keep pace with market developments .
Although the Basle II rules have only been fully implemented as of 1 January 2008 further improvements have already been planned in the capital requirements directive .
This work has taken on increased importance in the light of the recent turmoil and maybe there will be other aspects of Basle II that we will need to address in the time ahead .
We intend to adopt a new proposal for this directive in October so that discussion in Parliament and the Council can take place before the adoption of a new directive in April 2009 .
We appreciate very much the involvement of Parliament in all these discussions .
We need Parliament 's contribution and we appreciate this involvement and this contribution .
On 1 April - a few days before the next informal Ecofin - Mr McCreevy will go to the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
And , as you know , from a macro-financial stability point of view , I , as the Commissioner for economic and monetary affairs , am always ready to contribute to the discussions in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and in this Parliament .
Finally , on macro-financial issues , it is true that we need to improve the supervisory and regulatory framework - it is absolutely true at European level and at a global level - but we will not put an end to these bubbles , this excess of liquidity , this risk to financial stability unless we seriously tackle global imbalances .
This is the real origin of these imbalances .
We cannot solve the current or previous problems , or perhaps the next challenges to the functioning of the global economy , without tackling the global imbalances that are still there .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , in 1999 we initiated the European single financial market project and have since been pressing ahead with it .
We are on the path to success .
We now have to see that market developments do not overtake political developments .
The Lamfalussy Process was a step in this direction . Level 3 could be a way of bringing supervisors in Europe a step closer together .
However , I hold on to what Commissioner Almunia has said , and that is : act quickly and effectively .
We are going through a sub-prime crisis or sub-prime turbulence .
The Americans - whether they are the SEC , the White House , politicians or the offices of the District Attorney in New York or Washington - have long been drawing up the relevant summaries and thinking about what measures are required , while finance ministers in Europe are still reflecting on which direction they could be taking .
The finance ministers are refusing to push a European supervisory structure , so I shall not be talking about a European supervisor here .
What the finance ministers already have to answer for , however - and here I appeal specifically to the Council - is the fact that Europe is not present at the international discussion on how to deal with this problem .
Once again we shall ultimately find ourselves merely adopting the rules of other nations , such as the United States , for example .
I would just remind you of the Katiforis report .
After Parmalat and Enron , we asked the Commission and Council in 2003-2006 to speak out on rating agencies .
The Commission does indeed analyse everything in Europe , but when crises arise , no analysis takes place .
On the subject of hedge funds , for instance , no analysis is taking place in the European Union .
Hence my urgent appeal : throw off your lethargy , leave your national egotisms behind and keep working on turning the European financial market into a success story not only in Europe , so that what has stood the test here also becomes the rule throughout the world .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Madam President , let me first make two preliminary remarks .
One is that I would have liked to discuss with Mr Almunia these global imbalances and monetary intervention etc . , but we will do that with Mr Trichet in another configuration .

But what I want to stress here is that if we had not had this ECB structure , this system of European banks that intervened in the present turmoil , we would be much worse off .
I think that this balance exists in monetary policy - we have had this type of European-level execution of activity , but we do not have it in the supervisory aspects .
This is necessary for ex ante prevention instead of only intervention measures .
My second preliminary remark is about the absence of Charlie McCreevy . I think it is unacceptable that he does not want to discuss this with us .
Maybe he is dealing with his personal future , but I would say for the 2009 Commission that it would be worthwhile considering having a special Commissioner for the financial markets who will concentrate only on this , because I think this is a really major subject for Europe and for the European Commission .
Then , on the issue of the supervision - the road map you have described - I do not think we disagree on the measures , but I would have expected - and I said this very clearly in the level three committee at the annual joint meeting held in November - that these measures should also have been the elements of a clear proposal for legislative measures from the Commission .
The Commission has the right of initiative , they can put proposals on the table , and we would have been able to act swiftly and consistently if we had had a concrete proposal .
Because now , a lot of these measures are only voluntary : they are requests to committees which really do not have the powers , the mandates , the competences and the tools to do what we would like them to do , because they are nationally organised and do not have this European mandate .
This could have been the subject of a European Commission proposal in this regard .
Why is the Commission so slow in acting ?
I think one of the reasons is that they want these level three committees to be merely advisory and not the central tool for European supervision .
I think this is something we also have to acknowledge : that they play this important role and that we need to have , like the European Central Bank , a real , independent supervisory structure which can deal with these subjects .
It should not be only the Commission - as DG Competition - dealing with it , because the Commission is too weak in this respect .
Concerning the Council , I would really hope that you see the sense of urgency and discuss further measures on the architecture of supervision .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( ES ) Madam President , Commissioner , Minister , a dynamic and healthy financial sector is crucial for the stability of the European economy and for global competitiveness .
This is vitally important for consumers and companies .
With this in mind , we all agree on the need for financial institutions to be well managed and supervised .
That is why in 2001 we launched what is known as the Lamfalussy Process , with the aim of putting in place an efficient mechanism for convergence between the various Member States and partners in terms of supervisory practice and financial regulation .
Now the Commission is asking us to approve a series of new initiatives relating to the adoption of legislation , the convergence of supervision and the strengthening of cooperation between the supervisory bodies in the various Member States .
We agree with all of this because we need a strong and healthy financial sector that is capable of supporting our economy in the face of the turbulence on the international markets , but we want even more .
We want the Savings Directive , which has been in force since 2005 , to be examined in order to put an end to scandals such as Liechtenstein , which appears to be hiding tax evaders .
There should not be Member States , linked territories or countries associated with the European Economic Area that , under the protection of banking secrecy , do not exchange information on interest paid to residents of other members of that same common economic space .
Free competition prohibits State aid as a way of promoting the private economy ; and taxation of savings should not be a gateway for distorting equal competition .
The rules of the game should be the same for everyone and we should therefore eradicate tax havens , as they are anti-competitive and also anti-social .
Madam President , two minutes is not long enough to allow me to take on board all the points .
I would just like to be very brief .
I am in agreement with many of the things mentioned by my colleagues , especially what Ms van den Burg said about Commission reluctance to give a greater role to level three committees .
I think that it is natural that level three committees have two different roles .
They have succeeded well in giving advice on new directives .
The advisory role is very well accomplished , but we have not yet found a way to achieve true convergence in Europe .
There is a real asymmetry between European convergence and national accountability .
Although we wholeheartedly support the Ecofin proposals , the road map and everything that has been produced , we have doubts that they will solve the problems we have in Europe .
Is it really possible to achieve fully integrated management with the current supervisory system ?
I do not think this is the case .
We also think that consolidating the supervisory model of the CRD needs much bigger improvements than the ones presented in the road map .
It is not enough to have good delegational powers , good information requirements and to solve home host issues .
We need to give level three committees more decisive powers .
They need to be more independent of the Commission and to be the seed of the new European supervisory network-based system .
Finally , I would like to raise the issue , which was also dealt with by my colleague , Mr Radwan , of US convergence and global consequences .
I think we are losing time in Europe .
If we do not get our act together , we cannot really be taken seriously by our international colleagues .
Even though the financial services dialogue has developed well , we need to further improve our route to convergence in order to show the Americans that we have an equivalent system and can rely on mutual recognition and even substituted compliance .
So this global aspect is very important to take on board .
( PT ) Madam President , the recent turbulence in the financial markets showed that the trend which gave rise to increased efficiency might also entail greater risks , affecting the soundness of the financial system and the health of the real economy .
The review planned for 2007 thus became more urgent and acquired greater political relevance .
Today Europe is being asked to produce careful and effective responses to suit the growing complexity of the markets .
It is also known that progress is possible without altering the central architecture of the Lamfalussy method but , as many of my fellow Members have said , one of the most obvious and urgent tools for obtaining improvements involves stronger and more effective coordination between national regulators and supervisors through greater efficiency at Level 3 , increasing powers and competence , strengthening the mechanisms for managing turbulent situations and crises and ensuring consistency of principles and practices .
Such coordination is complex and does not arise spontaneously : it requires specific , competent initiatives on the part of the Commission , in response to the recommendations , rightly mentioned here today , made by Parliament on various occasions , and by the Ecofin Council , and set out in the roadmap which has been extensively quoted here .
With the next European Council approaching , the apparent lack of transparency of the initiatives planned by the Commission is surprising .
The absence of Commissioner McCreevy is even more surprising when Parliament has expressly asked him for information on the progress of the work .
Finally , I should like to thank Commissioner Almunia once again for his availability , although I still think we need to have a clarifying debate with the Commissioner responsible in accordance with the specific and technical nature of the subject , and the Commission 's obligation to propose a specific initiative .
( ES ) Madam President , the Lamfalussy Process was created so that Community legislation on financial matters could respond quickly and flexibly to developments in the market and in order to encourage convergence of supervisory practices .
Its activities , on all four levels , have enabled the actions of the institutions and the supervisory authorities in the European Union to be better coordinated .
We need to go further .
In order to increase its legitimacy , quality and coherence we need to continue to reinforce the principles of better regulation and democratic scrutiny , improving the integration of its levels and promoting greater inter-sectoral convergence in order to avoid arbitrage .
A European perspective and new steps are essential for responding to these needs and especially for adequately tackling the supervision of cross-border groups and moving forward with the prevention and management of international crises .
( DE ) Madam President , financial stability through crisis management must now be the standard when developing regulatory convergence .
It is about drawing lessons from the financial crises and developments in the finance industry that get out of hand and are no longer compatible with an adequate macroeconomy .
This means that a sustainable basis for the Lamfalussy Process still needs to be created in 2008 .
The requirements of the market operators call for a flexible regulatory procedure .
The requirement here has to be that supervisory action is provided for by parliamentary control and Parliament 's rights are protected .
There is no transparent control without parliamentarianism .
Our path leads straight into a system of European supervisory authorities via the lead supervisor .
Only in a European system of supervisory authorities can a balance be found between European financial centres that takes account of all the political and economic interests .
The Commission must be a player , not just a moderator , in the intermediate stages here .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , the Lamfalussy Process has commendably seen us through over the years to this specific focal point of the financial mechanisms .
On the other hand we have continually been trying to keep democratic law-making going there , too , as part of the normal discussion of the Constitution , where we have law-making delegated from the European institutions .
We always have the same problem in both cases , namely ensuring that we are able on the one hand to guarantee a modicum of transparency and on the other hand that Parliament is sufficiently involved in controlling this .
Are practical efforts being made to bring the general discussions closer together in the context of comitology and the Lamfalussy Process in particular , so that we do not continue to have this array of processes and another component of transparency is thereby taken from us ?
Member of the Commission . - ( ES ) Madam President , I will try to be very brief , but I wanted to make a few brief comments on some of the speeches that have been made .
First of all , it is clear that there is asymmetry between the national structure of supervisors , the financial supervision structures , and the growing importance of the supranational institutions , and the global , rather than just the European dimension , of the financial markets and financial activity .
This asymmetry causes tension and demands a response from the European institutions , from the Commission and from the Council and Parliament .
We are not going to discuss this , as I think that we are all in agreement on it .
Secondly , I am not so much in agreement with some speeches that may have suggested that the structures for supervision and for reacting to events in the financial system in the United States are superior to those that we have in Europe .
I sincerely believe that the facts do not show this , but rather that there is an argument in favour of the European regulation and supervision structures and the way that the financial markets function in Europe in a whole series of areas compared with what happens in the United States .
Thirdly , the Lamfalussy Level 3 Committees are extraordinarily important .
Two of the three Level 3 Committees , the Banking Committee and the Insurance and Occupational Pensions Committee , were only created in 2005 , even though the Lamfalussy Process began in 1999 .
We need to make up for lost time , but a great deal of time was wasted before this Commission came in .
Fourthly , how do we move forward ?
It appears from some of the speeches that some of you think that it is the Commission 's responsibility to make the decision to move forward at the right pace .
I am not going to hide the Commission 's responsibilities , which it does have , as do Parliament and the Council , and of course the Member States .
My experience of taking part in many recent discussions in Ecofin , and also in the Eurogroup , on developments in supervision and regulation and on how to deal with the turbulence in the financial markets and respond to the uncertainty , lack of confidence and failings that we are seeing in the system , my experience , which I can share with you and you can choose to believe it or not , is that the greatest obstacles to moving forward are the positions of some Member States .
This is not , however , in Member States that are not suffering the consequences of the financial turbulence .
There is a lot of work being done .
I understand why Parliament wants the work to go more quickly , but I think that Parliament has the same information as the Commission and the Council , and therefore knows that a great deal of work is being done in many directions at once . We are in a situation in which improvisation tends to lead to mistakes , and in which trying to do things before we know what needs to be done tends to be counterproductive .
There are experiences in Europe and the United States relating to previous supervision problems and previous regulation problems , previous financial problems , that show that it is better to wait for a few months and get it right than speed up the possible response and make the problems that we want to tackle even worse .
One last consideration : the Commission has the right of legislative initiative in the European Union .
The Commission is never going to give up its right of initiative , it is never going to hand over this right of initiative to the Lamfalussy Committees .
It takes them into account , but it is never going to consider that the Commission 's right of initiative should be handed over to the Lamfalussy Committees , and I do not think Parliament or the Council think so either .
What is true , as I have said , is that all of us , starting with the Commission , think that the coordination between the Level 3 Lamfalussy Committees , the capacity to adopt criteria and decisions with a system of majority voting , the capacity to react with almost binding decisions , is something that is increasingly evident and increasingly necessary , in view of the extraordinary importance of the task that these committees have to carry out .
However , this should not lead us to confuse them with the holders of the right of legislative initiative in Europe .
The debate is closed .
Commission Question Time

Madam President , on a point of order , according to the parliamentary website Oral Questions , my question was No 3 on the list .
The question was designed to be answered by Commissioner Mandelson , as its title clearly stated ' WTO talks ' and Mr Mandelson is conducting those talks on our behalf .
However , I now see that my question has been put into section 3 , which means that it will not be verbally answered by Commissioner Mandelson .
I am asking whether he is refusing to be accountable to the House for the WTO negotiations .
What is the point in tabling a question to a Commissioner who is present on the day if the Commissioner refuses to answer that question ?
It is the Commission that decides who answers which questions .
Madam President , that is the problem , because the question , on WTO talks , was clearly for Commissioner Mandelson .
He is the Commissioner who was conducting those talks , he is here today and he is refusing to answer the question .
Ms Harkin , your point is noted and we will do what we can .
The following questions are addressed to the Commission .
Part one
Subject : Negative impact on business of the international credit crisis
The current international credit crisis , which is leading the US economy into recession , is slowing down the rate of growth at world level .
The effects on the European economy and business are substantial .
Greek and other European companies are already coming under considerable pressure from the increase in imports from non-EU countries whose cheaper products are constantly gaining ground on the market .
At the same time , a fall in European exports is forecast for the current year .
What measures will the Commission take to provide European companies with effective support to survive this crisis and become more commercially competitive at international level ?
Which sectors of commerce and which European products does it consider to be most vulnerable ? Which should be protected as a matter of priority and how can that be achieved ?

Member of the Commission . - ( ES ) Madam President , in response to Mr Arnaoutakis 's question , I must say firstly that the global economy is in the process of slowing down ; it is cooling down , to use climate terminology .
The financial turbulence is continuing ; the US economy is in a process of marked slowdown - some think that it is on the brink of recession .
Prices of raw materials , not only oil but also other raw materials , are increasing , and all this is having a negative impact on growth , although the growth of the global economy is still substantial .
The European economy is dealing relatively well with these difficulties .
In our recent forecasts , presented on 21 February , we talked about 2 % growth for the European Union this year , and 1.8 % for the euro area .
There is therefore an impact on the European economy , but the extent of it should not be exaggerated .
With regard to external trade , the most recent figures published by Eurostat show that , for 2007 , the initial estimate talks about a trade deficit in the European Union of 27 of EUR 185 000 million , which is a substantial trade deficit , but in any event lower than many of the other areas of industrialised countries , and the euro area has a trade surplus of EUR 28 300 million .
Therefore , in a global economy characterised by major imbalances , our external sector is balanced in general , and not only our external sector , but our public accounts are also basically balanced .
Third point : the best way of dealing with the crisis in the global economy is to maintain the structural reforms and macroeconomic policies that have enabled us to get our public accounts back on track , improve the stability of our economies , improve our capacity for growth and be in a better position than before to face up to financial turbulence .
Fourthly , there are specific problems to deal with as a result of this turbulence .
We discussed these in the previous debate , so I am not going to repeat them .
I will , however , remind the Member and the House that there are roadmaps adopted by the Ecofin Council in October that establish how to react to this financial turbulence .
Fifthly , I would also like to remind the Member and Parliament that in October 2006 we adopted a strategy for the EU 's external economic action , the Global Europe programme , which establishes a new European trade policy to improve our external competitiveness , with strategies relating to market access , protecting intellectual property rights , open public procurement abroad , trade defence instruments , a policy of not just multilateral agreements in the context of the World Trade Organization , but also a new generation of bilateral trade agreements that complement the efforts to move forward in the multilateral negotiations in the Doha Round .
To conclude this answer , I would like to say that the facts show , in particular for European economies , that market integration , globalisation and liberalisation of trade are beneficial to our economies and bring many more benefits than disadvantages or problems .
Globalisation and , in the European context , the single market , are essential tools for improving our competitiveness and , as Europeans know very well , probably better than anyone else in the world , protectionism is not the solution .

( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , I should like to ask you whether there has been any assessment by the Commission of how this international credit crisis will affect sectors such as tourism and shipping , which in the case of my country , Greece , represent 21 % of the GDP . What measures does the Commission intend to take ?
Member of the Commission . - ( ES ) No , I cannot give you such specific and detailed calculations as you are asking for .
It is very possible that the Greek authorities have made these estimates .
We estimated the impact of the financial turbulence and the more economically challenging international climate on the European economies in our updated forecasts in February , and we estimated that there is going to be less growth , five tenths less growth in the European Union , and four tenths less growth in the euro area compared with the forecasts that we presented in November 2007 .
Also half a point more inflation , basically as a result of the ' shock ' of the increase in oil prices , raw materials , and in particular , food raw materials .
Thus far , the impact on exports is very small , not to say that it has not been felt until now , but as we have said on many occasions , especially recently when the exchange markets have been extremely volatile , we feel that the changes in and volatility of exchange rates as they affect us as Europeans are reaching limits that are causing us great concern , and we need to remind all the other players in the global economy that excessive volatility in the exchange markets is undesirable , because it has negative consequences in terms of growth and economic activity , for everyone .
- ( LT ) Businesses are influenced not only by international crises , but also , as has just been mentioned , by currency exchange rates .
A country with a strong currency can struggle in the competition stakes in international markets .
At present the euro is so strong that businesses have started to complain that exporting is no longer profitable .
Could any measures be taken to alleviate this problem ?
Sometimes countries try to devalue their currency in order to make a profit from sales abroad .
Member of the Commission . - ( ES ) As the honourable Member knows , the exchange markets , in the vast majority of countries , and in particular in more advanced industrialised economies , are governed by flexible exchange rates .
It is the law of supply and demand that sets exchange rates at any given time .
What is desirable is for all the players , all those that are part of the global economy , and in particular , the exchange markets , to keep to the guidelines that we agreed in the G7 , in the International Monetary Fund , in the multilateral consultations , that took place a year ago now , in order to try to deal with the global imbalances in the economy .
One of the conclusions of those multilateral consultations had to do with the need to give the exchange markets the freedom to reflect the fundamentals of each economy , and this is the best way for exchange rates not to be collectively detrimental to the players , the participants in the international markets .
Thus far , for the euro area , if we look at the figures published by Eurostat for 2007 , the first Eurostat figures for 2007 , published on 15 February , over last year exports from countries in the euro area , which is thirteen countries , grew by 8 % , while imports grew by 6 % .
However , at the same time it is true that the changes in interest rates concern us ; and in particular we are concerned by the changes in recent weeks .
This was said as a result of the last meeting of the Eurogroup last week , by the Chairman of the Eurogroup , the Chairman of the European Central Bank and by me as Commissioner for Economic and Monetary Affairs .
We are taking note of the will of the US authorities , which are still repeating publicly that they want to maintain a strong currency .
We are taking note of the announcements and declarations of intention from the authorities in countries such as China and other emerging Asian economies , which are saying that they are aware of the need to gradually introduce more flexibility in the management of exchange rates .
While we change to Commissioner Figeľ for the next question , may I take the opportunity to return to Ms Harkin 's earlier point of order .
I have caused some enquiries to be made and my first point would be that we are dealing with Question Time to the Commission , not to a particular Commissioner .
The Commission has looked at the point you raised and has consulted DG Trade and DG AGRI and in their estimation , I am afraid , your question falls within the competence of Commissioner Fischer Boel .
I cannot enter into debate , but I pass on that information to you so that you know the reasoning .
Subject : Legal downloads of songs from the Internet
On 28 January 2008 , an agreement was signed between the three biggest record companies ( EMI , Universal Music and Warner Music ) to make 25 million songs available on the Qtrax website for free downloading by users .
While downloading is in progress , however , users have to watch the advertising on the site .
This website is available to residents of Europe and the USA and it is estimated that the site 's creators will soon recoup their investment .
Given that there is no EU legal framework covering online music services - as , following the recent recommendation , the Commission does not intend to propose a legally binding framework - and that this agreement was made largely to safeguard the rights and profits of the record companies affected by illegal downloading , in what way are the rights of the artists protected within this framework ?
In view of the fact that this website is also aimed at European citizens , does the Commission consider that competition in music services will be undermined since this agreement involves only three record companies which will make their songs available on the Internet free of charge and will enjoy the profits from advertising on the same website ?

Member of the Commission . - I am sure that Mr Mavrommatis recalls that Qtrax recently announced a new agreement with several major labels to offer the first free and legal advertisement-supported peer-to-peer service with major music labels on their website .
It happened at the MIDEM Conference in Cannes in January .
However , it seems that no deal is currently in place that would allow free downloads of their music catalogues .
Indeed , in reaction to the Qtrax announcement , the four major companies have publicly stated that no deal has yet been finalised , although negotiations are ongoing .
At this stage , there are still uncertainties as to how many agreements Qtrax will eventually sign with the major music labels and as to the content and the scope of these agreements .
It is therefore too early to make any preliminary assessment of the impact on competition in the online music industry .
However , it is clear that such a service would not only have to be licensed by the record labels , but the authors who wrote and composed the music would also , of course , have to be part of the agreement .
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , as I have said in my question , there are three companies making a profit .
I ask again , Commissioner : will other unprotected companies have to close down , leaving the rights of thousands of artists unprotected , at the very time when online music services are steadily gaining strength ?
Or am I to believe Mr McCreevy , who has told us that such a directive will be put before the European Parliament in 2010 ?
Member of the Commission . - Firstly , I would like to assure you once again that the competition policy of the Union and this Commission is an ongoing process .
We check and test and , if needed , we act or react .
Secondly , the adaptation of important rules or frameworks for online content or cross-border rules for the provision of services , including now for copyrights or even terms of protection , are part of the gradual adaptation .
Some of them will probably be adapted this year .
Some proposals have been on the table since autumn last year .
So I think it is an important process , where we are working together , where a cultural context or impact is duly taken into account and cultural diversity protected and promoted .
We are not advising what individual companies should do in terms of the behaviour of others , but it is important that transparency and favourable conditions for creativity and for the dissemination of culture are preserved and promoted .
I think this is our common cause and our common concern .
I am sure that this is the case in the Committee on Culture and Education , of which you are vice-chairman , Mr Mavrommatis .
( ES ) Commissioner , I assume that you know that in some States there is a method for paying authors ' rights that involves establishing a charge that must be paid by all those who buy equipment to record or reproduce material , or buy CDs or DVDs .
I wanted to ask you whether you think that this method is acceptable , when there are many people who buy such equipment or DVDs and do not use them either to download music or to reproduce anything that affects authors ' rights .
I think that this method is punishing honest citizens .
I would like to know your opinion on this .

Member of the Commission . - It is true that in some countries these copyright levies are really very high or the differences are striking .
This is one of topics which we are dealing with .
We did it last year , and I am sure that the Commission will come back to these issues .
My colleague , Commissioner Charlie McCreevy , is responsible for this file , and I see it in connection with other areas where either copyrights , terms of protection or authors ' rights are concerned or touched upon .
So I know about the issues , but thank you for the message , which is repeated by some countries and some industries .
I am sure that this will be part of reviews in the near future .
Subject : Carbon tariffs on imports ?
On 23 January 2008 the European Commission put forward a far-reaching package of proposals that will deliver on the European Union 's ambitious commitments to fight climate change and promote renewable energy up to 2020 and beyond .
Central to the strategy is a strengthening and expansion of the Emissions Trading System ( EU ETS ) , the EU 's key tool for cutting emissions cost-effectively .
Emissions from the sectors covered by the system will be cut by 21 % by 2020 compared with levels in 2005 .
A single EU-wide cap on ETS emissions will be set , and free allocation of emission allowances will be progressively replaced by auctioning of allowances by 2020 .
Under any international agreement , which would ensure that competitors in other parts of the world bear a comparable cost , the risk of carbon leakage could well be negligible .
However , such an agreement is not yet in place .
In light of the above , can the Commission comment as to why carbon tariffs on imports into the EU were excluded from the EU ETS ?
Secondly , can the Commission further indicate the degree of support in the College of Commissioners on the issue of carbon tariffs on products from countries that have no CO2 reduction legislation in place ?
Has the WTO a view on this ?
Member of the Commission . - ( EL ) Madam President , it is a top priority for the Commission to conclude a far-reaching international agreement on climate change , covering the period after 2012 .
The Bali Conference was a significant step in the effort to confront climate change at world level .
All the parties to the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change , including the United States , China and India , agreed to begin formal negotiations .
What we need now - as it is a key priority for the EU and the Commission - is an agreement by the end of 2009 on a future international legal framework on climate .
This framework must be generally applicable ; it must ensure that all parties are committed participants , and it must be effective .
To achieve the desired result , which is , as we have said , an international agreement , the EU really must continue to play a leading role , as it certainly did up to and of course during the Bali Conference .
This is precisely the significance of the package of proposals on climate and renewable sources of energy , which the Commission submitted on 23 January . The EU must retain its leading role and clearly show determination to proceed .
The EU emission allowance trading system is our basic means of channelling investments towards cleaner technologies .
This system ensures that the greenhouse gas targets set by the EU can be achieved at the lowest possible cost .
The EU proposal for a revised directive on the trading system envisages auctioning as the main method of distributing allowances .
Auctioning not only provides incentives for investments in low carbon emission technologies ; it also prevents the undesirable consequences of unfair allocation and unjustifiable profits .
For this reason , the Commission proposes that , from the start of the third trading period , allowances should no longer be allocated free of charge to power-generating companies , and in the industrial sector , free allocation will be progressively curtailed with a target of complete abolition in 2020 .
Some energy-intensive sectors or industries operate in a fiercely competitive international market . As a result , they cannot pass on the cost to the consumer without the risk of losing a large part of the market .
If there is no international agreement , they risk relocating outside Europe , with the result that worldwide greenhouse gas emissions ( carbon leakage ) will increase .
The sectors where this risk of carbon leakage plays a part must be specified objectively .
The Commission therefore proposes that this question should be examined thoroughly and that a list of vulnerable sectors or industries be drawn up by 2010 .
By June 2011 the Commission will assess the situation in these energy-intensive industries . It will base its assessment on the outcome of negotiations for the international agreement on climate change or on any individual sector agreements that may have been concluded .
On the basis of this assessment , the Commission will submit a report to the European Parliament and the Council in 2011 and , if deemed necessary , will propose additional measures .
These measures will include free allocation of greenhouse gas emission allowances to energy-intensive sectors , up to 100 % .
The Commission 's proposal includes , as a further measure , the establishment of an effective carbon equalising or offsetting mechanism .
The aim is that the Community industrial installations that run a significant risk of carbon leakage should be placed on a comparable , equal footing with those in third countries .
Under such an equalising system , provision could also be made for imposing terms on importers , comparable with the terms applying to installations within the EU , for example , the obligation to return CO2 emission allowances .
Whatever method is agreed and whatever action is undertaken , it must be in full conformity with the principles of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change . This is especially true of the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities and capabilities in the special case of less developed countries .
It must also be in conformity with the Community 's international obligations , including Word Trade Organisation rules .
To conclude , the proposal on climate and energy has been collectively approved by the European Commission as a whole , and is therefore supported by all its members .
Thank you , Commissioner , for a very substantial reply to my question , which , incidentally , I tabled long before I realised I would have responsibility as rapporteur for the review of the EU Emissions Trading Scheme situation .
My question was quite specifically about where we stand , ' we ' really being the College of Commissioners at this stage , in relation to a possible introduction of carbon adjustment tariffs , or carbon allowances , in the event that we do not get international agreement .
I agree with you very much that we need a level playing field for EU industry and third-country production in this area .
I just want to tease out whether this option - and I am not being protectionist , and I really support the globalised world we live in today - of a potential carbon adjustment tariff is still out there on the table .
I feel it should be , so I am asking you whether that is the position of the College of Commissioners on this issue , to mark the seriousness with which we treat the whole need to reduce CO2 emissions and the whole climate change debate .
We do not need to be aggressive about it , but we need to be determined about it .
Member of the Commission . - I fully agree with you , and this is a very responsible position .
I am very glad that you are going to be the rapporteur for this very important piece of legislation .
Of course , we discussed everything .
I remember that in Nairobi we had a specific discussion on this issue .
We discussed it in my services , with other services and with other Commissioners , and what we concluded as being a wise , balanced position is to include in the proposal a provision which will take care of the problems that energy-intensive sectors could face in the event that we do not have an international agreement , or that an international agreement does not impose carbon constraints in other countries as ambitious as the European Union 's .
What we have decided is that , by 2010 , we shall identify with objective criteria which are these sectors , and by June 2011 we shall assess the situation of whether we have an international agreement or even international sectoral agreements .
Accordingly , I hope , and I sincerely believe , that we will have an agreement by the end of 2009 , one which will tackle climate change problems effectively .
However , if we do not have an agreement , or if it is not ambitious enough , then there are provisions in our proposal that permit us to assess the situation and , accordingly , either provide emissions allowances for up to 100 % of the allocations of these energy-intensive industries or permit the inclusion of importers into our emissions trading system and , of course , the obligation to pay for similar amounts of allowances as local producers will do , so equalising the situation - or even a combination of these measures .
Therefore , we are giving the necessary assurance to our industries that we will be looking at the problems .
At the same time , we are giving a warning to other countries : they had better agree on an international agreement .
Therefore , by having this very balanced position , we are achieving all the objectives , and I hope that Parliament and the Council will vote on and adopt the legislation as soon as possible , by the end of the year or early next spring .
( NL ) I am delighted with the position of the Commission , of the Commissioner , and the well-balanced approach .
Nevertheless , I have one more very important concern , and that is that we are still exporting old technology to developing countries that is inefficient and also generates emissions .
I would ask the Commissioner whether we can perhaps conduct a complementary policy in this regard that is along the same lines .
Can we expect any such initiatives in the short term ?
In a debate this afternoon on the CAP , we discussed imports into the EU and we called on the Commission as a matter of urgency to develop a plan to push through European non-trade concerns in the WTO talks .
Surely the issue of climate change must feature high on our list of priorities and carbon tariffs on imports into the EU is certainly important in this regard .
So I would just like to ask the Commissioner , as Mrs Doyle did in her original question , does the WTO have a view on this , and what is it ?
Member of the Commission . - I fully agree that we should not export technologies which are going to pollute abroad .
Actually , our first concern will be that we shall not permit the relocation of sectors or industries outside the European Union , not only because we are going to lose jobs and we are going to create employment problems but also because we do not want to carry on emitting and polluting in countries that do not have carbon restraints as we have .
So we should be very careful and we should apply our utmost attention to not permitting this phenomenon to occur .
Of course , when we are preaching that the main way for developing countries to fight climate change is by improving energy efficiency , we have to be very careful what we are exporting to them .
Regarding the World Trade Organisation position on carbon tariffs , we do not know their position , because the question has not arisen , but , after examination within the European Union , we think that there is no problem , because what we have tried to do with the inclusion in the emissions trading system , which is a bit different from border tax , is to equalise the situation .
We do not favour our industries ; we put them in the same position as similar industries and sectors which are producing in countries with no carbon constraints .
By the way , in the United States they are having the same discussion , because in the Liebermann-Warner bill for the introduction of an emissions trading system in the United States they have a similar provision .
This discussion also took place in the United States and they also think that this is compatible with World Trade Organisation rules .
Part two
Subject : Intercultural dialogue in EU
In this Year of Intercultural Dialogue in the EU the Commission has planned many events .
An emphasis should be placed on involving young people in the events of this year so that they may benefit from the rich cultural diversity in the EU .
What specific measures does the Commission envisage in order to involve young people in the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue ?
Thank you very much , Commissioner , for your very detailed reply , and I welcome the developments which you referred to .
I know you , as Commissioner , and the Commission are working very hard on this programme .
In relation to the 27 individual governments , what programme have you asked them to get involved in with regard to supporting what the Commission is doing ?
In other words , while it is fine that we are putting up seven flagship projects , is each individual government also going to put forward a flagship project within each of their own individual countries ?
Member of the Commission . - I said that this is a common cause , a common endeavour , and there are many good ideas and ongoing initiatives at European and national level , plus many at regional and municipal level .
I am happy that there is this kind of strong interest , even internationally , to see opportunities and to seek the opportunity to promote an intercultural approach instead of ' multi-culti ' comments and laments .
I think we need this .
I do not intend to read out the projects themselves ; they are quite inspirational - especially at EU level - because these were selected from many at EU level , and they are very different to those as the level of the Member States .
In fact we have 28 , because in Belgium there are two main communities and support .
We think that the Member States which involve the young generation , which are really open to the future , are probably the best examples of addressing the challenges of living in diversity , and also promoting unity .
Projects like Diversidad , which is run by the European music office .
Here we see a combination of very popular activities : music , music interpretation , listening to music , learning via music , and dialogue with urban culture .
The International Yehudi Menuhin Foundation ; Ton monde est le mien , something which reflects that we need others to understand ourselves ; A Unique Brussels , which is a network of EU institutes of culture ; Alter Ego , a contribution to intercultural dialogue , cross-cultural understanding , and European citizenship by young people through collaborative art projects , which can make them reach beyond their normal social circles .
One project is by the European Cultural Foundation - Stranger .
This is about young people expressing themselves and creating a platform where they can link their experience to the wider European context .
Last but not least , I think it is very important that Parliament is involved as much as possible , individually or collectively .
There are many occasions - events in Brussels , for example - on different topics connected to intercultural dialogue .
We as a Commission will invite the Committee on Culture as a body ( this also means Members ) to all the events we are participating in or co-organising .
We will have , for example , a European Youth Week in November , and I think they should come .
Some of the events should be organised in the premises of Parliament in Brussels , with the participation of parliamentarians and , of course , young people from all countries including non-EU members .
There are many occasions where you can have a say and , especially , set an example and show your commitment .
I believe this should not be just a one-year story .
It must be a long-term objective and a process where we learn , participate and mature in order to ensure a better century than the 20th century , which was one of many divisions , conflicts and ideologies opposing human dignity .
So I think there is strong momentum for your involvement .
I am just wondering , in the whole area of intercultural dialogue and the involving of young people , whether the Commission has looked at the excellent work that is being done in the north of Ireland in this particular area : in the north , between the two different communities that have been at loggerheads for so long , and on a cross-border basis .
I think there is something specific there that could be drawn on , and I would ask the Commission whether it has looked at it and , if not , could they do so .
I shall be very brief .
I just want to ask the Commissioner whether there are any measures proposed in the area of volunteering .
This is surely an ideal opportunity for people from different backgrounds to work together by choice , particularly , let us say , in the area of youth volunteering , with programmes that would set out to ensure that people who do not normally volunteer would get involved - because sometimes volunteering tends to be a white , middle-class activity - and in the area of intergenerational volunteering .
Are there any measures in those areas to promote intercultural dialogue ?
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , on Northern Ireland , I would firstly like express my congratulations in relation to the new atmosphere and what I would describe as very positive expectations of gradual and sincere reconciliation and commitment to the shared values .
I even plan to go there , which may be the best answer .
I think that greater involvement of Northern Ireland 's students , teachers and professors in EU exchanges and cooperation in the ERASMUS programme would also help to bring the larger European community and populations closer .
So I plan to visit this part of the European Union .
Secondly , as regards volunteering , it is a very important topic because volunteering is an expression of solidarity , humanity and togetherness .
On the other hand it is also a non-formal education or learning process .
We need it for employment , new skills , new knowledge and social skills and also for the promotion of citizenship and for values which unite us .
We do more than we used to .
For example in the new programme , Youth in Action , there is a much bigger volume of money and importance in the European voluntary service .
It is now more open to international engagement .
We have larger numbers and I think this is one of the answers .
This year we would like to come up with an initiative on volunteering where more recognition and better conditions for volunteering could be developed .
Of course we need Member States to participate and I am happy that France in particular is willing to deal with volunteering as a topic - volunteering and young people .
This morning I met the minister responsible for health , youth and sport policy and we agreed on certain priorities .
This is one of three priorities for the youth area under the French Presidency , so we will take some steps forward .
The next question on the paper was by Mr Higgins .
I am sorry to say that I cannot accept the question , because he is not in the Chamber .
I know that you would like to work in cooperation .
Unfortunately , the exchange was not notified to us previously and , therefore , according to our Rules , I cannot take it .
I am very sorry I cannot take it and I must give priority to those Members who are present in the Chamber .
Subject : German-Czech-Austrian cultural cooperation
What trilateral or bilateral cross-border cultural cooperation projects has the Commission supported between the Czech Republic , Germany and Austria during the past year , and does it see any possibilities for assisting such projects on a significant scale in 2008 ?
Member of the Commission . - ( SK ) Madam President , allow me to thank Mr Bernd Posselt for his question .
I would like to point out that culture and its financing at national level are the responsibility of the Member States . That is the principle of subsidiarity , which we respect and value highly .
The European Union 's task is to support and complement the activities carried out in the Member States , not to take responsibility for them .
Secondly , it is important to remember that the Culture Programme ( 2007 to 2013 ) promotes intercultural dialogue , transnational mobility of cultural players and works , and cultural and artistic products .
These projects must involve at least three cultural operators in three different countries : this partly answers Mr Bernd Posselt 's question .
Cooperation between operators from the Czech Republic , Austria and Germany can therefore be supported if these partners have been chosen on the basis of the quality of projects submitted as a response to the invitation by the European Commission .
As regards the specific projects of these three Member States financed last year , I would like to point out that the Culture Programme ( 2007 to 2013 ) has only been up and running for a little over a year .
We will have to wait some time to find out about the type of projects financed during this short space of time .
In short , the results relating to last year 's projects are not yet available .
However , if we look at the period 2000 to 2006 , support was provided for 116 cooperation projects and 39 cofinanced projects over a number of years that involved either bilateral or trilateral cooperation between Austria , Germany and the Czech Republic .
Of these projects , 28 were financed from the 2006 budget : this in fact paved the way for the activities of last year ( 2007 ) .
The complete list of all approved and financed projects is published on the European Commission 's website .
I think that that is a comprehensive response to this matter .
( DE ) Many thanks , Commissioner , for your reply .
A little while ago you spoke at length about events in Brussels .
However , events in the regions are also very important and I therefore have two short supplementary questions .
Firstly , you have just been talking about bilateral programmes .
Does this allow for German-Czech programmes only , or should three countries be included here ?
Along with Austria , this could also be Slovakia or Poland , for instance .
Second supplementary question : does this also cover the Euroregions ?
Member of the Commission . - ( SK ) As I said before , under the new Culture Programme there must be three partners from three countries involved in short , one-year programmes ; more partners are needed for programmes running for several years .
The scope or quantity of these activities are thus in a way adapted to the enlarged European Union .
We cannot supplement or substitute , from a small budget , what really needs much greater support from the national governments or regional authorities in large federal states .
As regards what I said about bilateral relations , of the three countries mentioned in Mr Bernd Posselt 's question two were in certain cases paired with another country but the issue of participation was thus partially answered .
I want to reassure not only Mr Posselt but also potential partners that cooperation between , for example , regions or Euroregions , between cities as well as cultural operators in the general sense , is today possible and supported not only by the Culture Programme ( 2007 to 2013 ) but also by the Europe for Citizens Programme 2007 - 2013 .
This programme promotes the involvement of civil society , and its legal basis , inter alia , is Article 151 of the EC Treaty , promoting citizenship defined in cultural terms or with a cultural dimension .
Today there are thousands of examples of well-established partnerships between cooperating local authorities , non-governmental organisations or various associations based on the people-to-people dialogue in civil society .
Thirdly , I would like to add that the Structural Funds are an even greater source of support for the general promotion of cultural aspects and cultural heritage and for cooperation between countries to safeguard and enhance their cultural heritage .
I would like to appeal to the ministers or partners to remember when debating culture that Europe is more characterised by culture than by business or geography .
That is why investment in culture helps to increase our potential , strengthens European identity and makes Europeans more attractive .
This should happen at local level , where people live .
It is not just about Brussels and other capital cities : it is about our regions , towns and villages .
- ( LT ) I have a question , Commissioner .
As you have said , only the Member States themselves would implement the cultural policy .
Brussels is in no position to do anything about it .
However , in the new accession countries in particular , artists and people involved in cultural activities have been feeling neglected for the last 10 to 15 years .
What is the Commission doing , or what is it prepared to do , to share the good experience of how artists are being supported in the new accession countries , as well as new ideas and projects relating to this ?
Could you please give any examples ?
( DE ) There are also numerous historical pressures in the relationships between the Czech Republic , Germany and Austria .
Are there any specific programmes or rather is the Commission planning to concentrate its main efforts here in order to include the associations of displaces people in these European programmes of work , for example , which would be very important in this regard for a more general understanding ?
Member of the Commission . - ( SK ) Thank you for the additional questions .
They demonstrate that culture , identity and memories are important , as is looking forward and developing culture .
We support these aspects .
I must reiterate that subsidiarity is about responsibility and not about creating an alibi for us so that we can say that we are not cooperating because the matter is a Member State competence .
The Commission genuinely makes every effort to create the best possible environment for cultural dialogue , exchange and cooperation , and I believe that the fruit of those efforts are fairly obvious .
I mentioned the Culture Programme ( 2007 to 2013 ) earlier .
Let us compare the numbers : seven years in the past , seven years now .
However , one very important example is the fact that the European agenda for culture in a globalising world was pushed through and approved for the first time last year , not just to the satisfaction of the Commission but to the satisfaction of the EU as a whole .
The proposals were presented in May and approved by the Member States in November .
Secondly , we have succeeded in agreeing that when it comes to culture , to an agenda for culture , we will be using a new method of cooperation , an open method of coordination .
Prior to that , the majority would have said that this would have been unlikely because we would have been unable to reach an agreement due to the differences of opinion .
However , the substance is the key issue : it is important to ensure that this cooperation focuses on practical cultural needs in the broader sense , on the needs of the cultural and artistic sectors , on simply expanding culture .
The Lisbon Council achieved something important in spring last year : cultural sectors or the so-called cultural industry have for the first time been mentioned in the Lisbon Strategy , which is credited with making an important contribution to economic growth and employment .
This helps to overcome the classic dichotomy that culture costs money while business brings in money .
Culture goes hand in hand with values , with the expanding dimensions of sustainable economic development .
A lack of culture results in business problems , as well as political and other problems .
By this I mean that culture should be perceived as an important player and promoted in different ways so that it prospers .
I am therefore glad that even in the Commission we are achieving more success with this more horizontal approach , thanks , too , to last year 's decision .
I do not want my answer to be too long .
The new Member States make contributions through their culture , their extensive heritage , their fresh memories of a divided Europe or of a past that was much more dramatic in the second half of the 20th century .
However , in many ways they can learn from the older Member States , which , for example , have much more dynamic methods of financing culture , developing cultural education and dealing with many issues that have to be promoted in the new Member States too .
Policies and governments cannot treat culture as a residual issue : ' if there is money left of course we will give something to the cultural sector , but it is neither a priority nor a key topic ' .
Secondly , I would like to respond to what Mr Reinhard Rack said about the burden of the past .
A little bit earlier I touched briefly on the issue of memory : it plays an important role in matters of identity ; it teaches us not to repeat the tragedies of the past .
In my response to Mr Bernd Posselt , I referred to the Europe for Citizens Programme 2007-2013 .
This programme allows the European Union over the course of these seven years to cofinance projects aimed at keeping alive the memories of the periods of dictatorship , as well as the victims of Nazism and Stalinism .
I think that this is a very important challenge because it helps us to remember that all that we have - freedom , democracy , a united Europe - has not just happened by chance or by default and that there is always a certain temptation , be it smaller or greater , to move towards totality and a form of simplification .
Remember that we need to develop values in each generation : technology and buildings are easy to pass on but values must be implanted in every person 's mind and heart from childhood .
I would therefore encourage you to use these instruments for cultural or civil cooperation , to use them to preserve our memories , for the benefit of our hearts and our minds .
In my opinion , that is precisely the task of those who have survived such times , who remember the events , who come from countries that used to be in a sort of grey zone or behind the Iron Curtain .
In any event , today 's Union should provide a space for remembering and for developing the Community .
In view of our time constraints we will now move to the questions to Commissioner Mandelson .
Questions 38 to 40 will therefore be answered in writing .
The debate on the Lamfalussy Process was allowed to run 30 minutes into Question Time .
As a result , I could not be here .
I understood questions were starting at 18.00 , that there would be 30 minutes for the first Commissioner , and then I would be the second questioner for the next Commissioner .
The procedures of this House are absolutely crazy .
This is supposed to be a model of organisation .
The kind of organisation and the kind of procedures that we have here would not be tolerated in the most disorganised village or town council within the European Union .
It is absolutely crazy .
Question Time should be sacrosanct and there should be absolutely no overrun .
It discriminates against those Members who put down questions well in advance and there is absolutely no excuse for it .
I made the point at the beginning of Question Time that we were running late , and that this was extremely unfortunate .
I will try to find out what the reasons were that we seemed to have so many debates before that had caused that late running .
I take that very seriously , having responsibility for Question Time .
Now , as far as your own question is concerned , I had noted that there are other Members in this Chamber who have waited patiently throughout for their questions to be answered and did not leave for other engagements .
I know that we all have difficult calendars and agendas , but I have had , therefore , to follow the Rules strictly and give priority to those Members who have stayed in the Chamber .
I am sorry , but the Rules are quite clear .
Subject : Settlement of dispute between the EU and the USA concerning GMOs in the World Trade Organisation
On 11 January 2008 , the reasonable period of time ( RPT ) expired for EU compliance with the ruling of the WTO Dispute Settlement Body concerning measures for the authorisation and marketing of genetically modified organisms ( GMOs ) .
According to statements by the US Government , the USA agreed with the EU temporarily to suspend the procedure to apply trade sanctions ' in order to provide the EU an opportunity to demonstrate meaningful progress on the approval of biotech products . '
The US also expressed its displeasure at the French Government 's intention to activate the safeguard clause to prohibit the cultivation of a variety of GM maize , as other EU Member States have already done .
What is the Commission 's scope for negotiation to achieve an ' amicable ' settlement of this matter and avoid reprisals against the EU while , nevertheless , enabling the EU to maintain a strict regulatory framework in relation to GMOs ?
Member of the Commission . - Settlement of the dispute referred to by the honourable Member would be facilitated if the European Union showed to the complainant that its regulatory procedure was working satisfactorily and led to approvals without undue delay , whenever risks to health or the environment were not identified or were manageable .
Furthermore , a solution would have to be found regarding the national safeguard measures subject to the WTO proceedings , which are found not to be scientifically based and thus not to be compatible with WTO rules .
In both cases , the Commission needs to count on cooperation by Member States .
The obligations on us , therefore , are clear and we cannot evade our responsibilities .
Meanwhile , the United States has agreed not to move to immediate retaliation .
However , respective proceedings could resume following a determination by a compliance panel that the European Union has failed to implement the WTO panel rulings .
The effective functioning of the European Union regulatory system on genetically modified organisms is not only of interest to the WTO complainants but also to the European Union itself .
Most of our current sources of animal feed are countries developing biotechnology products .
Therefore , our timely authorisation of safe GMO products for feed use is necessary to ensure the competitiveness of the livestock industry in the EU .
For example , the EU pork industry is facing increasing difficulties in obtaining feed at reasonable prices , while prices for porkmeat are falling .
In other words , the longer the delay for our authorisations , the greater the risk to farming needs in Europe .
- ( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , in the event of a trade war between the EU and the United States over genetically modified organisms , what amount of potential sanctions is being considered , and how will they be applied ?
Member of the Commission . - The amount of retaliation would be determined by the WTO implementation panel .
But potential retaliation could be very significant . Indeed , it could run to hundreds of millions of dollars ' worth of trade .
It could be applied to EU products coming from different Member States , not only those that have adopted national safeguard measures against GMOs .
So those Member States responsible would not only be putting their own producers and exporters at direct risk of retaliation . They would , through their actions , be putting in jeopardy the exporters of many Member States besides their own .
I hope that they will consider these implications and these consequences when they come to review the action they are taking .
I should like to thank the Commissioner for his clarity , because this is a huge issue for the animal feed industry .
But does he see - as I see - an increasing unwillingness among consumers to take on board the reality of the EU feed market ?
He mentions very effectively the issue of the impact on our poultrymeat and pigmeat sector on competitiveness .
Perhaps at a later stage we can discuss the wider issue of WTO rules in relation to non-trade and the negotiations currently under way on the competitiveness of agriculture in general .
Member of the Commission . - I think that what we are seeing is a great deal of misinformation , misrepresentation and scaremongering , which is influencing some sections of public opinion .
I think that if there were a more representative range of information sources and more objective information given to our public , and some of the ramifications and consequences of some of these actions taken into account , then they would quite possibly come to other conclusions .
Of course consumers should know what they are consuming .
Consumers should also have a choice between GMO and non-GMO .
At the moment they are being denied that choice by prejudice against GMOs .
Subject : In-depth evaluation of Economic Partnership Agreements
ACP governments which have agreed to liberalise trade in goods have insufficient negotiating power on matters of real concern to them .
While they have to make major concessions in the EPAs , Europe is not entering into any binding commitments on important issues such as improving the rules of origin , the allocation of subsidies or the extension of development aid .
Does the Commission agree that these countries should be given more time to arrive at properly negotiated EPAs , that they should have better support in boosting their negotiating capacity , and that an in-depth evaluation and review on the existing agreements - which are still far from being the ' development instruments ' they should be - is therefore necessary !
Subject : Economic Partnership Agreements
The expiry of the 1 January 2008 deadline regarding Economic Partnership Agreements with ACP countries has given rise to considerable uncertainty in these countries .
Agreements concluded on exemption clauses for exports , safeguard clauses , improved rules of origin , the allocation of subsidies or the extension of development aid are often inadequate and therefore enjoy little support in the countries concerned .
Is the Commission prepared to carry out an in-depth evaluation of the existing agreements ? What specific measures will it undertake to that end , and within what time-framework ?
Subject : Impact measurement of Economic Partnership Agreements
The Commission has recently agreed a full Economic Partnership Agreement ( EPA ) with the Caribbean , as well as a series of interim deals meant to eventually lead to full EPAs with other countries or regions .
The progress made so far was presented very clearly to the European Parliament Development Committee this January , and we acknowledge the hard work which has been put in from the Commissioner 's side .
You also pointed out the tasks ahead , however . Among others , you mentioned that it will be vital to find ways to monitor the implementation and impact of new agreements .
Does the Commission have any rough estimates at this point of the positive impact of the latest agreements on the income of African farmers , as well as on the final prices for European consumers ?
How does the Commission plan to go about the development of techniques to monitor and measure implementation and impact ?
Subject : EPAs
Can the Commission provide the latest information on EPAs ?
Subject : Economic Partnership Agreements
Why have you not managed to convince critics that EPAs are fair to developing countries ?
Subject : Partnership agreements with developing countries
Most ACP countries have signed economic partnership agreement ( EPAs ) with the EU .
A whole series of voluntary organisations do not consider that the agreements will attain the stated objectives , i.e. promoting economic development in the contracting countries .
The Commission 's spokesperson has stated that EPAs could in future be put up for debate and thus be renegotiated .
On the other hand , the Trade Commissioner has distanced himself from the possibility of renegotiating the existing agreements .
Can the Commission clarify the situation in this regard ?
Will developing countries which have signed partnership agreements with the EU be able to renegotiate them ?
Member of the Commission . - Things have moved on since the Commission 's update to the Committee on Development in January of this year .
The legal texts have been jointly checked for the Caribbean economic partnership agreement , and we are beginning the process leading to signature and ratification .
In other regions , we have been preparing the interim agreements for signature and have been reflecting on how to replace these with full EPAs .
I have just returned from a visit to southern and eastern Africa taking in Lesotho , South Africa , Botswana and Zambia .
I held ministerial meetings with the SADC and ESA regions , and I had extensive discussions with President Mbeki on both EPAs and the DDA , incidentally .
I was struck in all meetings with ESA and SADC by the commitment of the regions to move forward with the negotiations , not to look back and not to unravel what has been achieved , with all the disastrous implications for trade security that that unravelling would have .
This was reflected in joint declarations in which we made clear our shared commitment to agree full EPAs by the end of this year .
We have also held senior official meetings with central Africa and west Africa in recent days .
Central Africa wants a full EPA by July , and west Africa intends to reach a full EPA in mid-2009 .
Finally , the Pacific region is consulting internally , but the agreed objective remains to finalise a full EPA in 2008 .
My clear sense is that most of the regions are now coming out of a period of stock-taking and reflection after the developments of last December and are clearly restating their commitment to move towards full EPAs .
This is an important sign that their commitment to integrating trade and development strategies in a progressive , forward-looking way .
It is a commitment I welcome .
Our objectives for full EPAs for whole regions and covering the full range of trade , trade-related and development issues remain unchanged .
In the mean time non-LDCs like Kenya , Côte d 'Ivoire and others say they have protected thousands of agricultural jobs through the interim agreements , and LDCs like Tanzania and Lesotho praise improvements in rules of origin .
Sensitive agricultural sectors are protected , and the ACP now have time and space to work out how to reach full regional agreements .
EPAs need to be closely monitored in both aid and trade aspects .
This is why the Caribbean EPA establishes compressive monitoring arrangements , including parliamentary and other consultative subcommittees .
The interim agreements will be replaced with full EPAs that include similar provisions before any substantive liberalisation commitments apply on the ACP side .
( NL ) Commissioner , I take note of your answer .
We shall look into that further .
You cannot deny , however , that most ACP countries have a very inadequate negotiating capacity and are sometimes left with no choice , presented with a fait accompli .
Just last week - and this has nothing to do with the ACP countries - I met a trade union leader from Guatemala , Mr Pinzon , who told me about his difficult situation as a union leader when it came to negotiations between the European Union and Central America .
This situation is common in countries where certain communities and positions are extremely weak .
My question is as follows : can the Commissioner ensure that certain rights , for example trade union rights and international labour rights , are made binding in that kind of trade agreement , both Economic Partnership Agreements ( EPAs ) and agreements with other global blocs , such as Central America , so that those rights are respected ?
I am no specialist in the subject , but I have the impression that the agreements contain significant gaps in this regard .
Member of the Commission . - Guatemala , when I last looked at the list of ACP countries , is not included in their number .
We do not have any in Central America .
So , I would advise the honourable Member to find different sources for his information , from those who actually live and work in ACP countries .
Economic partnership agreements ( EPAs ) were originally conceptualised as trade and development agreements going beyond pure market access .
Could the Commissioner comment on growing concerns that the interim partnership agreements are creating growing trade enmity amongst African nations , the example of Kenya being one ?
Kenyan support for these agreements has been viewed by its neighbours as undermining the continent 's zeal for a more radical position on EPAs .
Member of the Commission . - I am very sorry , I do not know what neighbours of Kenya have taken this position .
As far as I know , unless the honourable Member can advise me which particular country she is talking about , they seem to have subscribed to the interim agreements in the same way as Kenya .
All I would say is that the interim agreements concern goods market access .
They are interim agreements that were made before the WTO 's deadline at the end of December so that countries like Kenya , which are not LDCs and are therefore not covered by ' everything but arms ' , would have their trade preferences and access to the European market secured , so that there was no trade disruption after 1 January .
It is for that reason that our counterparts in Kenya and other similarly placed countries have recorded their satisfaction with the lengths we went to and the flexibility we showed to make sure that they came over the line by the end of the year .
Would you accept that , apart from making the ACP-EU relationship WTO-compatible , one of the key aims of the economic partnership agreements is to ensure that South-South trade increases ?
In that context , would you examine the possibility of increasing and better targeting our aid for trade to make sure that the benefits of South-South trade are realised through these EPAs ?
Member of the Commission . - I strongly support that point and I would use this opportunity to appeal to our Member States to fulfil what I regard as their side of the bargain by fulfilling the commitments they have made to provide aid for trade , to match the commitment that has been made by the Commission .
It is a very important commitment that we have made , which Member States have previously said they would match .
I hope they do so in practice now and live up to the expectations of our colleagues in ACP countries .
As a non-specialist in this area - unlike , probably , many of the other questioners - I am just interested to know how , and rather puzzled as to why , the opponents of EPAs made so much of the running in the press .
Why was it not possible to get across better the advantages of EPAs ?
Is it simply that those opposing them did not accept the benefits of trade liberalisation , which I do , and just wanted to keep protectionism ?
Why is it that the Commission and others were not , perhaps , able to get their voices heard sufficiently in the press ?
Member of the Commission . - Where our voice was heard was where it matters - amongst policy-makers , ministers and decision-takers .
I cannot account for the press ; the days when I could account for what was written in the press have long since passed behind me .
In the case of many of our negotiating partners amongst the ACP , they took the arguments very well indeed .
Having put in place interim agreements , in most cases now they are very keen not only to sign them fully , but to proceed to negotiate a full economic partnership agreement , to move on from goods to services , investment and other trade-related rules , because they know that is where the further bulk of the development value of these agreements lies .
Obviously , there has been a sort of cacophony put up about EPAs - in the main , though not entirely , by people who are suspicious of trade , are anti-globalisation ( whatever that means ) , and who believe that ACP countries would be better off , in a sense , more isolated from the international economy , but , I would say , trapped in the past .
I do not think that has anything to recommend it , but it has the attractiveness of providing simplistic slogans which are easy to absorb and easy to write about , whereas the actual policy substance and content of what this is about is more complex .
But those who take the trouble to grasp it see the value and see the potential benefits . That is why many in the ACP are trying to grasp them .
( DE ) Commissioner , I would be interested to know whether strategies are being conceived for partnership agreements with the developing countries in the field of renewable energies , because it is , of course , important for us that costs are reduced to a minimum wherever production takes place in an exemplary way , while the consumption of dangerous goods is also taxed accordingly .
Could you envisage incorporating this into such an agreement ?
Member of the Commission . - There is a sustainability dimension to all the trade agreements that we are pursuing by negotiation and the economic partnership agreements are no exception .
However , we have to be guided by the interests of the ACP countries and their negotiators and by their perception of their interests .
So , whilst we will not be shy in putting such issues on the table , I cannot vouch for the reception they will receive from those with whom we are engaged in these negotiations .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will be answered in writing ( see Annex ) .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 19.55 and resumed at 21.00 )

The situation of women in rural areas of the EU ( debate )
The next item is the report by Christa Klaß , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , on the situation of women in rural areas of the EU .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all I would like to thank the rapporteur , Ms Klaß , and the members of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality for their own-initiative report .
We all know that keeping the issue of gender equality high on the agenda requires a continuous effort .
I have always considered the European Parliament as a leading institution in this respect , and I want to pay tribute to the work done to help celebrate International Women 's Day 2008 , including last week 's conference .
I fully agree that women in the countryside should have real opportunities and should be encouraged to use all those opportunities .
Overall , I therefore agree that women in rural areas need particular political attention , and I am glad that this principle is implemented via the Community strategic guidelines for rural development under the third axis , where the encouragement of women 's entry into the labour market is stressed as a key action .
The rural economy needs women , not only in order to keep up with economic growth in the rest of society , but also to ensure sustainable rural development , where families and companies see a real future in staying in the countryside .
Before answering some of the specific issues highlighted in this report , I would like to stress that the principle of promoting equality between men and women is central for the second pillar of the common agricultural policy .
In practice we apply it in two main ways .
The first is a creation of an economic opportunity for women through , for example , the promotion of women 's entrepreneurship .
Importantly , in the context of the rural development programmes for the period 2007-2013 , some Member States have designed specific measures for women ; other Member States will give priority to applications from women under certain measures .
The second aspect of the improvement of the quality of life in the countryside : the objective should be a women-friendly countryside , facilitating women 's lives in rural areas and allowing women to make better use of their potential .
For example , rural development supports the funding of day-care centres for children in the countryside so that women have the possibility to stay out there but still to take upon themselves the possibilities of a job .
I think these are examples of agricultural common policy actions that contribute to the improvement of the situation for women in rural areas .
I would also like to highlight the LEADER programme in this context , which contributes to improving the involvement of women in the decision-making process in the local action groups .
In fact , the number of projects managed by women is , for LEADER , higher than the projects that are managed by men : for the period 2003-2005 , two out of three beneficiaries were women .
Concerning the specific requests included in the report , I agree that there is a necessity to monitor and to evaluate the integration of the gender perspective into the rural development programmes .
Indicators , which will show the results and impact of certain measures in the period - again - from 2007-2013 , are broken down by gender , and they should give us the necessary information .
Finally , I would like to mention one point that is not really related to rural areas .
The Commission has initiated an impact assessment as part of the review of Directive 86 / 613 / EEC , which deals with the principle of equal treatment between self-employed men and women , including those in agriculture .
An important point is the protection of self-employed women during pregnancy and motherhood .
A review of this Directive is set down in the legislative working programme of the Commission for this year , 2008 , and this will give us another opportunity to support and improve the position of women in rural areas .
Once again , I thank the rapporteurs and all those who have contributed to a very important issue .
on behalf of the PPE-DE group . - ( HU ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , a great deal was said about the situation of women last week in relation to 8 March .
Alongside the platitudes , some spoke of the problems that lie behind the averages and become visible if one takes a structured approach .
Women do not live in identical circumstances ; their natural aptitudes vary , and so do the opportunities they have and the problems they face .
Women living in rural areas are equally heterogeneous ; they have some difficulties in common , but there are others that only occur in particular social strata or groups .
The report by Mrs Klaß differs from reports that are framed in more general terms in that it clearly and specifically addresses the difficulties facing rural women and policy deficits in this regard .
There is little point in setting out goals to be achieved in terms of female employment if the flexible background services that are necessary for this , for example transport facilities , are not in place .
The situation of women living in rural areas is generally more difficult ; they tend much more often to undertake hidden , unpaid work with no insurance or protection , for example on family farms .
In practice this renders the legal position of these women unclear as regards maternity , sickness and old-age-related benefits .
These issues still await resolution , but meanwhile the exodus from rural to urban areas that can provide better living conditions is virtually unstoppable .
I agree with the rapporteur that greater account needs to be taken of the situation of rural women when distributing and deploying European financial resources .
Failure to do so has far-reaching consequences . Thank you .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , this report sets out the reality of the situation of women in rural areas of the EU , in order to respond to the significant challenges of the additional difficulties that women have in living in this environment .
We are talking about half the population in these areas , therefore mainstreaming gender into the rural sector is a priority , both for the promotion of equality between men and women and for enabling economic and social growth in the countryside .
While women encounter genuine difficulties in integrating into the labour market or reconciling work and family life , these difficulties are heightened when we are talking about a rural environment .
It is therefore necessary to promote initiatives and policies that tackle these challenges so that there might be effective equal opportunities .
Despite our differences , we can agree that women in rural areas need special , joint political attention , promoting rural development initiatives that encourage them to participate in economic and social life and curb the migration of women from the countryside to the city , which is an increasingly concerning reality .
We are indebted to the women of our villages , who have contributed incalculably and almost invisibly to the development of the countryside .
Recognising them should go hand in hand with policies driven by the Member States and regional and local authorities that foster improvements in living conditions and remove the barriers that currently exist .
Therefore , expansion of public services , improving training , access to new technologies and support for innovative business projects are fundamental for achieving these objectives .
We also call on the Member States to develop the legal construct of shared ownership , in order to ensure that women 's rights in the agricultural sector are fully recognised .
This is the only way that we will be able to ensure that equal opportunities become a reality for European women in the countryside .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on raising such an important issue as improving the situation of women in rural areas of the EU .
Recently we were discussing the matter of Europe 's demographic future .
We enumerated many reasons for its bleak appearance .
This problem is even more acute in rural areas .
We need to do all we can to provide country dwellers , and especially women , with the right conditions for life and economic and personal development .
Social exclusion and poverty probably relate to women from rural areas in particular ; I say probably , because there is a need for better statistics on this .
The key to improving the situation in this regard may be for the spouses of those who are self-employed , including rural women , to have a right to their own independent social and pension rights .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , mainstreaming gender in the rural sector is necessary not only to promote equality between women and men , but also to help economic growth to be based on sustainable rural development .
Our Group therefore strongly supports the Klaß report , essentially because of three elements .
Three of the aspects that it highlights are the most important in our view : 1 ) it asks for statistics on the rural world to also be disaggregated by gender so that women in rural areas cease to be an invisible group and that the work that they do is explicitly valued ; 2 ) for the relevant local , regional and State authorities to encourage the participation of women in local action groups and the development of local partnerships under the Leader axis ; and 3 ) the request to focus in particular on improving transport infrastructure in rural areas , and establishing positive measures to promote access to transport in order to curb social exclusion , which particularly affects women .
However , I would also like to propose and support the amendment tabled by my colleague Iratxe García , asking for the text to include an explicit reference to the need for Member States to develop the legal construct of shared ownership , in order to ensure that women 's rights in the agricultural sector are fully recognised , with the corresponding protection in the field of social security and recognition of their work .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( PT ) The situation of women in rural areas is very much affected by the situation of agriculture , suffering the consequences of the common agricultural policy 's unjust measures , which have caused increasing numbers of small- and medium-sized farmers and family farmers to abandon production .
In many cases this leads the men and young people to emigrate , leaving the women with the children and the elderly , condemning them to poverty ; that situation is made worse in the rural areas of some countries such as Portugal with the closure of schools , health and maternity centres , post offices and other public services .
That is why this policy needs to be abandoned .
We are therefore also tabling some amendments in order to stress that the common agricultural policy needs to be reviewed , taking account of this problem and strengthening aid to maintain family farms and develop the rural world , whilst attaching maximum value to the work of women , including migrant women , who also work in agriculture .
We therefore hope that our proposals will be accepted .

on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , since I have been given the opportunity to speak in the debate on the situation of women in rural areas of the EU , I would like to draw attention to the fact that the situation of women in villages and suburban areas in the new Member States in particular is difficult and sometimes dramatic , partly because of the introduction of EU policies that impose various kinds of limits and restrictions , causing poverty and social exclusion through job losses and unprofitable production .
In typically agricultural regions , and not only those in eastern Poland , thousands of families are threatened with the loss of their means of subsistence because their farm is unprofitable , the sugar factory has gone bankrupt or closed down , limits have been placed on fish catches , only certain types of soft fruit are subsidised and there are penalties for the overproduction of milk .
These are the reasons behind the lack of development of infrastructure and communications as well as the provision of education , health care and various other services that will not come into being while there is a lack of economic development .
This kind of development-disrupting policy is also prompting young people , including women , to leave for the city and to emigrate abroad .
The LEADER programmes are capable of helping women from only a few regions ( those that are attractive to tourists or known for their unique regional products ) and will go nowhere towards compensating for the losses suffered by the rural populace who are still waiting for the lofty phrases , the sustainable development , equal opportunities and complete non-discrimination that are to be found in the documents to be realised in practice .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , nothing that we are hearing today and are tabling in terms of demands is new .
We repeat that it is nothing new , whether in the reports on ' Women and industry ' , ' Women and health ' or ' Women in rural areas ' .
We have not yet achieved equal pay for equal work , nor do we have more women in positions of leadership and more flexible child care .
All these problems are multiplied in rural areas .
The distance from home to work and poor transport links are a major problem here .
The shortage of local continuing and vocational training is also a problem .
As already mentioned , broadband access is a must today , but it is scarce in rural areas .
This means we need measures but primarily we need to raise awareness of what it is like for women in rural areas .
This also means , however , that we have to take greater account of the gender aspect in all EU support programmes - whether for the development of rural areas , the Social Fund and the like - and make the programmes contingent upon how they continue to be used .
Austria , incidentally , leads the way in this and will have a law in place as from 2009 - gender budgeting - in which all gender aspects are included .
I think this would be worth emulating .
( PL ) Mr President , much has been said and there have been many discussions in recent years about the role of women , their rights , their position in society and their occupational situation .
Today we are debating the situation in which rural women find themselves , and it is right that we should do so , for it is rural women , especially those in regions of retarded development , who work hardest and benefit least from the rights they are due .
A woman in the city will have a flat with all mod cons , easy access to equipment , education and culture , a right to maternity and parental leave , and the opportunity to work and enjoy the benefits of civilisation .
A woman in the country will often have a home with no plumbing and numerous duties in the family and on the farm .
She cannot count on placing her child in a crèche or kindergarten and her contact with culture and the world will often amount to limited radio and television broadcasts .
A woman from a small village out in the sticks , living on a family farm , is virtually deprived of any opportunity for occupational , social , political or cultural advancement .
Please note that funds for culture are mainly directed towards centres located in cities .
In the cities we have just about everything .
In the country there are only amateur activities , and those activities are often organised in private houses and at the expense of the people involved .
Much is said in the European Union about lifelong learning , and this should indeed be the case .
Let us have some thought , though , for women in such programmes .
In my opinion it is high time for a sensible programme for women that is financed from the EU 's budget .
( SV ) Mr President , vigorous and sustainable development demands that the situation of women be taken into account .
The participation of women is necessary for positive development .
Women who live and work in the countryside , like women in other environments , live in an unequal society .
Hence work to achieve equality is just as important for all women , in all the different environments and situations of life .
In this report I would especially draw colleagues ' attention to the importance of supporting the GUE / NGL amendments tabled by Ilda Figueiredo , in particular Amendment 9 , from which it is clear that the equality problem must also be taken fully into account in a much needed review of the common agricultural policy .
Without the active participation of women we shall not succeed in achieving the aims of sustainable economic growth .
That applies , as I have said , in all environments of life .
We need equality for the survival of the countryside , we need it for women and we need it for the future .
( BG ) Mr. Chairman , Mme Commissioner , Colleagues , First of all I would like to congratulate Ms Klaß for her excellent report .
Being a member of the Committee for Regional Development from Bulgaria , I would like to draw your attention to the fact that rural areas have different development potential .
However , there is something that will certainly contribute to better quality of life in the rural areas , and especially the situation of women there . This is the provision of transport and social infrastructure , accessible social services in the villages , such as raising of children , care for aged and sick persons , communication services , and establishment of cultural and sports centres .
In this respect , the adequate support for the rural areas through financing from the EU funds is of paramount importance .
Therefore I would like to recommend better alignment of the urban and rural issues .
The development of rural areas should be coordinated with the activities performed within the framework of the regional policy .
I believe that an integrated approach to the convergence and development of rural areas , taking into account the role of small and medium-sized towns in them , rather than a separate approach like the one we have had so far , would increase the efficiency of the EU assistance and contribute to the improvement of living conditions , especially those of women .
( PL ) Mr President , the situation of women in rural areas compares distinctly unfavourably with that of women in the cities .
Access to health care and education is not the end of it .
If I may , I would like to draw your attention to points 4 and 10 in the report , which stress the need to even out social and economic rights for women who are self-employed or who work on family farms .
This means in particular the right to paid maternity leave and to an earnings-based pension .
In some countries there are actually legal prohibitions on formal employment and social insurance for partners working on family farms and in family businesses .
The effects of these regulations chiefly impinge on women , and they should be changed as soon as possible .
I congratulate the rapporteur .

( ES ) Mr President , I would first of all like to congratulate Mrs Klaß on her report ; not only is it useful , but also Mrs Klaß has worked very hard , so I would like to thank her very much .

I would like to point out that not all women in rural areas live in the same way .
The rural world is not homogenous .
On the contrary , frequently their worlds are very different .
However , above all , we need to attract women to the rural world and prevent the exodus that is occurring increasingly , because the position of women in our society progresses slowly , but at least it is progressing in the urban world .
Nevertheless , in the rural world , not only do they carry the work inside and outside the home , but at the same time they also care for dependents and , on top of this , these women do this under much worse conditions than in the urban world .
Therefore , attracting women to the rural world should be done not only by improving their personal welfare , but also the economy of rural areas , an economy that is above all agricultural , as you well know , Commissioner .
However , in order for this economy to be strong , the common agricultural policy needs to be supported and strengthened , while at the same time , of course , it has to be taken into account that the technical and social situation needs to change , and soon .
( RO ) I am glad to be given the floor concerning a reality that is much ignored , namely the position of women in rural areas .
Although the system of legislation and norms valid at Union level , as well as at the level of each and every Member State , precludes any kind of discrimination , it is obvious that there is a significant discrepancy between the life of women in urban areas and women in rural areas .
Romania , like other new Member States of the European Union , is in a much worse situation than the general one described in the report .
Given the background of deindustrialisation in the 1990s , there was a phenomenon that the West European countries have not encountered : migration from town to village as a solution for economic survival .
In our region , poverty in rural areas has affected and still affects women above all , and they have become the most vulnerable victims of trafficking in human beings .
Unfortunately , industrial agriculture , which could have attracted part of the female work force in the villages , itself underwent destructuring .
Public health , education , transport , water and sewerage services underwent an accelerated worsening , such services being practically absent in many villages in the less developed countries of the European Union .
Women in rural areas , especially young or middle-aged ones , could develop independent economic activities if they had access to bank loans and I believe we should discuss the opportunity of establishing a bank that would grant micro-loans in rural areas .
( PL ) Mr President , in rural areas women are a social group that is particularly prone to discrimination .
Because of the traditional division of roles and the weak infrastructure in many areas , such as child care , for example , many women never feature in the official labour market , but at the same time they are not registered as unemployed .
Women carry out work that is comparable to an occupational activity but is not recognised as such and is neither protected nor paid .
Member States , together with the European Commission , should find a solution as quickly as possible to the problem of the substantial group of women assisting with farming and in small and medium-sized enterprises who , in many Member States , suffer from a lack of legal status .
This leads to financial and legal problems for these women in relation to the right to maternity and sick leave , the acquisition of pension rights and access to social security .
For the sake of harmonious development , Member States should ensure the creation of high-quality jobs in rural areas through such measures as promoting enterprise among women , increasing their qualifications and providing easy access in all rural areas to standard 21st century infrastructure and services .
Finally , I would like to congratulate Mrs Klaß on a very well-compiled report .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur .
It would be better if we were talking about the situation of people in rural areas rather than women , and indeed many of the problems for women also affect men in rural areas , but women have particular issues and I acknowledge that in this report .

That said , the quality of life for people who live in the countryside can be better in many cases , where they have sufficient resources , than in the city .
I think the problem has always been that women 's work has not been measured , has not been paid for and therefore is not recognised .
In some countries , some progress has been made on this , but I think Member States differ in how they treat women .
I would like to mention a particular role that women play , and perhaps it has not been addressed yet .
Women are still , in my view , the primary motivators and educators of children and they are generally the ones who decide whether a child will farm or not , and often decide the future of rural areas .
We need to pay particular attention to that so that they have a positive view of agriculture , and not a negative one .
Lastly , few women own land and few are in farm organisations .
That needs to be addressed .
( RO ) In 2006 , in the European Union , the ratio between the income earned by that 20 % of the population with the highest wages and the income earned by that 20 % of the population with the lowest wages was 4.8 .
Unfortunately , in Portugal , Lithuania and Latvia , this ratio exceeded 6 .
It is obvious that the population in rural areas has lower wages than in urban areas , and this situation is even more obvious in the case of women .
In order to improve the situation of women in rural areas , we need to efficiently use the structural funds .
The development of transport infrastructure , education , health services , communication infrastructure and information technology and of the service sector in rural areas will result in the economic development thereof and , implicitly , in the improvement of women 's status in rural areas .
I close my statement by saying that rural areas can transform , by means of investments , the available lands into industrial parks to offer jobs .
An effective transport infrastructure could result in the distance being measured in time and not in kilometres , so that the people that work in urban areas could live in rural areas thus contributing to their economic development .
Mr President , in acknowledging the hard work that our rapporteur , Ms Klaß , has put into this report entitled ' The situation of women in rural areas of the EU ' , I would have to ask : compared to men in rural areas or women in urban areas ?
What is the context in which we are talking here ?
There is no such homogeneous group as ' women in rural areas of the EU ' .
I am a woman from a rural area of the EU , but the lady who lives down the road from me with six or seven children and a husband who is unemployed , and who cannot afford her rent or mortgage , is a different type of woman in a rural area .
It is not a homogeneous group , and we must be very careful in this issue .
Many women in rural areas have an urban lifestyle ; others have a lot of poverty and hardship in their life .
You have an urban lifestyle in the middle of the countryside if there are two cars outside the door , all mod cons , ICT and perhaps a foreign holiday a year .
So let us give it some context .
The real issue here is the restoration of choices to all women : the choice to marry or not ; the choice to have children or not , to have a career , to have further education or not , to stay at home , to go out into the workplace , to start a business or to have access to property .
A few years ago when I went to buy an apartment in Brussels , the Brussels bank manager would not sign off my mortgage unless I got my husband to sign it .
This was only a few years ago in Brussels .
I got my mortgage and my husband did not sign it .
Might I say that I objected strongly !
So the access to money , property and business - there are lots of different types of women in rural areas .
Mrs Doyle , I can assure you I would never have turned you down for this mortgage .
( RO ) The success of the Lisbon Strategy involves sustained economic growth both in the urban areas and in the rural areas of the European Union and women play a crucial part in the development of these areas .
I praise the drafting of this report which , apart from analysing the condition of women in rural areas , also proposes concrete recommendations in order to improve their condition in the context of globalisation and achievement of the Lisbon goals .
From the multitude of incentives and conditions to be observed for this purpose , I would like to underline the importance of a major factor , namely education .
The statistical data that are available to us show that a small number of women in rural areas have access to higher education due to financial difficulties , but also due to the precarious quality of educational activities in such areas .
The women in rural areas should benefit from enhanced access to education and lifelong learning , as well as to opportunities to reconcile family life with professional life .
It is a key element that should be consolidated along with the active role of women in politics and the socio-economic development of rural areas .
( SK ) Thank you , Mr President .
I would like to congratulate Mrs Klaß on her excellent report .
I come from a new Member State with a relatively strong rural population .
Over the last 45 years it has remained stable , with only a small fall-off of 14 % .
Due to economic policies , rural regions are more prone to changes today .
There is a well-known process in operation involving firms relocating from rural to urban areas .
Public policies , however , should be such that this so-called modernisation does not take place at the expense of women in rural areas .
I would like to invite the Committee of the Regions to study this area and begin a broad consultation in the rural regions to learn more about life there with all its advantages and disadvantages .
I would also like to invite the Commission and the Council to direct their programmes , especially those involving micro-loans , towards women in rural areas , too .
( RO ) Dear colleagues , as we are discussing a matter related not only to the issue of equal opportunities , but also to the development of rural areas in general , I will refer to the measures that are applicable at Community level in this field .
The programmes and the funds of the 2nd pillar of rural development have , in terms of percentages , more significant resources than the special programmes of the European Union for equal opportunities .
If we succeeded in facilitating the access of women to programmes such as LEADER , dedicated to rural development , we would have much more to gain than if we used only the resources within the EQUAL , PROGRESS or DAPHNE programmes .
In the European Union budget , the funds for rural development are as high as 11 % , whilst the entire sector of citizenship , which includes the programmes for equal opportunities , does not even reach 1 % .
This is the great challenge for the European Union in this case : succeeding in communicating , mobilising and facilitating the link between European funds and the various projects which could be initiated in rural areas by women .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I thank the House for a very encouraging debate with some fairly dedicated speeches - I really enjoy that .
The discussion we have had tonight makes it clear again that the situation for women in rural areas really needs specific attention .
Although I feel that some of you are a little pessimistic about the progress that has been made , I want to approach this from a more positive side .
I think that quite a lot has been achieved , especially through the rural development tools , and I am confident that we are heading in the right direction when it comes to improving the position of women in rural areas .
Many of you have mentioned that mainstreaming the gender issue into our policy and broadening its scope to the wider rural economy will enhance its effect .
I fully subscribe to this approach .
We should not limit our focus to the farm sector only .
Embedding our policies in the needs and opportunities of rural society as a whole will create a multiplier effect that will also benefit the whole agricultural sector .
The Commission will closely monitor this aspect with the implementation of the rural development programmes .
Several of you mentioned the importance of broadband networks in rural areas .
Here I have to say that there is a possibility within the third axis - the diversification axis - of the rural development policy to go into areas that , from an economic point of view , are not economically viable for investors .
Those are remote areas where Member States can use the rural development policy to secure a broadband connection .
I can only encourage all Member States to take this into consideration when they plan their investments or the use of their rural development policy .
Some of you also mentioned the ' hidden work ' that is being done by women on farms .
I acknowledge that our statistics do not always reflect this fact .
We should , using all the different tools , try to encourage women to seize the opportunities to gain their economic independence by giving them the associated social rights .
For me , better possibilities for taking up part-time work for women in agriculture would be a huge step forward in strengthening rural incomes and also to help sustaining life in rural communities .
I must say that I travel quite a lot in rural areas and I am always very encouraged when I meet women who cross the borderlines and take part in the work of the different farmers ' organisations .
I know it is a big step for the first women to enter into these organisations but sometimes it spreads and it is not so difficult for the next one , although it requires some change of approach on the men 's side to accept that women can contribute on an equal footing in this area .
I think there is quite a lot more to be said on this subject , which should not be pushed into the background .
Let me assure you that I will wholeheartedly back all initiatives that can improve the position of women in rural areas , because I really think that we need this special approach from the female side to the diversification of rural areas .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , thank you for your contributions to the discussion .
We had a really good discussion here in this round .
Commissioner , thank you , too , for your statement that the review of Directive 86 / 613 / EEC on the principle of equal treatment is still taking place this year , in 2008 .
We have sent a reminder on this and we think it is time to review it .
We are unable this evening to adopt any European regulation for improving the situation of women in rural areas .
Mrs Doyle , I know that the situation of women is not the same everywhere .
It would also be dull and we do not want that at all .
However , women in rural regions do , of course , have the same conditions and they have to struggle with the same disadvantages as women living in towns and cities .
We have pointed this out here .
We are initiating the discussion process and we are asking the Commission and the Member States to ultimately bring about changes as well .
The report should raise awareness of this .
There are good examples in Europe and according to the principle of best practice we also want to highlight these examples for emulation .
We can also introduce a lot that is good here .
We want to broaden the view .
Women in rural areas are not only farmers ; women in rural areas are also on their way to becoming employed , and they have to combine family and work .
In the end , being personally affected is the best testimony .
We need the contribution of women in our organisations .
Mrs McGuinness has just been speaking about contented mothers who are also able to bestow contentment on their children .
We shall also have contented women when we do something towards their equal treatment , towards their fair participation .
Our concern here is that young people will also then stay in the villages again .
It would be exciting , Commissioner , to have a list of all the many opportunities that ultimately present themselves for women in the European Union .
We are constantly asserting that these are concealed in many cases under the cover of other programmes .
Perhaps we could manage to say just once that women are involved in one programme or another , in this way or that .
This constantly creates problems , even when it should be sorted out locally .
Perhaps we should schedule this as a start in order to be able eventually to say to those responsible in the regions : we can achieve improvements for women here .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday 12 March 2008 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( HU ) In terms of employment , a comparison of urban and rural areas reveals that a widening abyss is developing .
Women living in rural areas are particularly disadvantaged .
Their chances of social integration , of obtaining employment , and of access to child-related , educational , health and social institutions , are less .
They constitute one of the most vulnerable groups in society , as they are much more exposed to the risk of poverty and marginalisation .
Where they do manage to obtain employment , their wages lag considerably behind those of their urban counterparts .
Cumulative social disadvantage engenders social tensions , as the social welfare system is at its most inadequate in the most disadvantaged communities , while the worst infrastructural deficiencies are also to be found here .
In the absence of other options , agriculture , with its short-term advantages and lower standard of living , has the effect of conserving the tension-rife rural employment situation .
The solution lies in concerted action ; local authorities , governments and the European Community all have a role and a responsibility in this regard .
Multi-faceted adjustment programmes need to be put in place .
Opportunities for adjustment must be provided for the rural population by creating alternative employment opportunities , developing infrastructure , initiating training and further education programmes facilitating adaptation to market conditions , supporting business start-ups , and establishing projects in border areas and across national borders .
Adjustment programmes will inevitably have to be tailored to the particular characteristics of individual rural areas .
This will ensure the ongoing reduction of regional differences .
in writing . - ( HU ) I would like to congratulate my colleague Christa Klaß on her report , which highlights the difficulties that women living in rural areas have to face in the labour market and in other aspects of their lives .
Any discussion of the most disadvantaged people living in the worst circumstances must make special mention of Roma women , a significant proportion of whom live in villages and small settlements .
Numerous studies have shown that Roma women constitute the European Union 's most vulnerable group , with a life expectancy that is shockingly low compared to the majority of society and an unemployment rate that is several times the average .
In line with the report 's recommendations , therefore , Member States need to draft and implement the kind of policies that will improve the general living conditions of women living in less developed regions and help disadvantaged women and women facing social exclusion to obtain work or engage in self-employment by fostering new businesses .
Roma women in particular could benefit from support from Member States and the European Commission for socially aware business models that involve the poor and disadvantaged groups in society .
I welcome the fact that the report places great emphasis on gathering reliable statistical data , because the gathering and processing of data disaggregated according to gender and ethnic origin are vital , on the one hand , for eliminating indirect and multiple discrimination and , on the other hand , for measuring progress achieved in terms of education , housing , health and employment . Thank you .
in writing . - ( SK ) The enterprising report by the rapporteur , Mrs Klaß , seeks a new approach to eliminating the obvious inequalities between urban and rural areas . Women play a crucial role in the socio-political , economic and environmental development of rural areas .
Women 's lives in rural areas present a great deal of opportunities as well as considerable difficulties .
Making rural areas more attractive will help to curb the exodus of mainly young and well-trained people .
I am thus calling for the promotion of sustainable integrated growth and the generation of new employment opportunities , particularly for women , as well as the provision of high-quality health care , social services and other general services throughout the EU .
Only educated women will be able to be fully involved in revitalising local communities .
They will be able to set up new companies , which in turn will contribute to the diversification of the rural economy and improvements in the quality of life in rural areas . We must remove all obstacles to accessing information and communication technologies and ensure that broadband is available to women in rural areas .
Continuous education and language learning as well as opportunities for re-training must be available to all interested women .
Moreover , the successful LEADER programme should continue .
It has successfully allowed many women to set up companies in rural communities in areas such as tourism , crafts and the provision of regional products .
I believe that by identifying best practices and using the new tools for exchanges of experience , a significant contribution can be made to improving the quality of life in rural areas .
in writing . - ( RO ) The EU is confronted by important social changes which have been brought about by problems related to migration , social security and poverty .
The programmes developed at EU level have made an important contribution to the improvement of the condition of women in rural areas .
Nevertheless , women are not involved in decision making in the communities to which they belong .
A concrete and worrying example , is that most women in the rural areas in Romania have an income below 5 EURO / day , and a third do not use any media .
I would cite as as a priority three action fields in order to obtain equal opportunities and to improve the condition of the women in the rural area :
improvement of social status by supporting the access of women to new income and goods acquisition opportunities ;
full involvement of women in the decision-making process and enhanced capacity to change / influence the decisions that affect them directly ;
access of the women in rural areas to essential services ( health , education ) and infrastructure .
The Member States should prepare public policies to encourage the participation of women in the labour market , in the decision-making process , and should control any forms of discrimination .
Sustainable agriculture and biogas : review of EU legislation ( debate )
The next item is the report by Csaba Sándor Tabajdi , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on sustainable agriculture and biogas : a need for review of EU legislation .
rapporteur . - ( HU ) Mr President , Commissioner Fischer Boel , ladies and gentlemen , in a world of climate change , increasing energy demand and rising prices , it is an absolute priority and a matter of vital interest to the European Union to reduce energy dependence and energy consumption and to diversify energy sources .
The increasing use of renewable energies is an integral part of this .
We must diversify , and this includes diversification within the area of renewable energies .
In the field of renewable energy sources , different countries have different natural endowments , and we must exploit these to the maximum .
Biogas holds enormous potential as a renewable energy source and is destined for a great future for a whole number of reasons that are set out in the report tabled for debate today .
The first and most important of these reasons , ladies and gentlemen , is that the primary raw material for producing biogas is animal manure , and the fact that we can combine energy production with the treatment of manure for environmental protection purposes .
This is one of the most significant advantages of biogas production , although biogas may of course be produced from other materials such as municipal sludge , slaughterhouse waste and energy crops .
Biogas is a multifunctional energy source : it can be used for electricity generation , for heating , cooling , or drying .
Pressurised biogas is suitable for running cars and public transport vehicles and , once it has been purified , biogas can be fed into the natural gas network .
Biogas production thus represents a serious opportunity for European energy production .
Among other things , if we consider that biogas can be produced from animal manure , we could produce 14 times more than we do at present .
The potential this represents is considerable , since we know from an environmental point of view that animal manure has to be treated before it can be used on the soil ; otherwise it can seriously harm the environment .
There was some discussion in our committee on the question of whether biogas production using plant-based material would compete with food production .
The European Commission has shown that such a situation has not yet arisen in Europe , and we hope that it will not arise in future either , since we now have the second generation of energy crops .
It may be that this is a problem in the global context , in Brazil and the United States , but in Europe it is not an issue at present , and we hope that it will not become one .
The other issue discussed in this context was how the biogas sector should be regulated .
Current regulation both at national and European Union level is exceptionally complicated and bureaucratic , and this is why in my report I have suggested adopting an EU biogas directive .
At the same time , however , European Commission representatives have convinced me in the course of consultations with the European People 's Party that there is no need for a separate biogas directive , as a directive on renewable energy sources is in preparation and the issue of biogas could be addressed in this context .
In this regard I ask the Commission to devote special attention to biogas in the directive on renewable energy sources and to adopt the suggestions set out in my report .
Ladies and gentlemen , in my response later I would like to thank the Danish institute that helped with this report and everyone who contributed to it . Thank you for your attention .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , before going into the context I would like to thank the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and the rapporteur , Mr Tabajdi , for this very interesting and important report .
Parliament 's report clearly underlines the benefits of biogas production to the agricultural sector , but also to society .
I fully agree with the emphasis placed on the development of biogas production .
It has environmental benefits by reducing the emission of powerful climate-altering gases , such as methane and nitrous oxides .
For this reason , biogas production further enhances the environmental sustainability of agriculture - there has already been a 20 % reduction in greenhouse gas emission since 1990 - and it also has obvious economic advantages as a useful alternative to natural gas in a situation where we now see that oil prices have exceeded USD 100 per barrel .
The production of biogas from agricultural feedstocks has more than doubled in the period from 2004 to 2006 .
Overall biogas production is increasing but I think that we can clearly do more .
There is a large untapped potential in biogas production within the European Union .
On the Commission side we are fully aware of this and we have put in place a number of important instruments to promote the production of biogas .
Our current Green Electricity Directive with implementing legislation in some Member States is an example of an important driving force .
Rural development policy also favours the development of biogas production .
Member States have the possibility to support investments , technical assistance and cooperatives and other activities enhancing biogas production and biogas use .
Implementation of the rural development programmes from the period 2007 to 2013 has only just started but I find that Member States ' first programming is very promising and I am confident that biogas-related measures will be among those with the highest uptake in the area when we talk about bio-energy .
Measures included in the Commission 's recent energy and climate package will give a further boost to biogas production in the coming years .
Particularly important is the 20 % target for renewable energy .
It is expected that biogas will contribute significantly to reaching those targets .
Biogas will also play an important role in delivering the 20 % reduction targets for greenhouse gas emission from sectors that are not participating in the emission trading system .
Therefore we are in a very positive situation where we can kill two birds with one stone .
I am convinced that biogas production will be a key element in the European Union strategy to combat climate change and to make it possible for us to meet the Kyoto targets .
I agree with you that a coherent biogas policy is important .
The EU initiatives are in my view coherent and they go in the same direction .
Nevertheless , I believe that this policy could be most effectively fleshed out and implemented at regional or at national level on the basis of local resources , needs and economic realities .
In this respect , I welcome the recommendations concerning the simplification of the current legislative framework .
They are in line with our ongoing discussions on simplification and better regulation , which represent a Commission strategy very high on the agenda .
Finally I have to say that I have doubts on specific targets for biogas , and I heard a remark by the rapporteur .
I think that the 20 % target for renewable energy already encompasses biogas .
Biogas can also contribute to the achievement of the 10 % biofuel target .
If we introduce a special biogas target we would run the risk of not being focused enough .
Setting a specific target for biogas would introduce further administrative burdens for private operators and public authorities .
In my view it would also lead to excessive political pressure for a particular type of renewable energy , which could be unfortunate if economic circumstances are later not too favourable for biogas production .
The report on biogas that you request from the Commission is certainly useful .
However , it seems to me that the deadline of 2008 that you are setting is a bit too early when we look at all the other initiatives that are taking place .
However , the Commission will report on the implementation of the EU Biomass Action Plan by the end of 2008 , so I am quite sure that we will find common ground on this issue .
It is a very important and also very interesting report .
I am quite sure this will provide a very good basis for further discussions .
draftsman of an opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety . - ( SV ) Madam President , biogas can play an important role in combating climate change , not just biogas to produce heat and electricity but also to drive vehicles .
Biogas can be produced , for example , from manure and household waste .
There is currently great potential for a substantial increase in the production of biogas .
In the Committee on the Environment we want to respond positively to this possibility and in the future see much more biogas .
Increased biogas production must not be an end in itself , however .
When it comes to waste , the main priority must still be to reduce the total quantity of waste .
If we are to reduce waste , we must - saying this is like swearing in church - reduce our consumption .
I should like to take the opportunity to put a couple of questions to Commissioner Fischer Boel , who is with us this evening : does the Commission have a strategy for reducing the ever growing waste mountain in the EU ?
Perhaps the Commission also has a strategy to help us reduce the consumption of so many goods that we do not really need ?
In the Environment Committee we also want to see certification for sustainable biogas .
Such a certification system must cover the entire chain , i.e. from field to vehicle .
The certification system must be founded on social and environmental considerations .
I welcome the Commission 's proposal for a new directive on renewable fuels , but more needs to be done to enhance the role of biogas .
One more question for Mrs Fischer Boel : what is your view of such a certification system ?
This and other environment-related questions underscore the importance of public responsibility .
Most of us here agree that we should boost the role of biogas .
More cars and lorries should be able to run on biogas .
Biogas reduces emissions of greenhouse gases from cars by as much as 90 % .
In addition , particulate emissions are also reduced and cars run more quietly on gas .
However , if we are really serious about our environmental commitments , the responsibility cannot be left to the market .
For example , to enable more cars to run on biogas , there must be filling stations where they can fill up with gas .
The State must ensure that filling stations face up to their responsibility through legislation and temporary funding .
In my homeland , Sweden , the last filling station on a drive to the north is in Uppsala , which is in the middle of the country .
In other words , motorists who like to keep their tanks topped up have to drive for more than 1000 km without any chance of filling up with biogas .
That is of course unacceptable .
Hence we all have a responsibility for promoting biogas : the EU by drawing up guidelines , the Member States by stimulating national production , and not least the local authorities , which should build more biogas installations .
draftsman of the opinion of the Advisory Committee on Industry , Research and Energy . - ( DE ) Madam President , I am reporting the opinion of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , which bears responsibility for energy policy .
I have no personal opinion on this , but the committee has accepted my draft opinion by 45 votes to 0 , with 0 abstentions .
The Committee on Industry is aware of the positive contribution of biogas not just from manure - as the rapporteur thinks - but from all organic waste .
We have pointed out that competition in foodstuffs is becoming increasingly problematic , that there must be discussion on the fact that the feeding of biogas into the gas network must be free of discrimination and that new processes for second-generation technical biogas should be proposed .
We have discussed the role of green gene technology in connection with biogas and we are of the opinion that the young , innovative biogas sector admittedly needs start-up financing , but not a permanent subsidy .
In addition , we want uniform support instruments across the EU and this is expressly stated in our 13 points : we want a simplified planning permission procedure for biogas installations .
The Committee on Industry has not demanded that four new directives should be put forward , as my fellow Member has done in his draft report .
I share the Commissioner 's opinion that we do not need any new directives , but that we should give biogas a fair role in the existing directives on renewable energies .
In this respect the Committee on Industry has formed a somewhat different opinion from the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , which is responsible for the report .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as shadow rapporteur for the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , I am able largely to endorse this report .
The rapporteur has produced some good work .
I am able to agree with what has already been said : biogas can make a substantial contribution towards achieving our goals for renewable energy sources , using fewer fossil energies and thereby also reducing CO2 emissions .
The prerequisite , of course , is that biogas potentials are used .
In Germany there are many biogas plants , in which only electricity is produced .
Only about 38 % of the available energy is being used here ; over 60 % of energy is unused as lost heat and pumped into the environment .
This cannot be the purpose of biogas production !
I therefore believe it is right for this report to demand that biogas also be fed into the gas network .
We must follow both these directions : either use the heat lost when producing electricity or feed biogas directly into the network .
We can then achieve a high degree of efficiency with both these processes .
I am also of the opinion that even better plants can be cultivated with modern plant production .
I am definitely not of the opinion , however , that genetic engineering is required to do this .
Plant growers tell me that yields for biogas plants can be doubled on good acreage with traditional plant cultivation .
We are able to harvest the equivalent of approximately 5 000 litres of fuel oil per hectare for biogas .
With good plants , which in future will be created by plant cultivation , we shall be able to harvest up to 10 000 litres per hectare .
This is a good way for biogas to contribute towards countering climate change .
Madam President , I was very interested to read the proposals prepared by my colleague Mr Tabajdi .
I would like to congratulate him on a fine report .
In the current world situation , where the price of oil and other energy sources - gas , for example - is rising steeply but is subject to unpredictable swings that make it difficult to plan sensibly and estimate investment costs and when the energy demands of European countries are also rising , a report on the subject of biogas would appear to be an unusually timely document .
This report in fact shows us how much we can still do to develop this sphere of energy generation .
Energy generation from these sources can be increased many times without any accompanying degradation of the natural environment .
A positive offshoot to this development would be to support beneficiaries with funds intended for regional development and the development of rural areas .
The Commission and the governments of individual countries also need to lavish particular care on generators of this type of energy and support this development through the mechanisms of specific financial incentives .
I am therefore entirely at one with the rapporteur 's view that the European Commission should intensify its efforts to develop energy from sources of this type and incorporate it into Europe 's energy strategy .
It is of particular importance for us Europeans that the European Union should make itself independent of exports in the energy sphere in the shortest possible time by increasing diversification .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to congratulate Mr Tabajdi on his balanced report .
I think he has succeeded in pointing out the significance of biogas for a sustainable energy future mix .
As an MEP representing Northern Germany , I am aware of the potential of biogas as an important and versatile form of biomass energy produced by agriculture .
Germany - and particularly Lower Saxony , where I come from - is a leader as far as biogas plants are concerned .
We should not miss the opportunity to develop strict , clear criteria for biogas technology when introducing an EU certification system for biomass fuels .
This should apply specifically to imports as well .
There should be no extra administrative burdens for our producers , however .
Only in this way can concerns about the use of cereals and foodstuffs for biogas production be effectively dispelled , because food production must continue to remain agriculture 's overriding responsibility .
Only in this way can and will biogas technology make a meaningful contribution to a secure energy supply , to reducing our dependence on foreign imports , to climate protection and to rural development .
European research and development programmes will also then be able to generate greater efficiency .
Madam President , implementation of the ideas listed in my fellow Member Mr Tabajdi 's report would certainly enable us to take a giant step forward in increasing biogas production .
At the same time it would be a step towards the realisation of sustainable agriculture through significantly reducing the amount of vegetable and animal waste , manure and sewage sludge and the acquisition of renewable energy .
There are , however , drawbacks to biogas production .
At current production and sale prices it would not cover costs , and there would still be waste at the end of the day , only more concentrated .
We need to assess the pros and cons in the cold light of day .
My political group has done this , and we believe that even with the technologies currently available we should support Mr Tabajdi 's report .
Perhaps other technologies will enable the production process to be upgraded , while rising energy prices will increase its economic effectiveness .
There is , however , no doubting the achievements in environmental protection and this is the most important thing .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , the rapporteur has submitted a good report and he has submitted it for the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , which is good .
We have just heard from Mr Langen that the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy is apparently competing with us here .
This is always how it is : whenever something becomes successful , the Committee on Industry tries to walk off with it .
That is not necessarily a good thing .
I recall that the pioneers of biogas production were farmers , who were laughed at 10 , 15 , 20 years ago when they wanted to produce energy from manure .
The idea here , to put it in graphic terms for once , is to turn shit into gold .
This actually entails producing energy from manure - and not entering into competition with human food .
What is left over from the manure will be an even better fertiliser that is more versatile than aggressive fertilisers .
This means that biogas is counted among the renewable energies alongside wind , water , sun and wood and is in fact a renewable energy if we confine ourselves to producing it from organic waste .
In a situation like the one that arose last year and the year before in the milk sector , where 23.5 cents was being paid for milk , the comparative excellence was much higher when maize was fed directly into the biogas facility , than when it was merely sent through the cow and milk was produced .
This means that food prices and energy prices always correspond and this has something to do with the fact that we do have an Electricity Feed Act - in Germany in any case , but also in some other countries - by which better recycling of plant products can be achieved in the energy sector than in the food sector .
We have to watch out here that we do not get into a competitive situation .
There is competition between tank and table if we get it wrong .
However , if we strike a balance on the issue of biomass fuel , this balance turns out to be negative , whereas we had a positive balance with biogas - even with biogas for cars .
It therefore depends on us clearly favouring smaller plants in policy on subsidies and in remuneration policy , in order to prevent migration into industrial production .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Madam President , let us be clear : this biomass thing is driven by the alleged global warming effect of man-derived carbon dioxide emissions .
Forget carbon footprints .
CO2 is a natural constituent of the atmosphere ; it is not some kind of devil potion , as is misleadingly made out in portraying the situation as an ' Inconvenient Truth ' .
This hyperactive film is not proof at all ; it is not even truth .
It is a theory and a very long way from proof .
You see , as a chemistry teacher - and I bet there are few of those in this Assembly - I know what it takes to go from hypothesis to theory to chemical law .
I do not go by the theatrical or didactic rantings of a US politician on the make .
Fortunately , we now have the Manhattan Declaration , released by 500 scientists last week , which says there is no convincing evidence that CO2 from modern industry is causing climate change .
It reminds us that the global climate has always changed and always will .
Does no one here appreciate that the Earth we know is not in a final state but in continuous dynamic development ?
To tax us all to achieve the unobtainable and unneeded is political greed .
To turn over farmland to produce biofuels when populations are increasing and there is a world shortage of cereals is madness .
To grow biofuels by cutting down whole areas of rainforest , burning the timber where it falls to get a few years ' worth of nitrates and then moving on , gang-raping the precious forests , is criminal .
So what is causing the current minimal degree of global warming ?
To paraphrase former President Clinton : it 's the sun , stupid !
on behalf of the NI Group . - Madam President , I welcome the recognition of the potential for a considerable increase in biogas production .
It ticks the boxes of helping livestock farmers tap into an alternative income stream and , at the same time , makes a worthwhile contribution to the environment by solving problems allied to the disposal of agricultural waste .
A third distinct advantage for biogas is that , unlike biofuels , it need not hinder food security but , rather , help it .
Therein is a key advantage for biogas : using waste rather than crops , it does not discourage essential feedstuff production or food production itself .
The fledgling biogas sector needs meaningful start-up support with a uniform support instrument across the EU rather than the sporadic patchwork of support which we have at the moment .
Extra research support to exploit second-generation biogas as a biofuel is a forward-looking necessity .
So there is much that can and should be done to promote biogas and , at the same time , make agriculture more sustainable .
I believe in the EU we grossly miscalculated in over-indulging biofuels .
Let us not compound that error by undervaluing biogas .
Madam President , I also welcome this report : it puts us into the picture of what the potential for biogas is , and I know there are different experiences in different Member States .
One would wonder why there is such a gap in biogas production and use in some countries and not in others .
As the Commissioner said , there is huge untapped potential there and we need to do something about it , but not , I say , another directive , as we have plenty of them and it would just confuse rather than assist progress in this area .
Let me draw your attention to paragraph 37 of the report , which calls for a simplified planning permission procedure .
It is perhaps the only mention of a most relevant fact in all of the deliberations about using waste and recycling .
In my country and in my experience every time there is a planning process for a green recycling facility or the use of meat and bone meal for energy production , there are objections , because people are suspicious of these developments and are fearful for their health .
We need to draw together the research and be very firm about what the truth is on this because the public has concerns .
Therefore , we need to educate the public of the need to recycle waste from agriculture and from sludge , but also be aware that there are downsides to this technology and that producing energy leaves a residue that has to be handled and dealt with very carefully .
I would welcome some comments about this side of the debate , because in this House we tend to look at renewables as being wonderful , but we also know that the public objects to wind turbines in their back gardens .
Therefore , we need to bring the public along with us , but also to acknowledge that there are concerns about health that need to be addressed .
Finally , let me say that I fully support Amendment 1 by Mr Mulder , a most sensible and very important amendment , and I suggest that I read it , because it re-emphasises the need to reclassify animal manure so that it is used properly on farms and the Nitrates Directive needs to be looked at in this context .
( HU ) Thank you very much , Madam President .
Ladies and gentlemen , the globalised world of today presents us with a number of challenges .
These include , for example , climate change , increasing poverty , the problems of energy efficiency and energy security , and the issue of using renewable energy sources .
In the interests of agricultural sustainability , we must therefore not only respond to the challenges affecting the European Union but also institute coordinated policy measures on the basis of a common strategy to try to address the difficulties facing the 27 Member States .
In this light I particularly welcome the initiative of my colleague , Mr Tabajdi , on biogas and sustainable agriculture and take this opportunity to congratulate him on his excellent report .
I think it is important to adopt a European Union directive on renewable energy sources in order to coordinate EU regulation and national policy , to coordinate regulation at EU and Member State level .
Biogas produced in integrated agricultural plants is one of the most important sources of bio-energy .
Setting up biogas plants is costly , however .
To enable us to exploit the potential of biogas it would make sense to coordinate cohesion policy , opportunities provided by agricultural , rural development and framework programmes , and to promote investment in and sustenance of biogas plants .
The allocation of financial support needs to be based first and foremost on efficiency ; if efficiency is the primary criterion , then electricity generation is virtually the only thing worth supporting .
There are many other potential uses for biogas , however , and we should therefore concentrate efforts on research and development and innovation in order to expand the range of efficient ways of using this resource .
In addition to European Union funding , we need to create favourable conditions in the Member States to facilitate the construction and operation of biogas plants .
In this context it would be useful for Member States to provide price subsidies or other measures to promote the use of this novel energy source .
Another advantage of biogas as an energy source is its significant capacity for adding value , both on agricultural holdings and in the rural regions , helping those regions to increase their economic viability .
It is therefore also important to ensure that disadvantaged regions are also able to exploit these opportunities . Thank you .
( PL ) Madam President , Mr Tabajdi 's report raises an issue that is of great importance to farmers , the economy and the environment .
Biogas limits the cost of importing natural gas , reduces the amount of methane that is released into the atmosphere and is a fuel that can be used directly in agricultural production and for public utility purposes .
Recycling manure , waste and sewage sludge to produce biogas is beneficial to the cause of environmental protection .
The level of biogas production in EU states , however , varies very widely .
In this area the EU institutions should take such actions as upgrading the functioning of legal and economic regulations to promote the development of biofuel production ; speeding up research programmes linked to upgrading biofuel production technology , including fuels produced from biomass , organic waste , sewage sludge and manure ; and introducing programmes to publicise information and advertise good experience as achieved by German , Belgian and Danish farmers .
( SV ) Madam President , the United Nations Panel on Climate Change says that man is emitting greenhouse gases to a degree which is changing the world 's climate .
The EU has accepted that mankind should therefore reduce these emissions dramatically over the coming decades and has said that the EU should take a lead in this global effort .
How are we to go about this ?
I am horrified to see how political meddling and the ambition to shift political power to the EU institutions are now threatening to run out of control .
We European parliamentarians should not be demanding subsidies for the commitment to biogas .
We have no idea how tax incentives should be applied to favour biogas over other alternatives .
We must allow emission targets to be set in each EU country , which we have done , and then leave it to the countries themselves to devise effective means of attaining their targets .
The classic European solution is institutional competition - not central control .
Madam President , I thank Mr Tabajdi very much for his report .
I , like many other speakers , welcome this report on biogas because it has a very important role to play .
In agriculture in particular a lot of waste is produced that could be made very effectively into biogas .
Waste food and waste vegetables could also be mixed with it to create electricity .
Therefore , it is likely to be very efficient .
In fact , use of biogas is considered to be one of the most efficient ways of making electricity by ' bio- ' means .
One thing I would say to Mr Tabajdi is that we do not need a directive specifically for bio-energy : it can be encompassed in a renewable energy directive .
I would urge him not to pursue that .
I would also say that , as far as farmers are concerned , one of the things they are now greatly involved with is the Nitrates Directive .
They also need a lot of storage on their farms for waste .
Slurry could be contained on the farm and could be changed into biogas , and the waste from that could then be spread on the land .
As the Commissioner said , it kills two birds with one stone .
Ms McGuinness said that one of the things we need to tackle - probably not at European but at Member State level - is that biogas plants are always wonderful things as long as they are somewhere else and not next door to you .
This is something that we suffer from greatly in Europe : it always happens somewhere else .
Finally , I should like to reply to Mr Clark - though I think he has left - who asked whether or not there is global warming .
I was talking to an eminent Israeli scientist who said that there could be global warming or there need not be , but can we wait for 20 years to know whether we were right or not ?
( RO ) Given the current price of oil , biogas is an energy resource that should be taken into account , especially in the context in which the reliance of the European Union on hydrocarbon imports is increasing .
We all are aware of the goal of achieving 20 % of renewable energy in the total energy consumption at European level by 2020 .
However , in these circumstances , it is obvious that the use of biogas as an energy resource should also be stimulated , especially by using financial tools .
Biogas and other biofuels , along with solar and wind energy , can significantly reduce the reliance on conventional energy sources .
Furthermore , in comparison to other renewable energy types , biogas has the advantage that it can be used in the production of electricity , thermal power , as well as in transportation .
Maybe a new directive on biogas alone is too much to ask , but I welcome the request addressed to the Commission to present a special report on biogas in the European Union , which should also include recommendations concerning the European and the national legislation in this field .
( FI ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I too would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Tabajdi , for his excellent report .
He has done a very thorough job .
Biogas is an important renewable energy resource which contributes to sustainable agricultural development and improves the state of the environment .
Biogas can also be used to help make farms and areas more self-sufficient in energy , and just a small part of this resource has actually been tapped .
We still need much in the way of product development , however .
We need innovations , an exchange of good experiences and additional funding .
The important raw materials of biogas , manure and the by-products of food , should not be classified as waste , but as raw materials that can be used to make biogas and fertiliser .
At the same time we have to lay down a common set of rules to promote the use of biogas throughout the European Union and remove the national barriers and restrictions that relate to it .
( SK ) The EU is reliant on countries outside the Union for its energy supply .
In addition , Europe is not far from an energy crisis .
It is , therefore , essential for us to intervene and support the use of renewable energy .
In my view , biogas represents a convenient option from both an economic and an environmental viewpoint .
It contributes to sustainable economic and agricultural development , to the development of rural areas and to the protection of the environment .
When produced from animal manure , sludge , communal and animal organic waste it offers new income opportunities to the farming community .
It is , however , also essential to pay close attention to safety measures .
Some active components and bacteria contained in agricultural and communal waste , if spread , could jeopardise both public health and the natural environment .
I would also like to object strongly to the use of corn , cereals and other primary agricultural food products for energy production .
Their combustion leads to overpricing of feedingstuffs and foodstuffs in general .
Madam President , the generation of renewable energy from biogas is a positive development from an energy-supply perspective .
However , the contribution of biogas from manure to the abatement of greenhouse gases requires further research .
The draft report does not actually address the issue of unintended or fugitive emissions , i.e. those emissions of gases which escape during the production process .
Some research suggests that methane losses during production , and emissions of nitrous oxide when digestate is applied to the land , can negate any potential for greenhouse gas abatement .
More research is urgently required .
Any review of legislation to support biogas production should be based on a rigorous life-cycle analysis to definitively assess the process in the context of renewable energy production and as an abatement strategy for greenhouse gases .
Madam President , I wish to begin by adding my congratulations to the rapporteur on a timely report .
Energy security , rising energy costs and climate change are perhaps the greatest challenges facing Europe in the 21st century .
One thing is clear : Europe must become more self-reliant in its energy needs and ensure the security of its energy supply .
To do this will mean more diversification into alternative energy sources and a heavier reliance on new technologies and renewables .
In my own constituency it is estimated that we import a staggering 96 % of our energy .
Many of you will agree with me that the emerging market for biomass and biofuels presents many new opportunities for the farmer .
It is an increasingly competitive marketplace : farmers in my constituency of Northern Ireland could find many benefits from looking to alternative uses of their land to create new business opportunities in the production of biofuels .
While I am under no illusions that biofuels and biomass energy are the only answer to Europe 's growing energy concerns , I am sure that they have an important role to play in easing them .
( PL ) Madam President , the role of gas is an important one , firstly in the diversification of gas supplies , secondly in countering climate change , and thirdly in improving the state of the environment , in other words protecting it .
Let us also bear in mind that biogas is produced from domestic waste , organic waste , slurry and manure .
Biogas is a very important source of renewable energy .
It can be used to produce energy , it is a good source of heat , and it can also be used to power vehicles .
A greater number of vehicles could benefit from biogas , but it needs to be made available and cost-effective to use .
We must , however , apply new second-generation technologies to produce biogas .
What we need to set up , then , are stable conditions for biogas development and suitable financial support instruments .
Madam President , as the rapporteur for the Renewables Directive on which we are about to vote in this Parliament , I really welcome Mr Tabajdi 's report .
I also broadly agree that biogas is one of the best ways of processing biomass in Europe .
In my report I will try to highlight the potential of biogas .
It is a storable form of energy , so is complementary to other intermittent sources of renewables .
I will also push to reduce red tape .
I think we have a real problem in Europe concerning authorisation , especially for energy production which is not dangerous , and biogas is not dangerous .
I would just like to mention one other issue .
At the moment we are also discussing the internal market Gas Directive .
We also need to make it easier for biogas to have access to the gas network .
Any of you who are interested in this should look at the amendments which I have tabled on the Gas Directive .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , my thanks to all those who have contributed to this discussion .
As always happens , it is very difficult to concentrate only on biogas - we then start a discussion on all renewable energies .
This whole discussion is based on the energy report published by the Commission last January , because we could suddenly see that we were depending heavily on imports of energy , especially from our eastern neighbours , and secondly : how could we contribute to the reduction of CO2 or greenhouse gas emissions ?
Suddenly all the different ideas were put on the table .
When we talk about the transport sector , 10 % needs to come from renewable energies by 2020 , and here the agricultural sector was the first supplier - and is at this stage the only supplier .
We all know - and we have heard it today as well - about the competition between food , feed and fuel .
This will be a discussion as long as we are in the first generation of those different biofuels .
I therefore completely agree with those who have underlined the necessity of investing heavily in research and development so that we can pass through the first generation and enter into the second generation .
It is crucial for it to be economically viable in the future , which it is not today with the different types of renewable energies .
We need to be able to find the ' golden solution ' , so that it becomes economically sustainable .
Another issue is sustainability - environmental sustainability .
Here we have a very clear approach .
We will not accept renewable energies that are not produced in a sustainable way , and this is related both to production within the European Union and to renewable energies that will be imported from overseas .
We will need imports .
Do not try to convince anyone that we can rely exclusively on European production .
That is simply not possible ; we will need imports .
I think it is a splendid idea to continue working hard on biogas .
Here we use waste - slurry - and all the residue from slaughterhouses , which is a very good component in this production process .
From an agricultural-environmental point of view this can solve some of the problems that some Member States , some regions , are facing with the Nitrates Directive , as mentioned here tonight .
It can help solve these problems as well .
I think there are lots of possibilities in the renewable energy sector , but we need to push for further investments to be able to make it a viable solution for the future .
Once again my thanks to the rapporteur .
It has been a very good report .
rapporteur . - ( HU ) Commissioner , Madam President , thank you for this debate .
It is clear , as today 's debate has also demonstrated , that neither biogas , nor bio-energy , nor renewable energy sources are panaceas in themselves , but all are vitally important in terms of energy diversification .
Second : biogas remains expensive , as my fellow Member , Mr Kuc , and many others have said .
Technological development is therefore needed .
Initially , as Commissioner Fischer Boel has mentioned , this will require government support from the rural development fund .
The third point is particularly important .
Evidently I did not make myself clear - I am addressing this to Mr Parish : tomorrow I will present an oral amendment withdrawing my proposal for a directive on biogas and bio-waste and recommending its inclusion in the unified directive on renewable energies .
This was the agreement reached between myself , Mrs Fischer Boel and her colleagues and the European People 's Party .
The fourth issue is that of the deadline : of course we will be flexible in this regard .
I would like to say to Mrs McGuinness that the procedure at present is exceedingly bureaucratic ; in Denmark , the country that has been most ambitious in this regard - and not because the Commissioner is Danish - it takes five years from inception of the idea to handing over of the plant , and there are countries where it takes ten years .
Lastly , I would like to address the point raised by Avril Doyle .
Here in my hands I have the excellent Danish study - which again has nothing to do with the fact that the Commissioner is Danish - produced by the National Centre of the Danish Agricultural Advisory Service .
Writing this report was easy .
I shall send Mrs Doyle the section that contains very precise calculations relating to ' Potential Environmental Problems ' , in other words on issues like fugitive gases ; I certainly found them reassuring , although I am not an environmental expert .
To conclude , I would like to express my gratitude - and I apologise to the Commissioner in advance for my poor pronunciation of Danish - to Thorkild Birkmose , Henning Lyngsø Foged and Jørgen Hinge of the Danish Agricultural Advisory Service , who produced this excellent study .
I would also like to thank Nicolas Nevez , who worked alongside the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , and my colleagues Dávid Korányi and Tamás Bíró ; I also thank the two draftsmen Werner Langen and Jens Holm for the opinion of the two associated committees , and I thank you all for your constructive criticism .
Let us move forward with biogas , even if it is not a cure-all . Thank you for your attention .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Energy statistics ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Turmes , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on energy statistics - C6-0035 / 2007 - .
Member of the Commission . - ( ES ) Madam President , last year was a year of crucial decisions on climate change and energy policy .
The European Union is determined , and committed to tackling climate change and taking up the challenge of guaranteeing secure , sustainable and competitive energy .
The European Council of March 2007 , a year ago , established precise and binding objectives , with an ambitious plan to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases and increase the use of renewable energy in our energy consumption .
The Commission , as you know , has put forward specific proposals in these areas .
All of these aspirations require high-quality , constant and detailed monitoring of the progress of our energy situation , as energy consumption is responsible for more than 80 % of our greenhouse gas emissions .
Member States also need to monitor their energy dependency closely , in particular with regard to natural gas and oil .
The proposal for a regulation on energy statistics is part of the energy package adopted by the Commission last year .
Traditionally , gathering statistics on energy has been based on voluntary agreements with the Member States , and it has been done in this way for years .
Nevertheless , both the Commission and Parliament agree that , now and in the future , this gathering of statistics is too important to depend solely on voluntary agreements .
Moreover , the liberalisation of the gas and electricity markets has brought with it an increase in the number of interested parties , with the logical consequence that gathering data in this field is now much more complex , which means that a legal basis is needed for this very important work .
This proposal for a regulation is the result of a request from the European Parliament to the Commission to make a legal commitment to provide European citizens with data on energy at European level periodically and at appropriate times .
In addition , energy statistics are a very dynamic field and the proposal for a regulation picks up the European Parliament 's desire for statistics on energy efficiency and renewable energy to continue to evolve .
This is all a reflection of the constructive atmosphere that has dominated the debates between our institutions to arrive at the final version of the proposal for a regulation that we are beginning to debate today in Parliament .
Therefore , allow me to conclude this presentation by thanking the protagonists in this process and especially the European Parliament rapporteur for their support in drawing up this legal basis , which will enable us to have transparent data on energy in the European Union in the future .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Madam President , energy is back on the political agenda .
Commissioner , when you took up your post in Brussels , the price of a barrel of oil was USD 25 .
Today it is USD 105 , so , in order to cope with the energy challenge - whether in respect of climate change , the oil shortage , our geopolitical dependence at the root of the situation , our economic vulnerability faced with the volatility of oil prices , or gas prices - I believe there is greater urgency than ever to introduce a European energy policy .
However , to draw up a good European energy policy , you need a good database .
I think that what we will be voting on this evening is in fact the creation of a good database , because statistics will be compulsory - that is a very important point - but also because Parliament has really achieved success , I believe , because the statistics , which up to now have been mainly very detailed fossil energy statistics on coal , oil and gas , are going to be adapted to the 21st century , and energy in the 21st century will be oriented towards renewable energy sources .

From 2020 , at 20 % , renewable energies will be the leading energy source in Europe .
Therefore , these statistics need to be adapted , and we are going to adapt them in line with demand for energy .
It is rather staggering to note how poor the national statistics - and , consequently , the European statistics - are , particularly as regards buildings and consumption by household and office appliances , and also as regards transport .
I believe we have also gained something important , namely transparency regarding the nuclear chain .
The new regulation will force Europe to be much more specific , including with regard to the front end of the nuclear chain , bringing an end to a rather Kafkaesque situation .
We were in a position where we were importing .
Europe imports 98 % of its uranium , and in the statistics , in Europe 's statistical yearbook , nuclear was shown as a native energy source because the statistics had not been adapted .
Therefore , there has been progress on this point .
Another success lies in the fact that the statistics are going to be published five months earlier .
It was a fierce battle that we won here , particularly against the Council .
There will also be a collateral gain , namely that the Member States - and particularly Germany , which was in practice the most difficult to convince - will be forced to invest more in the statistics .
From this platform , I would therefore like to offer my thanks to all the statisticians in Europe who , over the last 10 years , with very limited resources , have had to produce the statistics - and are continuing to produce them .
Today we are going to put them in a better position , because the Finance Ministers will now be obliged to take statistics on energy much more seriously .
This victory for Parliament is a collective victory .
I would like to thank Mrs Trautmann , Mrs Hall and Mrs Korhola for the work carried out .
I would also like to thank the Parliament staff , Mrs Cordero of the Portuguese Presidency , who is really the person who helped us reach an agreement , and finally the Eurostat officials who had to put up with me , sometimes afternoon after afternoon , with my questions and the provision of answers , so thank you to them , too .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FI ) Madam President , energy statistics at Community level always used to be based on a gentlemen 's agreement .
It was clear beforehand what the statistics were being compiled on , how accurate they had to be , and when they had to be ready for submission .
It has not been that way for a little while now , however .
EU enlargement , certain statistics practices which came along with it , and other reforms , such as the liberalisation of the energy markets and alternative forms of energy , have together created the need speedily to draft a Community-wide legal framework for compiling statistics .
The compromise package now before us is the result of intensive talks in which gentlemanly behaviour had to be sought to some extent , though in the end it was found , to the benefit of one and all .
The energy statistics process was supposed only to be a mere footnote to Parliament 's statistics on labour , but the rapporteur , Mr Turmes , has succeeded in playing an official political game of dry and technical statistics to stir up deep passions .
The calls for detailed statistics on the nuclear fuel cycle , energy end-use and extended statistics on renewable energy , as well as ambitious demands to bring forward the annual Eurostat reports , were all examples of politically oriented moves .
To be fit for purpose , however , statistics need to be a neutral tool , no more .
As the shadow rapporteur for my group , I was given the role of arbiter .
With regard to that , the views held by Eurostat and the Council were a long way off from the aims of our rapporteur .
I would now like to thank all the parties concerned for their prudent desire for a compromise , meaning that the regulation we have been waiting for can now swiftly enter into force .
The reforms pushed for by Mr Turmes will also be taken into account in the regulation , though in a realistic way .
We also found consensus on what the regulation is to cover and what should be left to other areas of legislation .
A splendid example of this is peat : we are not now adopting a position on its classification as a fossil or a renewable fuel , in that it renews itself every year , in this context .
Let us leave that little battle to the forthcoming debate on the directive on future renewable forms of energy , when our paths will surely cross once again .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as Europe gradually equips itself with instruments to limit climate change associated with greenhouse gas emissions , as European citizens experience the full force of the energy price rises , it is of course important finally to establish a legal basis for the collection and dissemination of energy statistics .
However , we feel it is just as important to make them consistent with the challenges we are facing : saving energy and redefining our energy mix , with fewer fossil energies and far more renewable energies .
The new elements of this regulation are therefore more a coherent redefinition of the scope of the statistics than a series of sporadic additions .
My approach as shadow rapporteur for the Socialist Group in the European Parliament will have been to ensure that these statistics can be even more useful to European citizens , but also to those who govern them .
They become more reliable for analyses and more useful as an aid to decision-making .
For citizens , we have fought for and obtained more transparent statistics that provide information about what affects them most : housing and transport , but also the nuclear industry .
For governments , the most up-to-date statistics possible will be available for the usual Energy Councils held each spring .
We will see how far these objectives are met .
In the meantime , the result of these changes is , in my view , quite restrained , that is they do not unduly increase the workload of the Member States or the various partners involved .
It is on this point that I would like to thank our rapporteur , Mr Turmes , for his sense of compromise , along with his whole team .
Finally , I would again like to applaud the very valuable and efficient support given throughout by Eurostat to help produce a result that is now recognised as robust .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , I would like to thank Mr Turmes for his excellent work as rapporteur and for his close cooperation with colleagues .
Energy statistics are like the steel rods holding up a building : you cannot see them from the outside but without them the whole building collapses .
At the moment we are constructing brand new ways of doing energy .
The EU has agreed new targets on energy efficiency and renewables and CO2 emissions .
But , as we know from past EU efforts in these areas , it is easier to set targets than it is to implement them , and the only way we can tell whether or not we are doing what we set out to do is by measuring actions statistically .
We now need statistics focused on energy demand as much as on energy supply .
We need detailed statistics on renewables as well as on fossil fuels .
We need improved statistics on nuclear energy , collected and collated at European level , and we need these statistics to be processed much more quickly so that we have early feedback .
It is particularly important to make sure that statistics are available well in advance of March energy summits .
Finally , I welcome the fact that peat remains firmly in the fossil fuel category .
In the UK , peat land is regarded as precious habitat to be protected .
Peat regenerates so slowly that it would be quite inappropriate to regard it as a renewable resource .
Madam President , climate change , security of supply , price increases , incidents such as blackouts in parts of Europe , and the Ukraine Gazprom wake-up call have all increased the awareness of the European citizen and policymakers to the complexity of our energy situation , which urgently requires the availability of accurate , timely and complete statistical data .
In this respect , I welcome the Commission proposal and the work done by our rapporteur , Mr Turmes .
Let me also take this opportunity to congratulate him warmly on his appointment as rapporteur on the Renewables Directive .
Energy use is responsible for 80 % of the total EU emissions of greenhouse gases .
The availability of timely and reliable baseline data on the energy situation in the EU is imperative in order for us to meet our objectives not only under the Kyoto Protocol but also in a post-2012 scenario .
How can we reliably agree to transparent targets on fossil fuel energy reduction on the international stage and the increased use of renewables without such baseline data ?
We cannot .
Currently the compilation of energy statistics is slow , inefficient and often incomplete , and even inaccurate .
As the rapporteur rightly points out , there is a substantial delay in the publication of Eurostat 's energy data .
Can the Commissioner confirm that this regulation will result in more timely availability of vital energy statistics and that the statistical model we use here in the EU is comparable to that used by , for example , the USA and other global players , so that we can compare like with like ?
Finally , I agree with the rapporteur when he says that the new regulation should provide protection from data manipulation .
Accurate , verifiable and unbiased Eurostat statistics are crucial to the whole range of current and future climate and energy policies , such as the EU emissions trading scheme , effort-sharing and renewable energy proposals .
( ES ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , if as the European Union we want to construct a coherent energy policy and speak with once voice on the international energy stage , it is essential that we have complete and reliable statistics that enable us to make comparisons easily .
It is also essential that there is good coordination with and between Member States .
We therefore think that it is important for the Commission 's text to state that their participation is compulsory .
It is also important , as Mrs Trautmann said , for the new proposal not to burden businesses or the other parties involved with more work .
We therefore welcome the fact that the proposal does not seek to modify the statistical tasks that are carried out , but rather establishes a common legal framework that guarantees methodological uniformity and thus facilitates data comparison .
In addition , understanding the complexity of our energy situation and conducting detailed quantitative monitoring of the progress made towards our goals also requires accurate , timely and complete statistics .
We therefore agree with the rapporteur that , in areas such as energy efficiency it is necessary to improve the statistics that we have .
Efficiency is now a priority for our energy and climate change policy .
The current statistics do not provide the necessary data for calculating coefficients that are not , in this field , absolutely necessary .
The development of the nuclear sector and renewable energy also raises considerable difficulties that need to be resolved .
These are only some examples of the limitations of our current system which , along with interesting proposals for solving them , are very well covered in the report by Mr Turmes , and I would like to congratulate him on his excellent work .


( PL ) Madam President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on a fine report .
I would also like to congratulate the Commissioner on the initiative raised by the Commission .
I support this report , mainly because it talks about a common energy policy , and in particular about a common foreign energy policy .
There is a further reason , however , and for me this one is actually more important : we are leaving Member States a choice where primary energies are concerned ( the energy mix ) , while at the same time we are limiting CO2 emissions and creating a common energy market .
If we want to compare costs , and to find out in the future which zero-emission solutions are best and which solutions are the most economic , we must have a basis for comparison .
A common market and competition in it , and above all effective investment , require good , comparable statistical data .
Such data are needed by investors , particularly private investors , if we are to operate an efficient policy in the energy market .
We shall also be able to compare data from individual Member States concerning specific prices and costs , which is something we are unable to do with the statistical data we have at present , particularly because of a lack of data on renewable energy sources .
There is one final question : who will be able to benefit from these data and how ?
All is not clear on this point , and it will be practice that decides .
It is very important for us to give attention to the extent to which such data will be accessible in future , and how we are going to protect that part of the data that should not be published .
( RO ) I wish to congratulate the rapporteur on his work .
Energy and climate change are priorities of the European Union .
That is why energy statistics enabling the Union to assess this sector and to take the necessary actions are extremely important .
On 26 February 2008 , Eurostat published a set of statistical indicators for energy , transport and the environment .
In the case of energy we find indicators for energy reliance , energy intensity , energy sources , final energy consumption , renewable energy , energy efficiency and energy prices .
As regards climate change , we find information about greenhouse gas emissions .
The Member States will have the obligation to provide the necessary data to obtain the indicators requested by the proposed Regulation .
Important funds will be needed for data collection and processing .
Amendment 14 also refers to time savings due to the use of information technology in data collection and processing .
Amendment 5 outlines the necessity of security in the supply of the most important fuels and the availability of exact data at European level , supplied in due time , in order to anticipate and coordinate the solutions at European Union level in case of possible supply shortages .
This is in line with the solidarity clause for cases of energy shortages under the Treaty of Lisbon .
European citizens need such correct and exact statistics .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this report is very important for us all because the details naturally form the basis for political decisions .
It is therefore also important to differentiate in future between financial and product transactions .
We all know how energy prices are influenced by the different sectors .
However , the difference between production , trade and consumption also plays a major role .
We should begin here specifically with intelligent metering , not only with the consumer , but also with the various measuring points available .
The choice of method used to get a grip on the various costs for the statistics is also important to us .
We very much want to eliminate bureaucracy as well as to achieve greater efficiency in the statistics .
The choice of method here will therefore be important in terms of future use - random sampling , fully automated analysis , just-in-time , non-decrypting , comparable across the EU , but also globally .
The proportionality is also important for the different agencies .
We need to ensure that security of supply is transparently available as a universal criterion , that there is differentiation between costs and prices and that the entire system is sustainable .
rapporteur . - Madam President , I have just a few remarks to make .
With regard to peat - and unfortunately Ms Korhola has already left - it is very clear from our definition that peat is classified under fossil energy .
We have taken up the IPCC definition of peat , which makes it very clear that peat is not a renewable .
So in that respect some Finnish politicians and Finnish lobbyists should stop dreaming , read the Directive and stick to the actual text .
The idea of having weekly petrol stock measurements in Europe is one issue which I was sorry not to be able to carry through .
Our oil price in Europe is defined by the US Department of Energy 's weekly bulletin .
Because Europe has no independent statistics on oil , our prices are de facto defined by the scarcity in the US market and we are not able to show the market that the European market is often much less tight than the US market .
Because we were not able to obtain it here , Mr Commissioner , perhaps the Commission could , in the ongoing discussions on this at the IEA , take an initiative at least in looking at what we could potentially gain in Europe by having weekly oil statistics in Europe .
Some experts tell me that we could also reduce the oil price just with this measure .
We now have to get to work , as it is important that the Commission is coordinated .
The Commission has set up an energy market observatory in DG TREN , so it is important that Eurostat and this new observatory work closely together .
Finally , I would like to wish the Eurostat civil service and to civil servants in the Member States considerable energy and courage , as they will now have to meet often in comitology and to transform this into real statistics .
Thank you very much again , all of you , for your kind words .
I may even be able to offer you a glass of champagne at the end of this long evening !
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Statistics on plant protection products ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Staes , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning statistics on plant protection products - C6-0457 / 2006 - .

Member of the Commission . - ( ES ) Madam President , I would of course like to thank Mr Staes for his excellent work as rapporteur , as well as the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety and the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , for their contributions to the debate on this proposal for a regulation .
The proposal is part of the Thematic Strategy on the Sustainable Use of Pesticides .
The aim of this thematic strategy is to reduce the impact of pesticides on human health and the environment .
The proposal for a regulation that we are dealing with today contributes to this aim by ensuring that reliable and comparable data is collected in all the Member States , in order to enable harmonised risk indicators to be calculated .
The Commission 's proposal is the fruit of years of work with the OECD and with research bodies on developing these risk indicators .
Our initial intention in the Commission was to cover all types of pesticides , including biocides .
However , the preparatory phase of the legislation made it clear that the biocides sector is not very harmonised and neither the Commission nor the Member States have sufficient experience or knowledge to propose specific measures on biocides , therefore the decision was not to include this category of products in the initial proposal that has been presented for your consideration .
I know that in his report Mr Staes advocates the inclusion of biocides , but we had reasons for finally deciding not to include them .
I would , however , like to assure the rapporteur and all of you that the Commission will take the opportunity offered by the review of the Directive on biocides planned for the end of this year to put forward a proposal that covers this sector comprehensively , including data collection .
The report by Mr Staes also advocates extending the scope of the regulation to non-agricultural use of plant protection products , thus including production and marketing statistics .
In our proposal we decided to leave this data outside the scope of application of the regulation to avoid overlaps with other statistical regulations on production and marketing , which would increase the administrative cost of producing these statistics .
We are , however , open to examining how best to use the existing statistics on production and marketing to benefit the objectives of the Thematic Strategy .
I would like to conclude , Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , by reminding you of the high financial cost of implementing this regulation , which is between EUR 10 and 25 million per year in an initial estimate made for the Union of 25 , which leads us to recommend that the Member States should be given sufficient flexibility in applying this regulation .
I trust that , based on sound cooperation between Parliament , the Council and the Commission , we can arrive at an agreement as quickly as possible because , as you know , the process of collecting this data is a long and complex one that takes around five years .
It would be good for the regulation to be able to be applied as quickly as possible and , of course , once the framework directive on the Thematic Strategy is adopted .
Finally I would like once again to thank Mr Staes for his excellent work on a proposal that is very complex , but at the same time extremely important for the environment and for human health .
rapporteur . - ( NL ) I think that the Commissioner summarised his concerns on a number of points very well .
The Commission proposal on the regulation concerning statistics and pesticides is indeed directly linked to the Thematic Strategy on the Sustainable Use of Pesticides .
As the Commissioner also made very clear , the aim is Europe-wide harmonisation of national statistics on the use and placing on the market of pesticides , which must be achieved at the level where it is most feasible in functional terms .
The aim , therefore - and it is an important one - is to use those data to reduce , in the medium term , the risks and impact on the environment and public health resulting from the use of pesticides .
When drawing up my report , I had four objectives :
1. to ensure sufficient comparability of data ;
2. to avoid duplication of data collection ;
3. to extend the scope to non-agricultural uses ;
4. to make full use of the data thus obtained via a moral obligation to report .
I believe I have achieved these four objectives following the vote in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , but I know that there are still difficulties .
In particular , shadow rapporteur Mr Nassauer argued on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats that data collection should be regulated in a proper and efficient manner , in terms not only of the confidential treatment of those data but also of public access and transparency .
I think that Mr Nassauer and I have held very constructive discussions and that his concerns have been realised , including in the vote in the Committee on the Environment , which was almost unanimous .
We also succeeded in arriving at good wording with regard to the extension of the scope to the non-agricultural sector .
We have now opted for data collection for not only agricultural and horticultural , but also professional non-agricultural use , such as maintenance work on roads , railways and communal green areas .
Thanks to the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , the whole concept of biocides , which the Commissioner , too , discussed , has ultimately crept into the report .
This has met with opposition , particularly from the PPE-DE Group , and so , together with the PSE Group , and on behalf of my group , I have attempted to overcome this problem by drawing up two amendments based on an earlier text further to a report by Mrs Klaß , which was adopted at first reading .
I know that the PPE-DE Group , and Mr Nassauer , still have problems with this , but I hope that it will not be an insurmountable obstacle in the final vote ; after all , we are attempting to bow to the majority view in the European Parliament on this .
Another sticking point with the PPE-DE Group , ladies and gentlemen , is the decision of the Committee on the Environment to extend the scope of the regulation from pesticide sales and use to pesticide production , import , export and distribution .
The PPE-DE Group fears this will mean an extra burden on businesses .
To be frank , Mr Nassauer , I would venture to doubt that , since these data are available in any case , and there is actually no need for any additional calculations in this regard .
Contrary to Mr Nassauer 's assertions , I am convinced that the inclusion of these data will ensure a better overview of undesirable and even illegal flows .
I think that this knowledge will be of benefit in realising one of the objectives of the regulation , which the Commissioner , too , clearly stated , namely reducing risks and the impact on the environment and public health resulting from pesticides .
I also think that these two particular arguments will ensure that any WTO cases from third countries can be countered .
I should like to thank my fellow Members for their most constructive cooperation .
I hope that we succeed in obtaining a large majority in favour of my report , so that I am able to conduct productive negotiations with the Council at second reading .
I would also like to thank the Commission for its excellent cooperation , and also the Eurostat officials , who always made themselves available and were genuinely most helpful in bringing this report into being . Many thanks , ladies and gentlemen .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , there is consensus on the fact that we wish to reduce the harmful effects on people and the environment emanating from the use of pesticides .
In order to be able to calculate these effects , indicators need to be developed .
In order to be able to develop them , we need data .
To ascertain this data , we need this directive .
I emphasise this in order to make it clear that this does not involve authorising pesticides , or using them , but merely ascertaining data suitable for developing appropriate indicators .
There is agreement on this .
We have also gone to great lengths to reach common positions , as Mr Staes has rightly demonstrated , and this has also been amazingly successful .
We have agreed that the scope of application has to be extended to the non-agricultural sector .
We have also found a consistent position for protecting company and trade secrets .
Two items remain unresolved between us : the first is the inclusion of biocides .
I fully share the position expressed by the Commissioner .
There are no fundamental objections to it , but we do not have the necessary knowledge at present to take this step in a meaningful way .
I have no reservations against it in principle , as I have said .
This can take place at an appropriate time .
The second item carries more weight .
We categorically object to the fact that not only the application , but also the production of pesticides is included in the scope of application , because the production process as such does not provide any information about the application .
Products are exported to third countries ; products are stored before they are used .
Hence production , as has been said , does not yield anything as such for the purpose for which we are issuing this directive and we would therefore gladly eliminate it .
Nevertheless , I would say , Mr Staes , that if the Commission manages to abide by the compromises that we have worked out , your report will not come to grief in our final vote .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Madam President , I debated about whether to speak in Hungarian or English on this subject and then I realised that during the working process I used mainly English expressions on the given topic .
The PSE Group had an intensive debate on the report and reached a compromise standpoint .
Some of us , including myself , had more radical amendments but the common position of the group is acceptable to us .
I should like to welcome the report and congratulate the rapporteur .
Pesticides , on the one hand , are an important and essential support to modern European agriculture but , on the other hand , the non-sufficient pesticide use and the use of harmful substances are responsible for health problems , fatal accidents and environmental pollution .
Decision-makers , authorities , local governments , farmers , NGOs and citizens need proper information regarding pesticide use in order to reduce and prevent the negative impacts of pesticide use .
Therefore , this proposal for European statistics on pesticides is a positive step forward towards environmentally friendly agriculture .
Based on European statistics , we can monitor and evaluate the positive changes provided for in new pesticide legislation , i.e. the Directive on pesticide use , the thematic strategy on sustainable pesticide use and the Regulation on pesticide authorisations .
From the beginning , I proposed and supported the inclusion of biocide products into this directive with the approval of the PSE Group . As in most cases , the active ingredient of the biocides is also used as a plant protection product .
Biocides therefore have almost the same health and environmental impact .
It does not make any difference after it has been released into the environment whether the substance was produced as biocide or as a plant production product .
It is reasonable that , first , we collect the statistics on the biocide products only .
Business confidentiality is always a sensitive issue and , therefore , I am pleased we all accept that this directive takes into account the obligations under the Aarhus Convention on access to environmental information .
That is why I supported the amendment that obliges the producers to provide proper information for the public .
I hope that after the compromise among the political parties represented in this Chamber , we will have a good first reading agreement from the Council and within a few years , perhaps , I will be able to quote here in this Chamber the useful data from the latest European pesticides statistics .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , many congratulations to the rapporteur , Mr Staes , on an excellent report and for the great efforts he made to achieve compromise and consensus amongst the different political groups .
An EU-wide harmonisation of national statistics on the sale and use of plant protection products and the proper use of such statistics would undoubtedly greatly enhance the preparation of accurate impact assessments on the use of such products in the environment and on human health , and thus enable the taking of corrective measures .
In order for this harmonisation to be effective , and thus as beneficial as possible , the rapporteur has rightly made a number of amendments , which entail a compromise agreement of most groups , which cover four main areas .
Firstly , the generation of statistical data that is comparable and compatible in the Member States .
Secondly , the avoidance of duplication of data collection in order to reduce costs and the burden on professional users .
Thirdly , the necessity to include non-agricultural uses in the scope of the regulation , and fourthly the need to make the fullest possible use of the data collected .
We find the great majority of these amendments , as approved almost unanimously by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , useful and necessary and we will support it .
We will vote negatively on only three amendments , namely Amendments 24 , 27 and 29 .
Furthermore , we will fully support the five additional amendments submitted by the Greens and others .
In conclusion , I wish once again to make the general point that success in achieving the aims of this piece of legislation will depend very much on its proper implementation and to this end the constructive involvement and full commitment of Member States authorities is of paramount importance .
Let us hope that this will be the case in all 27 Member States .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , I would like to offer the rapporteur my sincere congratulations .
We , too , currently offer advice here in the EU pesticides package on how we can protect people , animals and the environment from damage caused by harmful pesticides - and this is our aim .
Having sufficient data is the basic requirement for this aim .
I hope that this vote sends out a strong signal for the protection of the environment and health .
Confidential operational information is not involved in the collection and publishing of the data , but the right of consumers to information and transparency is safeguarded .
I am in favour of as much data as possible being made accessible on the Internet .
This would also be totally in keeping with my report on the authorisation of pesticides .
Experience from the authorisation process shows that we need reliable figures on the use of pesticides in Europe and harmonised data collection methods .
Only when good data is available can we hope to have fewer misunderstandings and false information .
In conclusion , there is something else that is not contained in the statistics report , but is nevertheless close to my heart .
At the last reading on pesticide authorisation , we also resolved upon a pesticide passport for the wholesale and retail trade .
This also requires data on the application of pesticides .
The wholesale and retail trades want this data and I hope the Member States will not stand in their way .
This is also a good endorsement for the statistics on pesticide data .
I hope the aim unites us in achieving better protection of people , animals and the environment through more reliable figures and data .

on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( SV ) Madam President , I first want to thank Mr Staes for a good report , which of course we support in the GUE / NGL Group .
One of the aims contained in this report is to reduce the use of pesticides by improving the statistics , which is an urgent task .
The use of toxins and chemicals in agriculture is on the increase in Europe .
Toxins persist in food which we and our children eat .
It affects us all .
This is something which should worry all who care about their health and our environment .
In my homeland , the long-term vision of the environmental movement is an agriculture free of chemicals .
Unfortunately that goal is a remote one today .
The use of chemicals is increasing in agriculture , not just in the EU as a whole but also in Sweden .
I have a specific question for Commissioner Almunia : if a particular country wants to ban a chemical in agriculture , should it not be free to do so ?
Unfortunately there have been many instances of Member States wanting to ban the use of certain pesticides , yet your Commission has prevented them from doing so .
Why ?
Should not the environment and public health carry more weight than the demand for total harmonisation ?
( SK ) The report concerning statistics on plant protection products is closely connected with the Report on the Thematic Strategy on the Sustainable Use of Pesticides .
If the report is to conform to the strategy , it is essential that elements of the strategy that we have already agreed upon and approved be reflected in this proposal for a regulation .
This applies primarily to the title of the regulation and the replacement of the term ' plant protection products ' with ' pesticides ' .
In addition , the inclusion of biocides in the scope of the regulation should be seen as an element that is already approved in both the Thematic Strategy and the Directive on pesticides .
Biocides must be included in the scope even before the first report is submitted to the Commission .
All the relevant characteristics of biocides are well known to us .
There is therefore no reason not to include them or to await further information .
This would unnecessarily defer interpretation of the term pesticides , which encompasses both plant protection products and biocides .
I therefore strongly oppose Amendment 33 whereas I will support Amendment 2 , since Parliament has already reached agreement on this and this amendment alone conforms to the thematic strategy and the Directive on pesticides , as approved by Parliament in October 2007 .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , plant protection products are being tested and the statistics are part of a package that also contains the Regulation on authorisation of pesticides and the Directive on the sustainable use of pesticides .
The aim of the entire package is to keep the effects of plant protection products on both human health and the environment to a minimum .
The pressure of competition on the internal market and the cross-border environmental aspects require a common approach here .
The access to our markets by foodstuffs from across the world , however , also makes it clear that obligations have to be appropriate in order to be effective .
It is of no help to anybody if our fruit , vegetables and meat come only from third countries , because obligations render production too difficult here .
We in Europe have no influence on foodstuffs from third countries .
The only possibility is to determine the maximum residual quantities and we are not yet properly set up to do this , let alone ready for a pesticide passport .
It is right to keep records and statistics on the sale of pesticides for monitoring the flows and developments of plant protection .
The professed aim in doing so is to reduce the risk of pests .
Data collection must guarantee comparability and obligations to submit a report must be kept to a minimum .
The recording of substance flows clearly overshoots the mark here , since it is not yet certain whether a plant protection product , a biocide or perhaps even a drug is produced from a given substance .
Biocides must be considered separately and here we await the Commission 's proposal on the authorisation and use of biocides .
Only then will it be possible to consider the statistics that are still needed .
The illegal use of plant protection products must be more heavily scrutinised .
To do this , we need increased monitoring of the existing law .
In my opinion statistics do not help .
Any party that violates the law , Mr Staes , is not recorded in the statistics either .
( HU ) Thank you , Madam President .
There is no doubt that the substances developed to combat parasites and harmful organisms in plants radically transformed European agriculture .
These chemicals , however , have a harmful effect on human health and the environment .
Plant protection products that are particularly harmful must be taken out of circulation and the use of chemicals for this purpose must be significantly reduced .
To do this , however , we need reliable statistical data that are comparable and harmonised at European Union level .
In doing so we do not want to place an extra burden on the users of these products , agricultural holdings ; this is not our aim .
On the other hand we do want to see all non-agricultural uses of plant protection products included in the scope of the statistics , and hence also within the scope of future legislation .
Let me cite an example .
In Europe , the stone rubble alongside railway tracks is sprayed , or rather washed , using a herbicide , isopropylamine salt .
The total length of railway tracks in the European Union is around 213 000 km , and the amount of chemical we douse them with , according to the estimates , is around 900 000 litres .
This enters surface and groundwater along with the rain , and ultimately ends up in our bodies .
Up to now , we have not given adequate attention to this , and this situation needs to change .
The report we have before us is integrally linked to the legislative package we discussed last year , and should therefore be dealt with as such .
These are the framework directive on the sustainable use of plant protection substances referred to by my colleague in the European People 's Party , Mrs Klaß , the Thematic Strategy on the Sustainable Use of Pesticides drafted last year by Mrs Belohorská , and the regulation on the placing of new plant protection products on the market , in which Mrs Breyer , the person responsible for this topic in the European Parliament , sets out the future direction for the sustainable use of plant protection products .
I congratulate the rapporteur and support this report . Thank you very much .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this is the second report today on statistics and I should like to remind the Commission that we have actually set ourselves the aim of reducing administrative expenses by 25 % , since , in connection with statistics , there continues to be an outcry from those concerned not to allow excessive expenses and costs to accrue here .
I am very much of the opinion that the sustainable use of plant protection products is very important for the future development of genetic engineering and biotechnology and I also believe that the risk indicators are of particular significance for human health and the environment .
We should not forget , however , the general aim of the Lisbon Agenda , namely employment and ultimately growth in these sectors , nor tighten the requirements with bureaucratic obligations such as the collection of statistics , which can in fact also be obtained very easily in many sectors .
( PL ) Madam President , the main information that Member States should be gathering is the quantity of products applied .
This will enable Member States to make individual analyses - that is , analyses in line with the intention of national plans .
Manufacturers should provide information on the application of pesticides that is of vital importance .
National data should be aggregated in each Member State and sent to the Commission in the form of collective information .
Such aggregate information is sufficient for further analysis at EU level .
In regulating the duties of Member States , we should be wary of giving assistance to local institutions in the gathering of detailed information that contributes nothing but has a blurring effect and undermines the motivation of Member States to put the noble idea of the directive into practice .
Madam President , a few quick questions , if I may , through you to the Commissioner .
Could the quantities of plant protection products used in non-agricultural situations such as golf courses , parks , airports , railway tracks , roadsides , and home and garden use be deduced having regard to the overall quantities , that is the total quantity minus agricultural usage products ?
Secondly , biocides are used in a very wide range of situations and use patterns , including in domestic households , and , while data on the quantity of biocides placed on the market could be collected , it is very difficult to see how comprehensive data on the use of biocides could be collected .
Or is the suggestion to include only the agricultural use of biocides ?
And , if it is the agricultural use of biocides only , why are we going into the non-agricultural use of plant protection products ?
My third question is : could the explicit stipulation of statistics on production imports , exports and distribution of plant protection products lead to confusion and potential double-counting of quantities of plant protection products ?
Madam President , I just wanted to stress the importance of one point that applies to this report as well as to the previous report .
This is the fact that statistical data is not important in itself .
It is the interpretation of the statistical data , of course , and the drawing of the right conclusions and the implementation of measures guided by the statistical data which is important .
In this respect , the rapporteur has made a very important proposition relating to expert groups to evaluate the data collected .
I would like to ask the Commissioner , in this respect , what his thoughts are about such expert groups to evaluate the data .
The Commissioner will not intervene at the end of this debate . He has informed us that he will answer Mrs Doyle 's questions in writing .
rapporteur . - ( NL ) Ladies and gentlemen , thank you for all your encouraging words .
I believe that I have found a great deal of support in this House .
As the Commissioner said in his introductory speech , the positions of the Commission , the Council and Parliament are growing together ; something that it was not possible to achieve at first reading .
In fact it was downright impossible , despite the fact that I held consultations with both the Slovenian and the Portuguese Presidencies on two occasions .
The fact that these positions are growing together is evidenced by the Commissioner 's words on biocides .
He said that the Commission was considering revising that directive .
I wish to remain non-committal , and I trust that the wording of the proposal for a regulation , based on a text already adopted in the Klaß report , is non-committal .
Secondly , I most definitely take note of the Commission 's offer to make the best possible use of the statistics already available on the production of pesticides , which represents an important contribution to the debate , including with a view to the second reading .
Ladies and gentlemen , thank you once again ; I shall not keep you any longer . It is already late and I think we have all earned a little relaxation .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Written statements ( Article 142 )
in writing . - ( RO ) The proposal for a Regulation aims at reducing the impact of the use of plant protection products on the environment and human health by creating a mechanism for the calculation of risk indicators and monitoring of the objectives established in the Thematic Strategy on Sustainable Use of Pesticides .
As virtual rapporteur , I considered that it was necessary to ensure consistency between the definitions in the Pesticide Package and I opted for the inclusion of biocides in the proposal for a Regulation , in order to provide enhanced protection of users .
By means of this proposal , we want to improve the data collection system and to support the harmonisation of existing statistics between Member States , in order to be able to determine the progress accomplished in this field and to implement measures necessary for the achievement of the goal of reducing the risks generated by pesticides .
In addition , the availability of official statistics all over Europe would enhance market transparency and improve the competitiveness of the pesticide industry .
At the same time , a reduction in the use of pesticides will be beneficial for society , via an improvement of food quality , reduction of drinking water pollution , environmental protection and sustainable conservation of natural resources .
The European Union must be sure that citizens ' health is not endangered by these hazardous substances and must stimulate new eco-effective agricultural practices .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 11.55 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9.05 a.m. )
Written declarations ( submission ) : see Minutes
Preparation of the European Council ( Brussels , 13-14 March 2008 ) ( debate )
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on the preparation of the European Council in Brussels on 13-14 March 2008 .
Mr Janez Lenarčič will speak on behalf of the Council .
President of the Commission . - Mr President , traditionally , the Spring European Council is the time when we review the Lisbon Strategy for growth and jobs , and this meeting will be more important than most .
I would like to start by thanking the Slovenian Presidency for the very careful preparation of this spring summit .
Whatever other messages come out of the European Council this week , one should be clear : the Lisbon Strategy is working .
No fewer than 6.5 million jobs have been created in the European Union in the last two years .
Unemployment is at its lowest level for 25 years .
The employment rate stands at 66 % , getting close to the Lisbon target of 70 % .
What is more , job creation has gone hand in hand with productivity improvements .
Productivity is now growing faster in the European Union than in the United States .
These are no mean achievements .
Of course , the Lisbon process cannot shield us from negative economic developments whose origin lies outside Europe .
In today 's inter-connected economy , that is impossible .
We have had to trim our growth forecasts slightly for this year but we are still predicting growth of 2 % - a very respectable performance .
The reforms already carried out have made our economies more resilient and flexible .
This has left us better able to cope with external shocks .
Of course when conditions deteriorate it becomes all the more important to reassure those that feel threatened by an economic downturn .
Europe needs to protect - but it must avoid the temptation of becoming protectionist .
A retreat into protectionism would be madness .
Europe has been a huge winner from globalisation .
With just 7 % of the world 's population , Europe accounts for 30 % of economic output .
We account for seven of the ten most competitive nations in the world and , despite the rise of China and India , Europe remains the world 's largest trading power .
So Europe has every reason to approach the future with confidence .
At the same time , we need to remain vigilant and cautious as to further developments .
But our general line should be one of confidence .
It will not be with pessimism that we will win the next economic battles .
This is what has inspired our reaction to the financial turmoil and our policy papers on the financial situation and on sovereign wealth funds , which are also on the table of the European Council .
And we hope the European Council will support our proposals for a common European response to these challenges .
When I say that the Lisbon Strategy is working - and indeed it is - this does not mean that all is rosy and that we can rest on our laurels .
I have said , and the Commission has said , time and time again , there is no room for complacency , especially when the economic situation seems to be deteriorating globally .
A lot has to be done .
In many regions of Europe unemployment remains a serious problem .
There are special social categories that are very much affected .
Rising energy and food prices are fuelling inflation , eating into the purchasing power , especially of those who depend on salaries and pensions for their income .
So we need to continue our efforts .
But the Lisbon Strategy is not a static process .
Far from it .
The Commission Strategic Report sets out a series of new policy initiatives to make Europe even more resilient to economic turmoil , and to reinforce European efforts to shape and fully benefit from globalisation .
First , the most important area . The most important area is people .
The key to overcoming poverty and inequality is driving up standards of education and training throughout the Union , making sure they are available to all .
We have chosen to focus on one of the most vulnerable groups : early school-leavers .
Today in Europe , one in six young people still leaves school without qualifications .
One in five 15-year-olds does not have adequate reading skills .
We cannot afford to allow their talents to go to waste .
We must give young people the skills they need to realise their potential .
Another key pillar of the Lisbon Strategy we have returned to is research and innovation .
To keep investment coming in , Europe must increase its relative attractiveness .
We need a fifth freedom in Europe - the free movement of knowledge - to complement the other four freedoms on which the single market rests .
We need to support open innovation but at the same time we need to ensure that knowledge is suitably protected by European patents and copyright .
Here I would like to welcome the adoption of the European Institute of Innovation and Technology yesterday by this House .
This is a crucial moment for Europe .
I would like to congratulate the European Parliament on this achievement and to thank you for the support you have given to my proposal , which I remember met with so much resistance when I put it forward three years ago .
But , thanks to the good cooperation between Parliament and the Commission and the Member States , at the end we have got that agreement .
The third priority we have looked at is the business environment .
We need a single market that works for Europe and in particular for SMEs , which are the backbone of our economy and the place where most jobs are created .
That is why I will be asking the European Council tomorrow to endorse the idea of a Small Business Act to remove the impediments to the creation and the growth of SMEs .
We have to keep in mind that the most important thing we can give to SMEs is a real internal market .
This is the main difference between Europe and the United States of America , when it comes to SMEs , not because of specific legislation .
A small company in the United States can start in one state but can immediately reach the entire internal market of the United States .
In Europe it is still not like that .
In Europe there are a lot of barriers in practical terms in going from one country to the next .
So we really need to complete the internal market if we want to develop SMEs and if you want more growth and more employment in Europe .
( Applause )
The final Lisbon pillar we have revisited in our strategic report is energy and climate change , the defining challenge of our generation .
It may be early days for the energy and climate package .
But , as this House knows well , the momentum cannot be allowed to slip .
The timing of an agreement is critical to its success .
The earlier it comes , the lower the cost of adjustment , the bigger the benefits for early movers .
And it is crucial to our number one goal : agreeing a comprehensive international agreement in Copenhagen next year .
The more countries are involved and the closer their ambitions are to ours , the more we will have a level playing field .
Nothing will bring this closer than the European Union showing that it means business by reaching agreement by the end of this year .
So I am really determined - the Commission is really determined - to work with the Member States so that we can have a basic political agreement on the energy internal market and on the climate protection and renewables package by the end of this year .
Of course , we would also like to have the final legislative process concluded with the European Parliament at the beginning of next year .
It is of course important to link the climate protection strategy with the internal market for energy .
We all know this is essential for our vision of competitive , secure and sustainable energy for Europe .
I have been glad to see this dossier accelerating over the past weeks , and we are committed to finding ways of ensuring that the genuine market opening targeted in our original proposals is realised .
The Commission remains fully committed to the realisation of ownership unbundling or its functional equivalent .
The efforts of this House to be ready for a first reading by June are central .
Reform is not about rolling back valuable social advances or our social market economy ; it is about equipping people to succeed in times of change , giving them the chance to take control of their own lives .
It is about modernising our social systems and securing their sustainability .
Access , opportunity and solidarity must be the watchwords and will be at the heart of the renewed social agenda that the Commission will present before summer .
It is about a dynamic business environment where entrepreneurs are spending their time and resources on producing high-quality goods and services that people from all over the world want to buy , not on filling in unnecessary forms and having to battle every day against red tape .
It is also about transforming Europe into a low-carbon economy that is good for the environment and good for business .
An economy that provides rising living standards but which does not cost the earth .
I am glad to see that the hard work of the last few years on the revamped Lisbon Agenda has helped foster a broad consensus on where we stand and where we want to go .
This House has been a consistent source of critical support , and I want to thank you for this .
I was pleased to note the large degree of support for the Lisbon Strategy expressed in the European Parliament 's resolution of 20 February on the input for the 2008 Spring Council .
I have also seen the amendments that this House voted the same day to the broad economic policy guidelines .
I agree with the issues you emphasise , and indeed they are already part and parcel of European Union policies on the basis of proposals from the European Commission : social inclusion , sustainability of public finance , the need to fight inflation , R & D , improved economic policy coordination , the promotion of entrepreneurship and innovation , the external dimension of the internal market , and climate change and energy .
So let us be clear : the Commission agrees with these priorities .
After consulting with various stakeholders , including the Member States , the Commission proposed in December to keep the guidelines of the strategy as they were , given their inbuilt flexibility , which allows adaptation to the evolving circumstances and accommodation of the priorities I have just cited and which the Commission endorses .
Keeping the guidelines sends a much-needed signal of stability and predictability to Member States and economic operators alike and , in doing so , reinforces the likelihood of delivery .
As the Presidency of the Council just stated , the priority now is delivery .
We have to deliver concrete results and we have to show consistency .
This being said , after contacts with Parliament 's Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , the Commission tried to broker a compromise with the Council , suggesting adaptations to the narrative document accompanying the guidelines to reflect the issues highlighted by Parliament .
In spite of the efforts of the Commission , the Council decided not to follow our compromise suggestion on the broad economic policy guidelines .
Anyway , I would like to reassure this House of the utmost importance that the Commission attaches to setting the right framework for Member States to deliver on our shared priorities - and the priorities are growth and jobs .
When I say growth , it is growth that is sustainable from a social and environmental point of view .
And jobs that are not only increasing in numbers but also in quality .
Because we are sure that the renewed Lisbon Strategy focusing on jobs and growth , with its commitment to competitiveness and inclusiveness , is Europe 's best response to the challenges of globalisation .
( Applause )
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , the European Council 's spring priority will be to encourage European growth and relaunch the Lisbon Strategy for 2008-2010 .
Our group feels it is of the utmost importance to give the EU every chance in the light of globalisation , and to reform it as the European Commission has proposed most energetically since 2005 under President José Manuel Barroso .
This strategy is the best tool for dealing with the challenges facing us : globalisation , population and climate change .
We have a dual message here : pursuing the reforms undertaken , but also making the Lisbon Strategy more effective .
Globalisation is an opportunity for Europe , but we will never accept unbridled free trade . That is the first challenge .
We must protect the interests of the most vulnerable and promote our own social model .
It is not time to change of direction , but rather to increase our efforts along the route already marked out .
The Lisbon Strategy proposes an adapted response to each challenge .
In the face of competition from emerging nations , our future lies in research and innovation , support for entrepreneurs , lifelong training and reform of the job market .
Europe can only be competitive if its products have added value in terms of quality and innovation .
That is why I am calling for investment in research and innovation by the Member States on the largest possible scale .
Nor will growth and jobs emerge from development of SMEs .
We must help them secure contracts and create jobs by reducing the administrative burden .
Drawing up a Small Business Act on a European scale represents a step in the right direction .
Education and training must be adapted to the needs of the economy .
We can only maintain a competitive edge if our workforce has the right training .
Teaching at schools and universities and continuous training must be reviewed , and certainly enhanced .
In this respect we welcome the Lifelong Learning Programme 2007-2013 .
Wide-ranging reforms are also required for the job market , which must be more mobile , more flexible and also more secure .
Businesses must be able to adapt to market requirements .
Employees must be able to take advantage of retraining and adaptation opportunities .
The second challenge for Europe concerns its population .
The ageing of the population is set to create a shortage of labour and pressure on social security systems .
There must be better stimulation of the internal workforce , and better flexibility and adaptability for all generations to make it easier for them to reconcile their professional and family lives .
We must also review our immigration policy , which must be European , and attract skills and know-how .
The blue card proposal must be developed .
We must also halt the brain drain .
Our investment in education will have been in vain if researchers go abroad for better pay and working conditions .
The third and final challenge is climate change .
We must implement a political system in line with a viable environment-friendly economy , and this means meeting the target of a 20 % reduction in greenhouse gas emissions .
Quite apart from the ecological advantages , this will also stand us in good stead for clean-technology markets .
This is not insignificant .
We must , however , set an example and our partners must do the same .
A green policy must be accompanied by an external trade policy , which is not protectionist , but firm .
Ladies and gentlemen , we will only retain our values and our model of society if we have the courage to reform our society and tell our fellow citizens the truth .
We can only make social progress if growth plays a part .
Growth in turn can only play a part if we provide the means for it to do so .
Just this once I wish to thank the President of the Commission , Vice-President Verheugen and all the Commissioners for their work .
My thanks , ladies and gentlemen , may be considered in the context of a stable : the Barroso stable .
A ration of oats compensates a job well done , but oats also provide energy for all the work that remains .
( Applause )
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin with an observation to the President of the Council .
We have been informed , Sir , that the Mediterranean Union is to be discussed at tomorrow 's dinner .
This is an idea of the French President , and at the talks over dinner - as well as hoping that all the participants enjoy their meal - I would ask you on behalf of our Group to clarify the following .
If the idea is that the Mediterranean Union will build on , or upgrade , the Barcelona process into which we are pumping a good deal of money out of the European Union budget , then we are fully in favour of it .
However , there need to be guarantees that such a policy will be pursued within the framework of the European Union .
If the Mediterranean Union is to be a success , it must be a Community policy within the framework of the existing EU institutions and policies .
If , conversely , the Mediterranean Union were to become a divisive factor in the EU , then that would be a bad sign ; it would moreover isolate France on the eve of the French Presidency , something we certainly do not want .
( Applause )
We therefore ask you to pass on this message to the participants at the summit .
Not altering the guidelines is one thing .
The decision taken here on 20 February by a majority of 515 votes , namely to alter them , is quite a different matter .
However , let us not argue about whether or not to alter the guidelines ; let us discuss whether or not the substantive changes contained in our demand for the guidelines to be altered are practicable .
Mr Barroso , I criticised you last week for demonstrating a lack of commitment .
I have heard in the meantime that some Members of your Commission - presumably after consultation with you - have taken up and put forward some of the ideas that we proposed here .
Hence my criticism on this point is no longer relevant .
However , Mr President of the Commission , having heard your speech today I must repeat the following : you have a guiding role in Europe .
Your words to the Heads of State and Government tomorrow must encourage them to put what you have just been calling for into practice in the Member States .
A good deal of what you say is true , naturally , but we need to address the real situation in Europe .
Allow me therefore to list five points which we believe remain crucial but have not been sufficiently flagged up or put into practice .
Yes , progress has of course been made : unemployment is falling and productivity rising , yet job insecurity in Europe is rising too .
That is also a fact .
Of course more jobs are being created , but the jobs being created are not secure ; they are ever more insecure .
Pay rises in Europe are not keeping pace with company profits : in percentage terms , company profits are outstripping pay rises for workers .
( Applause )
This represents a social imbalance .
We wish to improve social cohesion ; we want more social protection .
What is the point of a growing internal market , what is the point of a globally competitive Union , if the reality is this : a manufacturing company makes a 4 % profit at a site and says ' this is not enough for the shareholders ; they want a 6 % profit , so we are closing down the company at this site ' .
That strikes a blow against the basic confidence that the European Union needs .
Our citizens must have confidence !
We are discussing unbundling in the energy sector , which might or might not be necessary .
Let us talk for once about an unbundling that is taking place in the social policy field in Europe .
There is a real danger that economic growth will become uncoupled from social security , which is why the guidelines need to be revised .
We must make plain that whatever happens in the social policy field in the European Union goes hand in hand with economic progress .
We are celebrating the 50th anniversary of the European Parliament this afternoon .
According to the spirit that prevailed here in Strasbourg 50 years ago , the combination of economic development and social security was the basis for the European Community 's growth and success .
It is increasingly being put at risk .
You say that red tape must be cut for small and medium-sized enterprises .
Yes !
However , if red tape is cut and such companies move around Europe and then produce a case such as the Laval case , that strikes a blow against confidence in the European Union .
For if freedom of movement can be used even by SMEs to roll back social progress , companies may stand to gain but their employees will not . Those employees , however , make up the vast majority of EU citizens .
Of course we need investment in education , training , research and technical innovation .
That goes without saying . However , if , for the overwhelming majority of people , access to university or school is dependent on whether their parents have enough money in their wallets , then that is not a social policy .
We need equal access for all citizens in the European Union , wherever they come from and whatever their family circumstances .
If Europe is to survive , we must strengthen that potential , not only business potential .
We must above all strengthen the potential of young people on this continent who need access to research , skills and training .
It undoubtedly strikes a blow against social confidence if any rich person in Europe can take their money coffers from one country to another without having to pay tax .
That is another blow !
You are therefore right to say that we need to regulate the EU 's financial markets .
All of this , Mr President , argues in favour of a revision of the guidelines .
Ultimately it matters little whether or not we call it that .
If you convey this message to the Council tomorrow , we will be on your side ; but we will only be on your side if you do so , Mr President !
( Applause )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , this week 's Council takes place somewhere along the road between despair and hope .
Although the major difficulties seem to be overcome , the Lisbon Treaty is not yet ratified , and questions linger over some of its provisions .
Uncertainties abound about the political direction of Russia , Turkey and some of our neighbours in the Middle and Near East .
Economic growth is slowing , haunted by the impact on GDP of past banking-sector crises in Sweden or Finland or Hungary or Spain , to say nothing of Argentina or Japan .
It makes concerted action by our central banks this morning all the more welcome .
Beyond these considerations , the major global challenges of population growth and migration , of international crime and terrorism , of climate change and energy security continue to weigh on the minds of our policy makers .
The urgent implementation of the Commission 's proposals to tackle climate change is incumbent on the Member States and on this House .
The contours of the challenge are wide .
The report from the High Representative on the impact of climate change on security and stability shows us that there is a real and immediate concern , with the danger of military implications , including the use - sometimes discussed - of NATO as an instrument of energy security .
Yet , blinded by short-term economic thinking , some of our Member States are already busy trying to limit their commitments to the Commission 's proposals on climate change .
Look at the draft Council conclusions - paragraph 18 - and see some of the weasel words that have been inserted .
These twin dangers carry the threat of a retreat into a Fortress Europe .
It is only by increasing internal solidarity that we can avoid the trap that Member States fall into , such as choosing South Stream over Nabucco .
It is only by extending solidarity beyond our shores that we can enjoy peace around the Mediterranean , that Mare Nostrum , or around the Caspian Sea .
Einstein was right when he said that peace cannot be kept by force , it can only be achieved by understanding .
We also need to lead by example .
I hope that in the Council conclusions we will see a commitment by national governments and the European Union to cut energy use in our own government and institutional buildings and in our car fleets , with binding targets to achieve that .
There have been stern warnings from the IPCC and others of the cost of inaction .
We must act and we can because , despite the strong headwinds , the economic fundamentals of the euro area economy are strong , as the President of the Commission says , with domestic demand and exports continuing to grow - a sign that the Lisbon Strategy is working and must be pursued .
We hear what people are saying in this House .
Mr Wurtz 's group was leading a protest about the threat to 12 000 jobs at Unilever .
Mr Schulz wrote a letter to 27 Heads of State and Government calling for a change in economic direction , binding social standards and greater social protection .
Yet these actions ignore the reality of what is happening in the global economy where , as more and more countries have opened their economies , the global ratio of trade to GDP has grown faster than total output .
Half of our income now comes from trade and even developing countries now account for a third of world trade .
The integration of the world economy is proving that it is not a zero-sum game .
While Europe 's share of that economy may be shrinking , the overall growth means that we continue to create jobs and wealth .
That is why we have created 6.5 million new jobs in the last two years .
My group has long argued this and we are pleased that it has been recognised by Mr Jacques Delors and Mr Poul Nyrup Rasmussen in the manifesto that they drafted for the PSE Group , which was adopted in Oporto some 15 months ago .
Mr Schulz , if there is an ostrich in this room , it is not to be found in seat 21 [ Mr Barroso 's seat ] ; it is to be found in seat 6 [ Mr Schulz 's seat ] .

I think that explains why the PSE Group has lost its former role as the motor of this institution .
The European Council must show more urgency in achieving its research and development targets .
It must boost the market for venture capital and the mobility of researchers to foster innovation .
It must improve transparency and supervision in the banking sector to ward off danger .
Mr Lenarčič , you must pay attention to social cohesion and environmental stability but you must do so secure in the knowledge that markets are the most powerful tool we have to improve living standards .
( Applause )
on behalf of the UEN Group . - Mr President , I would like to welcome the President-in-Office as well as the President of the Commission to discuss what our elders , wise men and some would say our betters - although I do not necessarily agree with that - will be discussing during the summit over the coming days .
Rather than going back over everything that my colleagues have said , because I can agree with most of the contributions , I would say that it is not one or the other but rather a combination of all : trying to drag the best ideas out of all the different proposals that have been put forward and utilising them as the unique model which Europe must follow .
I say that because our experience over the last 30 years , and in particular the last 20 years , has shown that it is not either one or the other .
You cannot have economic growth without proper social cohesion and social protection .
You cannot have protection of the environment without proper investment in new resources , information technology and research and development to create the innovative ways of dealing with the problems we are now facing .
Likewise , you cannot solve unemployment simply by saying that we want more jobs .
You have to encourage companies and businesses to create the jobs , to invest the money and to create the wealth .
Only so much can be done by public services , whether it is public investment for infrastructure or whatever else .
Ultimately it comes down to businessmen and businesswomen in small and medium-sized enterprises - which employ 62 % of all the people employed within the European Union - investing more money in creating more and more jobs .
That requires a certain amount of flexibility .
However , flexibility should not be a byword for a diminution of standards or of the protection of workers ' rights .
Likewise , you cannot use one bad example , like the Laval case - bad enough as it is - to say that everybody else must be controlled to the most rigorous level .
It must be used as a starting point , not as the end game .
Look at the challenges that we face in the European Union today : our lack of investment in proper research and development .
The best and the brightest from European universities and institutions are leaving Europe to do their research and further work in America , Japan and now even China .
And look at the relocation of European industry and business : it is not to other countries within Europe , which was the case 10 or 12 years ago ; it is now outside the European Union , to India , Pakistan , Malaysia and other countries .
What we really need to be focusing on now is not just where the sudden subprime market difficulties are creating short-term difficulties today .
If we look back over the last 25 years of the economic markets , they go in cycles : there are troughs and there are highs .
What we have to ensure is that the foundation stones that we put down today will be as strong in 15 years ' time as they are today , that they will continue to deliver economic growth and that they will continue to deliver security of energy supply .
The President of Estonia told us here yesterday that Russia is now acting like a superpower , to use its superpower status in oil and gas to influence foreign policy .
We must ensure that there is solidarity within the European Union to face up to and to meet that challenge .
Our best and most valuable asset is our young people .
If we do not invest properly in education and training and give them skills and opportunities in the European Union , we risk losing them .
Finally , let me say to the President-in-Office that I want to pay a small tribute to the young people in Slovenia for their work during Slovenia 's Presidency - particularly those in the protocol section - and the welcome and the image they give of Slovenia as a country .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by taking up what Mr Schulz said .
I would emphasise once again that we are not making an honest assessment of the Lisbon Strategy if we ignore the fact that , while Europe is indeed a major winner from globalisation , the winnings are very unevenly distributed .
In addition , employment growth has by no means resolved the problem of the working poor ; on the contrary , despite increased employment and increased growth , we also have increased poverty caused by job insecurity .
We in the European Parliament called explicitly in our resolution for the issue of sectoral minimum wages to be addressed by the Commission and the Council , and for the Commission to assess the results of the Lisbon Strategy differently in view of the problem of growing social marginalisation .
This poverty indicator is an integral part of our resolution , and I find it regrettable that neither the Council nor the Commission has so far responded to these decisions of the European Parliament .
( Applause )
Turning to the subject of climate and energy , quite frankly I was shocked when a German Government representative declared in Brussels , just a few days before this spring summit , that environment policy ought to steer clear of industrial and economic policy .
This pronouncement was made by a State Secretary in the German Ministry of the Environment , Mr Machnik , who is no doubt known to my German colleagues .
Germany 's Environment Ministry obviously has no real understanding of what sustainability actually means .
It is hardly surprising , consequently , that the German Government continues to oppose CO2 limits on vehicles , that it is not in favour of the single market for energy as proposed by the Commission and that it is attempting to organise an alliance against the ' new definitions of emissions trading ' .
I note with regret that , in these negotiations , Germany has partially forgotten what was signed and sealed at last year 's spring summit .
Some of its current policies are totally at odds with the outcomes of last year 's summit .
I am not certain , for example , that the new priority attached to renewable energy - which appears so uncontroversial - really is sufficient to ensure sustainability in the field of energy and the climate .
The Mediterranean Union also raises questions in my mind .
One sometimes gets the impression that , just like those major gas deals with Russia - I mean North Stream and South Stream - this Mediterranean Union is further proof that a uniform EU policy on energy and security of energy supply is simply not possible .
If the Council fails to tackle this problem , it will fall short of its obligations .
( Applause )
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , we are celebrating the 50th anniversary of the European Parliament today .
This should surely be an opportunity for the forthcoming summit to grant this House the right of initiative at long last !
I furthermore believe that the European Parliament 's 50th anniversary is the right occasion for me and my Group to make clear that neither the Council nor the Commission should expect this House to be docile and indulgent and full of adulation in future .
It will still be our duty to stand up for those people in the European Union who are often ignored : the 70 million or more people in the EU who are living in or at risk of poverty , including 19 million children .
If , as we understand , the European Council is to welcome the Commission 's strategic report on the renewed Lisbon Strategy and congratulate itself on its own success , then it should devote rather more than just a few lines to those EU citizens , those children , who derive no benefit at all from the achievements of the Lisbon Strategy .
The direction and priorities of the strategy are wrong , as are the resulting policies !
Mr Watson , it is not our protests against the aggressive global conduct of Unilever , Thyssen-Krupp , Nokia and many others that are unrealistic , but the refusal of the Commission and Council to confront the global corporations that are acting so aggressively and attach the appropriate priority to protecting the employees concerned and those who are socially excluded .
I can only agree with the European Anti-Poverty Network when it complains that the fight against poverty , social exclusion and a growing social divide is still not being tackled and backed up with the necessary clarity and determination .
The Network addressed four questions to the spring summit on 10 March , and the European Parliament should specifically endorse these questions .
How precisely do you propose to strengthen the social dimension of the Lisbon Strategy ?
What precise actions are proposed to meet the commitment ' to make a decisive impact on the eradication of poverty ' ?
Given that 18.9 million of those who are officially poor ( 78 million ) are in employment , what measures are proposed to address in-work poverty ?
What measures are proposed to ensure that rising energy prices do not threaten social cohesion and social inclusion ?
These four questions are fundamental , I believe , if economic growth really is to be sustainable in social and environmental terms .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , President of the Council and President of the Commission , together with my Irish colleague , Kathy Sinnott , I have made a proposal for a new protocol to be amended to the Lisbon Treaty before its final approval .
It will outlaw a revolutionary decision by the European Court of Justice dated 18 December 2007 .
A Latvian company wanted to build a school in Sweden with Latvian workers being paid much less than Swedish workers for similar jobs .
Swedish trade unions established a blockade .
This action has now been deemed illegal by the European Court of Justice .
They will only allow the Treaty principle on free movement of goods and services to be moderated by the other fundamental principle of the right to strike if there is a risk to public security , order or health .
A normal salary does not count .
Collective bargaining does not count .
The Scandinavian flexisecurity model , the voluntary cooperation between trade unions and employers , can be scrapped .
Foreign workers in foreign companies in Ireland may now work for the Irish minimum salary of EUR 9 an hour .
It is illegal for Irish trade unions to act against this Court judgment except in relation to the minimum wage .
It is even worse in my country , where we do not have a minimum wage .
This Court judgment is a disaster and must be annulled by a new wording in the Treaties or a legally binding protocol .
You can see our proposal on my website .
I urge the Slovenian Presidency and the President of the Commission to raise the question at the summit .
I have a question for the Commission and Council : When will we have a consolidated Treaty so that we can understand the content ?
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , I think that at the summit tomorrow the heads of states should wake up and admit that lowering the European production of CO2 by 20 % and increasing renewable energies to 20 % in 12 years ' time is a utopian idea .
If we impose further restrictions on European industries , we will jeopardise both the competitiveness of companies and employment , and in the end investments will shift towards countries that do not raise climate-related obstacles .
In addition to that , instead of giving credence to the nonsense about crowds of African and Asian refugees are invading Europe because the climate is forcing them to leave their homes , we should give a thought to our policies that made Europe a target for the migrating poor instead of the skilled workers .
I am convinced that we should focus on innovative processes that will reduce energy-intensive production .
We should give preference to , and spend funds on , expert brains instead of green brains .
We should also shake off the unfounded fear of nuclear reactors .
If the Council wants to act in the interest of citizens , countries should invest in research , development and education precisely in the field of nuclear energy .
Mr President , this European Council takes place with great economic uncertainty in the air .
The summit will consider an update of the Lisbon Agenda , which has only two years to run .
It is vital that heads of government do not indulge in self-congratulation .
There are real threats to free trade and to the fundamental principles of free and open competition that must underpin the European Union .
In that context I was delighted to read the recent remarks of the Commission President in the Financial Times , in which he raised the ugly spectre of growing protectionism in Europe .
When asked if such sentiment was on the rise , he said , ' Yes , and I fear this rise is not only in Europe but all over .
Political forces in Europe that were traditionally pro-market are today - let us put it elegantly - more prudent ' .
So there are rising protectionist threats , and not least when we hear the rhetoric from across the Atlantic from two of the front-runners in the presidential race .
Let us be clear , Europe has much more to gain from globalisation than it has to lose .
Indeed , The Economist recently lamented the anti-globalisation language used by some European leaders .
The reality , it said , was that European citizens are winners from globalisation , with cheap imports , low inflation and low interest rates .
And , notwithstanding the emergence of India and China , the EU 's share of world exports rose , albeit slightly , between 2000 and 2006 .
In France , where protectionist rhetoric is perhaps the most marked , a recent report stated that only 3.4 % of jobs that were lost in 2005 could be blamed on so-called offshoring .
So we should get all this in perspective and back the Commission President in his strong stance on the matter .
Europe will only succeed in international markets if its improves its competitiveness , radically reforms its labour markets and cracks down hard on bad business regulation , both at EU level and national level .
The Economist asked the question : Will today 's politicians ever be frank enough to tell the people that globalisation is good for Europe and for them ?
President Barroso has been frank ; it is time for EU leaders to back him .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the real world has caught up with the European Union .
At the 2007 spring summit , the EU27 was still free to dream of an ideal world .
Europe was on target again in terms of growth ; unemployment was falling ; employment was on the increase ; public deficits were going down ; the European Council was introducing a set of visionary targets in connection with the fight against climate change ; and at the Bali Conference Europe was set to act as a guide for the rest of the world .
In August , however , the subprime crisis erupted and continues to create havoc .
After the banks and insurance companies , investment funds have now entered the turmoil .
In showing their disdain for moral contingencies , the central banks have become the speculators ' flame-quellers .
The leading central banks have again been forced to inject billions into the financial circuits in order to ' deal with the pressure on liquid assets ' as one says discreetly in the world of high finance .
It is the general economy that picks up the tab .
A general tightening on credit has slowed up economic growth .
Recession looms ; the ECB urges moderation on employees whose spending power is continuously whittled away by higher prices for energy and food .
On the other hand , the failed geniuses of finance and industry are rewarded not quite so moderately .
The dollar is at a record low and a barrel of crude oil at a record high .
Growth forecasts are increasingly revised downwards .
Despite this changing context , President Barroso clings to the existing integrated guidelines as though they were engraved in Portuguese marble .
The Bali summit did not line up with the noble targets proposed by the Europeans .
The Americans , the Japanese , the Canadians and even the Australians , despite their new status as Kyoto signatories , did not want any compromising targets ; nor did the Chinese , the Indians , the Brazilians or the Russians .
The roadmap meant to lead to the 2009 Climate Conference in Copenhagen is the flimsiest of documents .
The Commission , however , has no wish to adjust the decisions taken at the 2007 summit to the real problems now emerging .
A number of reasonable voices are nevertheless making themselves heard within the Commission .
President Barroso speaks out against the illusions of an industry-free Europe .
Vice-President Verheugen insists clear flexible decisions must be taken that will not help deindustrialise Europe .
Industrialists in the energy sector would , of course , have no problem with CO2 certificates being put under the hammer .
Since their customers are putty in their hands , they will simply pass on the extra cost to them .
In the steel and aluminium sectors and other energy-intensive industries operating in a global market , oncosts will not be reflected in prices , but will certainly affect the only adjustment variable remaining : employment .
This option would rapidly cause relocation to countries where social regulations and climate regulations are less strict than in Europe .
The gain for the world 's climate would obviously be nil , but the social cost to Europeans would be unbearable .
The 2007 summit took some courageous decisions , but these did not square with the realities of the EU27 .
Achievement of the biofuels target alone would do the environment more harm than good , and consumers would certainly lose out .
The next summit must adjust these decisions to the new economic realities worldwide and define an environmental policy that does not operate under the illusion that the EU alone can bear the burden of the fight against climate change .
( PL ) Mr President , energy security ought of course to be one of the key features of the European Union 's energy policy .
Energy security can only be achieved through joint action , working in cooperation with others , and only when the European Union speaks with one voice .
This is not the case regarding the Nabucco pipeline , a project of strategic importance for Europe .
In my view , this matter should be raised at the forthcoming Council , and the latter should ensure that the Union acts as a single entity where this pipeline is concerned . It should also be borne in mind that a second pipeline , whose construction is supported by several European countries , may mean that it will not be possible to pursue the Nabucco project for practical reasons .
There simply will not be enough gas available .
I therefore have a question to put to the European Union . Would it not be possible simply to support this pipeline with European Union funds , in order to improve the Union 's energy security ?
Similar action was taken for the Galileo project , which was considered to be of strategic importance .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to remind the House that the Lisbon Strategy , whose praises were sung so loudly by President Barroso , was supposed to enable our economy to catch up with that of the United States .
Unfortunately , everything we see , hear and experience indicates that not only have we failed to catch up with the United States , but we are also losing out to Asia .
Instead of heralding success , therefore , it needs to be clearly stated that in pursuing the Lisbon Strategy the Union is running a race it has absolutely no intention of winning .
If the desire really was to make Europe 's economy more dynamic and effective , the European Commission would not have introduced barriers hindering our economic growth , as it has done in recent years . I refer to the restrictions on the freedom to provide services across the territory of the European Union and to restrictions on the freedom of employment .
Either we take the declarations seriously , therefore , or we simply put on a show , presenting slogans and swearing blind about reality , whilst actually taking action that has the opposite effect and impedes development .
The Commission is responsible for over-regulating the economy , for an excessive quantity of directives and concessions and for everything involved in making the economy unduly dependent on bureaucracy , including the European bureaucracy .
As regards combating climate change , notably the carbon dioxide issue , we do not wish the cost of this effort to represent an undue burden on the economies of the new Member States .
Allowing that to happen would amount to throwing the baby out with the bath water .

( DE ) Mr President , the Socialist Group is of course right to say that wealth distribution in Europe has not worked well over the past few years , and of course Robert Goebbels is right to demand a different approach to speculation and the squandering of billions of euro .
Nevertheless , I would caution against playing off social affairs against environmental affairs , as the Socialists and others in this House are once again attempting to do .
We are currently faced with the existence of a lobby , a lobby of steel barons , aluminium barons and chemical industry barons .
What do these men want ?
As a rule they are men !
These men want to undermine the ' polluter pays ' principle .
It is clearly unacceptable for the very industries which pollute the most now to be exempted from the pollution tax , and the auctioning of CO2 allowances is nothing other than that .
What would happen next ?
What would happen is that there would be no modernisation of the steel , aluminium and chemical industries internationally .
We therefore need the following model .
First , there must be 100 % auctioning .
Second , these funds must be hypothecated so that , as happened in Denmark in the early 1990s , the proceeds from a CO2 tax levied on industry are reinvested in the modernisation of the steel industry and other energy-intensive companies in Europe .
Third - and I think we shall have to work with the French Presidency on this point - we naturally need penalties for environmental dumping outside the single market , on other continents .
It is a misconception , however , that every steel plant outside Europe has poorer environmental and energy standards than steel plants located in Europe today .
That is not true , and so any such sanctions will only work if they are transparent .
Social and environmental policies operating hand-in-hand : that is the future .
( SV ) Mr President , the picture presented by the Commission and the Council today conveys an entirely different reality to that which the majority of our citizens live with , a reality in which poverty and gaps between different groups have increased .
We are told that more people have found jobs , but we are not told what kind of jobs have increased .
They are mostly low-wage jobs which do not enable people to provide for themselves and their children .
They are casual jobs with insecure conditions of employment .
This is not the model of society which we on the left want or accept .
We know that there are other paths to follow , paths that lead to solidarity and justice and a society for all our citizens .
Any prospect of a social Europe was brought to earth when the European Court of Justice ruled in the Vaxholm and Viking Line cases .
The judgments made it absolutely clear that , in the EU , free movement and the demands and interests of the internal market are more important than the interests of employees .
The outcome of the judgments is social dumping .
Workers from different countries are played against one another .
Serious employers who want to pay decent wages and offer reasonable working conditions are outcompeted .
The Court of Justice leaves no room for doubt .
But why do the Commission and the Council remain passive in this matter ?
Why approve a Treaty which further strengthens the interests of the market against those of working people ?
The Vaxholm judgment gave three unequivocal answers : firstly , that the Member States may not decide on labour-market matters ; secondly , that employees may not resort to disputes which disrupt the internal market - thus the Court takes away from workers their only effective means of defending the principle of equal pay for equal work ; thirdly , companies which establish themselves in EU countries with lower levels of pay get the right to send employees to other countries to work for the same low wages .
Trade union organisations , political organisations , non-governmental organisations and millions of ordinary people have recognised the possibility of a People 's Europe , but when will the Commission and the Council also recognise it ?
( NL ) President Barroso has spoken about inflation .
Inflation is a spectre that once again haunts the Member States .
At 3.2 % , it is currently well above the 2 % target , and this is a worrying development , a development that is stimulated by pay increases , as in the Netherlands .
Last year 's debate in preparation for the spring summit was dominated by the reforms to the welfare state .
That was perfectly reasonable .
The welfare states had become untenable .
Several Member States have dealt advantageously with this and are now in a better position .
However , Mr President , the outlook is not good .
Inflation is too high ; the cost of raw materials is on the increase ; and recently the central banks have had to avert a credit crisis in the financial markets with extensive loans .
Consumer confidence now has to recover .
Last week Mr Trichet said that , in accordance with the monetary policy stance , the European Central Bank would continue in its aim of maintaining stability , and the European Central Bank must do independently what the new French boss of the International Monetary Fund also claims .
It is , however , at the discretion of the Member States to support this policy by ensuring wage increases are controlled .
Can the President of the Council indicate which additional measures the Council will take in order to turn the tide ?
Can we expect measures to check the already over-accelerated wage increase ? Thank you very much .
( DE ) Mr President , it appears that one topic for discussion at the spring summit will be the Mediterranean Union , for which neither the structure nor the framework nor even the funding has been clarified as yet .
This discussion might perhaps sideline other economic issues such as implementation of the Lisbon Strategy or how to stimulate the economy in the face of the international financial crisis .
First of all we had the Baltic Council , then a Euro-Mediterranean Partnership .
Marine regions are therefore working together in a variety of ways .
However , the argument that a Mediterranean Union will strengthen governmental cooperation , with a view to countering illegal immigration , is a specious one in my opinion .
It would also be wrong to provide further financial support for African states under the mantle of promoting neighbourhood relations , without laying down conditions .
African countries of origin and transit for innumerable economic refugees have , after all , been pocketing vast quantities of development aid , often without showing the slightest willingness to take back their own nationals .
In general , therefore , financial assistance must be coupled with the conclusion of an agreement to take back illegal refugees or packages of measures to prevent illegal migration .
( NL ) Mr President-in-Office , Mr President of the Commission , Mr President of Parliament , ladies and gentlemen , if we look at the agenda of the spring summit we find an almost complete list of the socio-economic and ecological challenges facing our generation : that is , if we want to take responsibility for those who come after us in a time of globalisation , climate change , technological advances and an ageing demographic .
Without doubt we are responsible for the objectives and the approaches necessary to achieve this , and of course we expect everyone to do what they have said they will do and that sufficient pressure will be exerted at all political levels to achieve results .
As group coordinator for the Lisbon Strategy I want to say how much we value the fact that the Commission has presented the Community Lisbon Programme .
Each of the 10 points gets our full support , and the same goes for the announcement of the Small Business Act . This is on condition , however , that the Small Business Act pays more than just lip service to SMEs .
This Act , Mr President , must therefore become more than the SME Charter , which was approved in Santa Maria da Feira some years ago .
To do its job , the Small Business Act must ensure that the best possible operating environment is created for SMEs , and that applies to very small , small and medium-sized enterprises .
To this end , one condition is absolutely necessary and must apply at every stage , to substantive measures or mere simplification measures : think small first .
Take the SME as the point of departure and not as an exception , and let us take this as a binding criterion so that it at last becomes more than just a slogan .
It is only in this way that we will truly succeed in getting through to the firms that form the bulk of our business environment , but , more importantly , that provide the greatest number of jobs and the jobs that are currently being created .
It would be a very good thing , Members of the Commission and of the Council , if tomorrow at the spring Council this binding principle could be agreed upon once and for all . Thank you for your attention .
( FR ) Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , on the eve of the spring summit , the economy is in turmoil , markets are deregulated , stock markets are crashing , growth is falling .
That is international capitalism for you , creating wealth or destroying value at the whim of the markets , speculative bubbles , financial derivatives and crazed traders who , by the way , are merely doing what they are asked to do , i.e. obtain the maximum profit in the minimum time .
However , though the markets are that way , no human society can live like that .
At any rate , it is this phenomenon that may give Europe its very meaning in this globalised market : a Europe that obviously cannot completely escape this turmoil , a Europe that is itself one of the main players in globalisation , often to its benefit , but that largely finds in globalisation its meaning and vocation to counterbalance crazed capitalism through public regulation , economic stabilisation , active public policies to support growth in the real economy , support for public and private investment in research , innovation , and European infrastructure .
The monetary policy , for instance , ought to protect stability , which it does , but it also ought to stimulate growth and adjust parity in the best possible fashion to defend our exports , although as things stand today this is unfortunately not yet the case .
Finally and above all , our group stresses that the EU must counterbalance this destabilised high-finance economy with effective social protection , solid public services and guaranteed social rights for workers .
Mr President , Europe must now take much more action to anticipate and protect : it cannot merely act as an internal market within the vast overall market .
It must be more socially aware .
That is also the way to recover the support and trust of its citizens .
We now support the Lisbon Strategy , a strategy fundamentally based on these three pillars , which you have already mentioned here , but your words must be matched by action , by real EU policies ; otherwise your social intentions will remain a dead letter .
That is why we have called for a revision of the guidelines since they can be used to pilot the project .
We specifically ask you , however , for it is the substance that is important here , to relaunch the European social agenda . There must be , for instance , a Commission reaction to the Laval case .
It must use its powers of initiative to propose a revision of the Posting of Workers Directive . There must be a truly ambitious revision of the European Works Councils Directive to allow social dialogue in major groups facing restructuring to be utilised effectively and in a timely fashion .
There must be a revision , a real adaptation of the Working Time Directive to combat opt-outs and abuse of excessive working hours .
The Temporary Work Directive must be adopted in order to combat casual employment .
You must launch an ambitious lifelong learning programme so that this fifth pillar , this fifth fundamental freedom , is not just reserved only for an elite , but enables all people to fulfil effectively their own potential as workers to enable them to adapt to changes in the economy and the job market .
Mr President of the Commission , this is our message : use your power of initiative to help the Council to adopt an ambitious programme for a social Europe .
( SV ) Mr President , it is difficult to take responsibility for Europe 's future .
We must cope with globalisation and the competition to which it gives rise .
We must cope with difficult questions of demography , with a pensioner boom and a declining population going forward to 2020 , the year we are to achieve the environmental and climate goals we have set , i.e. the 20-20-20 targets .
We must ensure that we have economically sustainable development in Europe .
I am glad , when we discuss matters arising from the Lisbon Strategy , that it represents a comprehensive approach to sustainable economic development , economic growth , environmental responsibility and socially responsible policy .
We see that combined efforts are giving results .
That is good .
We also see that a combined strategy is of the utmost importance .
The cooperation that has been launched between the European Parliament and the national parliaments is immensely important .
I would like to draw attention to the new area which has been included in this year 's resolution , namely transport policy , on which much depends when it comes to the climate targets and growth .
We have a situation in which we shall be able to create more jobs in Europe through an effective , sustainable and environmentally compatible transport policy .
The fact is that the various policy areas hang together .
There is no point in making pronouncements on the 20-20-20 targets in climate policy when they are not also reflected in the Council 's resolution on the Lisbon Strategy .
I therefore hope that , when we see the results of the spring summit , we find a comprehensive policy which responds to both economic growth and the climate policy .
That , my friends , is a challenge !
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the forthcoming European Council must take a serious look at the global financial turbulence .
Euroland seems to be reeling under pressure from waves of money fleeing from Italian , Greek , Spanish and French bonds to take refuge in German ones .
The spread between Italian and German bonds has risen to more than 63 basis points , as it did in 1999 when Italy seemed unlikely to be able to comply strictly with the Maastricht criteria .
Only yesterday , at a sale of Treasury bonds in Italy , there were very few bids .
The Telegraph reported on 6 March that a major investment bank , which speculated by means of arbitrage between the buying and selling rates for Italian bonds and credit derivatives , had been forced to liquidate all of its bonds .
The Italian Treasury had to intervene to support the value of the bonds .
There have for some time been rumours in the world of high finance about Italy exiting from the euro . Is there any truth in this ?
Europe is weak , and the national governments need to redouble their efforts to tackle such grave problems , instead of the tired , pointless measures proposed by technocrats in Brussels ; the governments must intervene as necessary rather than resorting to outdated solutions such as tax cuts and injections of liquidity .
You should listen instead to the voice of the people and local communities !
Let us return to the real economy and give workers a stake in the share ownership of their companies !
( FR ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , spring summits leave a bad taste in my mouth .
It is true that we are celebrating the 50th anniversary of Europe , and it is good to remember these things .
However , gentlemen , I also remember the Gothenburg summit , which was an enormous ecological victory because the Heads of State or Government reached an agreement to hold the spring summit to take stock of the sustainable development of our EU policies in the fields of environmental health , health and social integration .
In Europe , for example , Mittal-Arcelor , the energy-intensive organisation par excellence , is set to cut 600 jobs amid monster profits , and the EU is poised to give it free greenhouse gas emission quotas .
Our citizens are now distraught and our young people anguished by the legacy we are bequeathing them .
Gentlemen , you are announcing a revolution when you propose , for instance , that greenhouse gas emissions ought to be reduced by 20 % .
We know this is well below what has to be done .
For example , Lester Brown , who visited us last week , was choked by emotion as he told us emissions would have to be reduced by 80 % between now and 2020 if there is to be any chance of reversing the trend .
Therefore , gentlemen , I do not believe in your project : it is well below what is required , and is totally inadequate for the environmental crisis endangering the entire planet .
- ( EL ) Mr President , now the European Parliament is celebrating its 50th anniversary , I was expecting the representatives of the Commission and the Council to come here with greater sincerity and modesty .
Instead of mutually congratulating and praising each other , and embellishing reality , I should like them to talk about their failures and about the problems preoccupying European citizens .
During the past years social inequalities have increased and poverty has increased .
As for the Lisbon targets - they are the ones you set , Mr Barroso , but you are not listening to me because you are talking to your colleague - you forget the social cohesion and environmental protection targets , Mr Barroso !
In Kosovo , you are forgetting the UN and international law !
As for you , representatives of the Council , rather than ambitiously promote the Barroso package on climate change , you are trying to waste it .
This is what I was expecting you to say , rather than congratulate each other .
( NL ) I am very surprised that the situation in Turkey has not been placed at the top of this week 's agenda .
It has hitherto always been stated that the process of negotiation with Turkey would take place in parallel with the progress of Turkish reforms .
Well , the reverse has proved to be the case .
The reform process has almost completely ground to a standstill , but the negotiations simply go ahead .
All we can tell is that Turkey is piling up the provocations .
Freedom of expression is formally obstructed under Article 301 of the Turkish Penal Code .
The Turkish Government had agreed to scrap or at the very least reform this article by the end of the year , but nothing has been done .
It also laconically let it be known that there was a higher priority , namely the suppression of the ban on headscarves in universities .
The Islamisation and the stealthy phasing-out of the current state apparently take precedence .
Then the Turkish Prime Minister , Mr Erdogan , went to Germany to remind the Turks living there not to adapt too well and to demand the establishment of Turkish universities in Europe .
Mr Erdogan conducted himself like a victorious commander coming to inspect his troops in occupied territory .
Furthermore , Turkey has been bombing Northern Iraq for weeks .
Approximately 10 000 troops have invaded the country .
It is almost as if Croatia , another candidate Member State , were to attack Montenegro .
Of course that would be absurd , and nobody in the European Union would accept something like that , and yet apparently Turkey can do what it wants .
My question therefore , Mr President , is how long will the European Union continue to behave like a sort of shrinking violet in the negotiations with Turkey ?
( PT ) Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , it should be noted that since 2005 , thanks to the current Commission , the Lisbon Strategy has shaken off its previous state of apathy .
I must therefore say to the President-in-Office of the Council that it is vital , as with the single currency and internal market , to give more responsibility to the Commission and allow it to be the pivot of the Lisbon Strategy , instead of continuing with the idea of intergovernmentalism , which has got us nowhere .
As for the education / research / innovation triangle , the simplistic solution of indiscriminately injecting money into research must be avoided .
Rather than scientific articles or fanciful ideas , we need better innovation , which is something quite different .
Innovation requires a culture that values entrepreneurship and those individuals prepared to take risks , who are precisely the ones who know how to make money from knowledge and not the other way round , in other words , throwing money around indiscriminately to see if knowledge appears .
As regards education , it is fundamental that we also create a culture of competitiveness and directed creativity .
We should firmly reject the easy solutions that hinder the future success of both individuals and companies .
As a result , Mr President , I welcome the Commission 's proposals to encourage entrepreneurship , directed research , links between schools and business , creativity in the education system , demand and competitiveness .
However , more than this , I would say that the drive for innovation and the Lisbon Strategy can be summed up in two words : what Europe , business and universities must do is create value .
( DE ) You have stated before this House , Mr President of the Commission , that you have moved closer to the European Parliament 's way of thinking .
My specific question is this : in what respect has this move towards Parliament 's stance led to any new emphasis , or to the setting of a single new priority in the economic and social policy guidelines that are to be adopted by the Council over the next couple of days ?
I take a different view .
I think you are using the Council , which was not prepared to take up various ideas , as an excuse .
I think the Council is using as an excuse the messages that you , Mr Barroso , have been sending out for months , namely that no changes are needed .
I believe that this team effort has produced a policy-blocking cartel with a shared mantra : business as usual .
That is not , however , in the interest of the European people , it is not in the interest of European firms and it is not in the interest of the European Parliament , which has issued many resolutions calling for greater attention to be paid to the economic , social and environmental circumstances in the European Union .
As our own studies have shown , we are falling behind in terms of research and development .
We have remained at a level well behind that of the US .
We have been at this same level since the early 1980s , and in the meantime we have not only been left behind by Japan but we are being overtaken by the Chinese , whose R & D expenditure in the economic sector is now greater than that of companies in the European Union .
When will you waken up ?
When will you adopt a positive attitude to the quality of finance and investment in the European Union , for the sake of the EU population ?
It is high time !
Mr President , at last year 's Spring Council , EU leaders signed up to a ' 20 % by 2020 ' target for energy efficiency , but delivery of this target remains sluggish .
Parliament 's report on the energy efficiency action plan exposed major failures in implementation of energy efficiency legislation .
In January , the Commission 's first assessment of national energy efficiency action plans spoke of the gap between the political commitment to energy efficiency and actual delivery .
Energy efficiency underpins all the EU 's targets on CO2 emissions , on renewables , on security of supply and on the Lisbon Agenda - all the things we have been discussing this morning .
Therefore , I would be grateful if the President-in-Office of the Council and the President of the Commission would indicate what this year 's Spring Council intends to do to improve performance on energy efficiency .
( PL ) Mr President , the aims of the Lisbon Strategy were defined eight years ago .
The Lisbon Strategy 's priority was to ensure that Europe developed at a faster rate than the United States , whilst also increasing sustainable employment .
Failure on both counts has been officially recorded .
There is clear lack of cohesion between the Lisbon Strategy and actual implementation of the common agricultural policy , for example .
One instance of this is the reform of the market in sugar . In many cases , the European Commission has been pressing ahead with the reforms without considering the relevant social context .
By way of example I should like to refer to the case of the sugar factory at Lublin in Poland . Contrary even to Union provisions , it is planned to make the entire staff of that factory redundant , to knock down all the buildings and to put modern facilities beyond use .
It is also planned to deprive growers in the entire region of their livelihood .
A one-off compensation payment will not resolve the employment problem .
Such actions run counter to the stated aims of the Lisbon Strategy . Ridiculous measures of this sort certainly do not bring us closer to achieving the aims of that Strategy .
( DE ) Mr President , I should like to broach a completely new topic which has not yet been mentioned , and recall the debate that took place in this House a month ago on the future of the cohesion policy and the link with two European documents : the Leipzig Charter and the Territorial Agenda .
That debate was unfortunately held without the presence of a Council representative .
The ministerial conferences that preceded our debate , under the German and Portuguese Presidencies of the Council , expressed a definite expectation that the Territorial Agenda would be discussed at the spring summit in order to lend greater political weight to the territorial dimension .
The particular background for this is that the territorial dimension has been incorporated into the Treaty of Lisbon as a new Community objective .
According to the documents accessible to me , however , the subject goes unmentioned .
Why is this ?
Cohesion policy is the practical application of the principle of solidarity ; it will therefore no doubt be with us , and occupy us , for longer than the Lisbon Strategy , which after all is to be successfully concluded by 2010 .
- ( EL ) Mr President , the state is ceding the last area of regulation under its control .
The welfare state is being dissolved , the private sector is operating without hindrance , social benefits are being reduced and the institutional framework allows employers to hire and fire as they wish .
Meanwhile , working conditions are worsening because of flexible working hours , and as a result , workers are being sacrificed to competitiveness for the sake of mega-profits for capital .
Yet another European Council summit is to deal with the Lisbon Strategy , which is deemed to have failed and needs to be reviewed .
Convergence has never been achieved , at least for workers .
Lisbon and its satellites insist on supporting the Union 's business-centred philosophy , while social policies continue to play second fiddle .
What we need is a radical reorganisation that places citizens back at the centre of the EU 's interests ; we need an anthropocentric strategy .
Mr President , the ratification of the renamed EU Constitution threatens the democratic legitimacy of the European project itself .
The peoples of France and Holland rejected the Constitution , yet it has now come back with a new name and with what Angela Merkel called ' cosmetic changes ' .
Now the institutions and the Member States , including the Labour Government in the UK , are dishonestly pretending that these cosmetic changes justify breaking their promise of a referendum .
They do not , and the pretence that they do is a huge breach of faith with the people .
In Britain a campaign group has just undertaken an independently monitored postal ballot in 10 Westminster constituencies .
Over 150 000 voters responded : 88 % wanted a referendum ; 89 % opposed the Treaty .
In six constituencies more people voted for a referendum than voted for their current Member of Parliament .
The people have spoken .
The Treaty cannot be legitimate without their consent .
The European Council must listen .
We must have a referendum .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr President of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , unlike the speakers from the Socialist Group I wish to commend the Commission for not having hastily altered its economic policy guidelines in these times of global uncertainty caused by the financial crisis .
This process forms an integral part of the post-Lisbon Strategy .
I wish to explicitly commend the Commission , because it is right .
The shortcomings in fact lie in implementation by the Member States , and the President of the Council should concentrate on these shortcomings in the Member States and not on what changes the Commission can make .
That is the problem .
When Mr Bullmann talks about a ' policy-blocking cartel ' , his criticism is completely unjustified .
Secondly , the opportunities of globalisation should be exploited and the risks minimised .
Mr Schulz said that poverty has increased .
That is just an illusion !
Europe is a model of prosperity !
Prosperity in Europe has risen ; its distribution has changed .
History has taught us , however , what becomes of societies where there are no differences in distribution .
There has to be a certain difference in distribution to stimulate modernisation and dynamism .
That is surely undeniable .
Thirdly , on the subject of cutting red tape , not enough has happened in that respect .
We have a High Level Group , but nothing is heard of it any more .
Is it still functioning ?
What are its interim findings ?
When can we expect any ?
We should like to know before the European elections .
My final point relates to finance market stability .
It is indeed true that the greed in the finance market is greater than the fear of disruption , and the Commission needs to take action in this regard .
It has already announced some plans .
On the subject of climate change , here , too , the Commission 's primary duty is to persuade the Member States at the summit to abide by their earlier goals .
Certain Member States have in fact emitted far more CO2 than was ever authorised .
How can we effectively introduce new measures unless the sinners of today and past years are punished ?
( SV ) Mr President , like the Commission I am happy that there are more jobs and that productivity has increased .
However , as many have pointed out , there is another side to the coin .
Many of the new jobs are insecure and impossible to live from .
The possibilities for training are extremely unevenly distributed .
Some regions cannot keep up with development .
What is needed , therefore , is a social Europe which provides secure jobs with decent wages , which offers the same training opportunities to all and which also ensures that the development is good and even across the regions .
For a long time we have been debating flexicurity .
Now a model of flexicurity is being challenged by the European Court of Justice in the Laval case , which does not think that the system applied in Scandinavia is good enough .
It is challenged on the grounds that freedom of movement takes precedence over the right to strike .
It is also challenged on the grounds that the principle of equal pay for equal work should not apply .
It opens the door to social dumping , but not just that , it also means that firms which pay decent wages in accordance with agreements will have difficulty competing .
It can lead to protectionism .
I share the Commission 's view that we do not need protectionism .
It is therefore important for the Commission to make it clear that the principle of equal pay for equal work must apply and that we must have good social conditions throughout Europe , so that the tide of protectionism does not advance across the EU .
- ( LT ) I would like to speak about the coordination of economic policy .
The European Union is first and foremost an economic union based on moral values .
In the face of new challenges the European Union has to find ways of tackling them quickly and flexibly in order not to lose in the dynamism and competitiveness stakes .
Regrettably , the recent economic policy coordination mechanism ( the Treaty of Lisbon , the economic policy framework ) has a number of stages and is far from being efficient .
It impedes the development of the internal market - the main source of economic growth .
I am therefore of the opinion that the European Parliament and perhaps the Commission should present a proposal to the European Council to examine this mechanism with a view to making it more flexible , enabling it to react efficiently to challenges .
This would be the best way of guaranteeing the continuity of the economic policy , consolidating the reforms and enabling the EU economy to adapt to new challenges .
The reason why some of the new programmes do not work properly is because their economic viability in the globalised world was not ascertained beforehand .
Meanwhile , we are discussing climate change , energy strategy , etc . , but all these means , as already mentioned , must be coordinated and their economic consequences evaluated .
Only then will they be viable .
( PL ) Mr President , plans for the internal market in energy and gas are on the agenda for the forthcoming Council .
Separating ownership of energy and the distribution networks is a crucial issue regardless of who may be in power in the Kremlin .
Under Mr Medvedew , there will be no change in Russia 's policy of energy blackmail towards Member States of the Union and neighbouring countries .
Saving energy and increasing the proportion of renewable energy consumed constitute only part of the solution to these problems .
The political aspect must be taken into account too if Europe 's energy policy is to be fully implemented .
We must make it abundantly clear what we expect from Russia and from Gazprom by way of reciprocity .
Gazprom is a Russian monopoly with a presence in 16 Member States of the Union either as an energy supplier or as the owner of distribution networks .
If we do not impose any restrictions on this aggressive monopoly , the Treaty of Lisbon 's provisions on energy solidarity may as well be shelved alongside fairy tales .
Mr President , is it not a little odd that when we are discussing how to make Europe more competitive in order to get more jobs that the discussion is leaning more towards the belief that jobs can be created through new regulations ?
That is not the case .
I should like to disclose a secret to our Socialist friends here today : in order for there to be employees , there needs to be employers - there are no employees without employers .
Their main problem is that , they are so eager to believe that jobs can be created through regulations , they forget that the preconditions and opportunities for new enterprises and new jobs need to be created , because there is no bigger social failure than unemployment and there is no bigger social success than every new job we can achieve in Europe and in our Member States .
I would like to underline what the President said about achieving results through the Lisbon Agenda .
Let us not forget that the world is moving faster and we need to be more competitive ; we need to be more entrepreneurial .
There are three things I would like him to consider at the European Council and later on .
Firstly , concerning red tape and better regulation : I would like him to report annually on the achievements of reducing red tape in order to show that he will reach the goal by 2012 of 25 % less red tape than exists today .
I would like him to also ensure that the Services Directive is implemented fully in each Member State as soon as possible .
I would like him to ensure that we are facilitating new businesses through a more offensive and more active broadband policy .
I think our success in making Europe more competitive lies in making small and medium-sized enterprises able to act all over the internal market .
That is a job we need to do and he should take the first steps , together with the Slovenian Presidency , at the end of this week .
- ( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , as you know , next year will be the European Year of Creativity and Innovation .
This is even greater evidence that the EU is very much hoping to strengthen its competitiveness and meet the challenges of globalisation . It has recourse to the ' knowledge triangle ' : innovation , the promotion of research , and education .
Community and national policies on employment and support for young people chiefly in the education sector ought to adhere to these ambitious targets . They should make systematic and coordinated efforts at regional , national and Community level in order to release the EU 's significant stores of knowledge and research potential .
Within this framework , however , I should also like to stress that the recognition of the free movement of knowledge - the ' fifth freedom ' - is essential ; this too should be emphasised at the European Council .
We also ought to recognise this significant initiative within this framework at Community level .
The Erasmus and Comenius programmes are at the heart of the initiatives . Let us stress that the new programme , mainly the Erasmus Mundus , which allows both mobility outside the borders of the EU as well as mobility for doctoral students , is an initiative that will have Parliament 's full support .
It is up to the Member States to step up coordination on the basis of the Bologna Process and make this mobility possible in practice .
- ( LT ) The discussion on the common energy policy and energy security started in 2006 in the wake of the Russian-Ukrainian gas crisis , the consequences of which had an unfavourable impact on Europe .
Regrettably , we still have neither a clearly defined common energy policy , nor an external energy policy .
I hope the European Council will hold a thorough discussion on the issues of EU energy security , including that of Lithuania , in view of the plans to close the Ignalina Nuclear Power Plant in 2009 .
With the closure of this power plant , Lithuania would become fully dependent on the only source - gas imported from Russia .
The rise in oil and gas prices will result in the electricity price in Lithuania more than doubling .
Consequently , it will be disastrous for the country 's households and general economy .
Furthermore , Russia is prone to manipulating energy supplies to pursue its political ambitions .
Lithuania has already experienced this .

On the basis of Article 37 and Protocol No 4 of the Treaty of Accession , I urge the Commission to help find a solution ; one possibility would be to postpone the closure of the safe Ignalina Nuclear Power Plant .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , I should like to return to last year 's spring summit .
It was an extremely successful summit , under Angela Merkel , and it is now a matter of transposing into legislation the decisions reached on 7 March last year .
However , legislation should not be punitive ; it should motivate our people and our firms to innovate and ultimately achieve greater sustainability .
It would appear from the current debate that the CO2 debate is the most important issue .
I believe that the real issue goes much deeper : it is about sustainability .
How should we manage our resources in the long term ?
The key point , in my opinion , is that we must run our economy using fewer fossil resources in the future .
Commissioner , we are bound to get into an argument here because we cannot accept everything you have proposed .
On the rules for vehicles , for instance , I dislike the fact that we already know how much someone will be fined , but we know nothing yet about the rules they must comply with .
I learned the opposite from my parents : first you must know the rules and then sanctions have to be found .
It is important that this procedure be followed in future .
If there are cross-border CO2 problems with the ETS , which I really do not dispute , then I suggest that we find more shoulders to bear this burden , such as by introducing a sensible waste policy throughout Europe .
I should like to share with you a very big personal concern of mine , Mr Barroso and Mr Verheugen : you are the guardians of the law !
It is absolutely pointless for us to shake hands here and agree on doing something or other , and then for it not to be implemented at the end of the day .
Instead , let us do less !
What we do , however , must be done better .
Therefore , Commissioner and President of the Commission , exercise your mandate not by punishing the conscientious but by encouraging those who are rather slower off the mark to finally meet the Kyoto targets .
A glance at the internet will show exactly who I mean .
Good luck ; we shall be keeping an eye on you .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , the European Union has made huge progress in the last few years .
Its economy is growing faster than the American or Japanese economies .
The Union is a world trade emporium , the largest donor of development assistance and also a paragon and model for other parts of the world when it comes to managing political , economic and social relations .
As we heard earlier , the European Union has been able to meet the Lisbon Strategy goals , step by step , whether in the area of employment or in other aspects .
It is good to know that new Member States such as Slovenia , which currently holds the presidency , participate in this success in equal measure .
Of course the European Union is facing new challenges : one is excessive dependence on imports of energy sources ; another is climate change .
I am convinced that savings , new energy-saving technologies and of course diversification of energy sources represent the key , or at least one of the keys , to solving this problem .
In this regard the European Union is going in the right direction .
However , I would like to ask the Commission and the Council to focus , more than they have done so far , on the issues of the use of nuclear energy .
This energy is safe , environmentally clean and will reduce our dependence on imports .
As to competitiveness , we can see in what direction the US , Russia , China or India are going .
Our own research should concentrate on nuclear energy far more than it has done so far .
( DE ) Mr President , anyone who takes a look at the draft Council conclusions can see that the language on the internal energy market is extremely weak .
There is no agreement in the Council on the question of unbundling , and the Commission 's package comes in for criticism .
I wish to put on record here that we consider it right to pursue the strategy of systematic unbundling , but the unbundling must benefit consumers .
It must result in fair prices and security of supply .
The Commission has in fact been too quick off the mark with its proposal on the complete unbundling of ownership rights .
We therefore believe that an attempt should first be made to achieve effective unbundling , but that ownership unbundling should not be taken off the agenda for the future .
I should like to raise a second point on the Council conclusions for reasons of principle .
The Council states that it looks forward to the social agenda that the Commission will present .
That agenda includes the topics of youth policy and education policy .
I always thought the Member States were responsible for such matters ; in my country , Germany , it is the Länder .
I merely wish to put this on record here , because the Parliament , Commission and ECJ will undoubtedly be criticised yet again for appropriating powers .
The Council looks forward to the Commission 's proposals on youth policy and education policy .
We should draw attention to this important point when these matters are discussed at home in the German Länder .
( NL ) As coordinator for regional policy in the PPE-DE Group , I am happy with the position regions and cities will occupy in the implementation of the Lisbon Strategy .
After all , the national reform programmes are implemented at regional level , the level at which we mainly deploy our Structural and Cohesion Funds , as well as the Seventh Framework Programme .
We see right across Europe that 60 % of public funds are used at regional level .
Furthermore , the tendency is - and it would be good to agree on this now - to go from investing in concrete and asphalt , if we can put it like that , to investing in knowledge and infrastructure ; the lion 's share of the Structural Funds , some 70 % , will be spent in the coming years on the Lisbon Strategy .
I have another example .
Last week we saw in Ljubljana figures on how this money has been spent : EUR 20 billion from the Structural Funds went on research and infrastructure .
Commissioner Potočnik spoke of a quiet revolution in the spending of money .
Put your money where your mouth is .
Do what you say you will do : ensure a shift in spending .
It is a quiet revolution that is already in full swing .
It is high time that we create a better legal framework at European level for investment in research and infrastructure .
You cannot make the same large-scale , expensive investments in every country .
I am delighted that the European Commission is putting forward a proposal this year to fit in with that and another proposal to improve the coordination of national responsibilities .
Finally , we will soon see a White Paper on territorial cohesion is forthcoming , combining not only the development of large central regions but also the territorial cohesion of more remote areas in Europe , and I welcome that too .
Mr President , I welcome the recognition by both the Council and the Commission recently that climate change is not just an environment policy but also a security and humanitarian policy .
There is nothing new in that of course .
The Stern report indicated that some 200 million people could be displaced by climate change , creating huge migratory pressures .
It is for that reason that we should always bear in mind that global warming is actually the poor suffering the consequences of the actions of the rich .
I would hope that in our discussion on climate change we can tie our climate change objectives to our development policy objectives .
We cannot act in isolation in this area .
Of course the poor within the European Union also suffer .
That is why any policy on energy has to ensure that Member States have a policy on energy poverty because too many people are suffering because of the rise in energy prices .
We need to address that .
But most importantly in this summit , we have to ensure that we have action rather than simply words .
The Commission set out a programme in 2007 .
Two thirds of that has reached the light of day .
Where is the other third ?
Member States commit themselves to targets which they do not reach .
We have to focus on action .
I also welcome the work being done on better regulation and the help for small businesses .
However , we must put much more emphasis on looking at transposition and evaluating how legislation has been implemented and if it has achieved what we have set out to achieve .
If it does not achieve what is required , there is no point in having the legislation in the first place .
Mr President , the next European Summit takes place in momentous times .
The deepening financial crisis , rooted in cyclical and structured conditions , demands firm responses .
Asia 's rise implies a new sort of competition amongst capitalisms , with the fallout in the activity of sovereign wealth funds and the rise in the price of basic commodities .
One should also add the worrying effects of climate change , the need to secure energy security and a rise in overall uncertainty .
All these factors impact strongly on the implementation of the Lisbon Agenda , through complicated , unavoidable trade-offs .
Let me stress several policy issues .
First , the quality of national policymaking is essential for improving industrial and economic performance .
Second , policymaking should be pragmatic , open-minded and avoid the confusion between free markets and totally deregulated markets .
Third , industrial policy , R & D in particular , has a major role to play , together with education .
It is essential to increase the number of graduates in science and mathematics in Member States , and all Member States should work together to this end .
Fourth , energy policy needs more focus and the Nabucco Project is a step in the right direction .
Fifth , good quality land should be seen as a strategic asset in the reform of the common agricultural policy .
Last but not least , we have to reaffirm moral values and moral conduct .
If we lose our moral compass , the talk about competitiveness in the social ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that the newly revised Lisbon Strategy has basically been successful since 2005 .
This is readily apparent from one fact : when one spoke in public about Lisbon in 2005 , everyone knew that it was the Portuguese capital but no one associated it with a process at that time .
Kyoto was already a process then , in respect of climate protection .
It is now 2008 , and thank goodness the world has changed .
Now , when Lisbon is referred to in public speeches , it is of course still the Portuguese capital but it is increasingly associated with a political process , and I think this demonstrates a reasonable degree of success .
I also believe that it was right to set new priorities aimed at boosting growth and employment , because that is one precondition for being able to proceed sensibly with sound environmental and social policies as the second and third pillars of the Lisbon Strategy .
I furthermore believe that it was right to leave the guidelines unchanged , because they have on the whole been successful .
I nevertheless wish to mention a few shortcomings .
For example , I still see major shortcomings in the ongoing development of the internal market , which has supposedly been with us since the early 1990s but simply does not exist in many areas .
We have no internal market in the insurance sector , and in company law , for instance , enterprises are unable to take full advantage of their right of establishment within the European Union .
We still lack intellectual property rights and Europe has no rules on patents .
There are no common rules on alternative financial instruments and we are still awaiting the internal market in healthcare .
On the other hand , there has been a whole series of legislative proposals in other areas , above all geared to progress in the fields of social affairs , the environment and consumer rights .
That is well and good , but a balance must be struck .
I would therefore call on the Commission and the Council to pay particular attention to closing the loopholes in the internal market legislation .
( FI ) Mr President , the President-in-Office of the Council was quite right when he said he thought that climate change and the economy are closely connected .
They cannot be separated from one another .
It has been said here that climate change is connected with all policy .
This issue must also be visible at the forthcoming summit .
Controlling climate change and adapting to it must be central to the EU 's Lisbon Strategy .
At the forthcoming summit we need to lay down a credible political policy in support of the decisions that have been taken .
Unfortunately , energy efficiency and energy saving do not feature among the European Union 's choice of binding remedies .
We nevertheless have to remember that the cleanest , cheapest and most efficient form of energy is saved energy .
At present we could save that 20 % of energy by implementing all EU legislation .
In other words , we still need more ambitious and clearer energy efficiency targets .
I hope that the forthcoming summit will give attention to this matter .
Mr President , tomorrow the heads of Member States meet in summit .
I understand there are many items on the agenda , but I hope you will also discuss the impact of the Laval-Vaxholm decision handed down by the ECJ just days after your last summit .
This decision allows companies to post workers in any Member State and pay them the minimum wage of the country , not the standard wage for the job in that country .
Further , the judgment renders trade unions helpless to protect their workers ' wages .
This will force workers in the host Member States to reduce their wages or lose their jobs .
This , to me , is the ticking time bomb .
The Laval-Vaxholm decision has the potential to unravel social partnership , industrial relations , the economic and social stability of whole countries , communities , responsible companies and families and to unravel support for the European project among its oldest Member States .
Of course , reducing salaries will make the EU more competitive in the global market , where it competes against low-cost nations like China , India and Brazil - but at what price and pain to a family in Ireland with a mortgage ?
Mr Bonde and I have sent a protocol to protect Member State economies from Laval to the Slovenian Presidency and our respective prime ministers for inclusion in the European Summit tomorrow .
To avoid wide-scale social dumping , take the Laval-Vaxholm decision seriously and include this protocol .
Mr President , this debate on the summit is an opportunity to talk to the Council about what they are doing to implement the whole of the Lisbon Agenda , so I want primarily to focus my remarks to the Council today .
I am delighted once again to welcome the Slovenian Minister , whom I had the pleasure of meeting in Slovenia recently , and to thank the Slovenian Presidency for their engagement with this process .
I am really pleased that the draft conclusions already published show that the Council is continuing to focus on the four key areas of the Lisbon Strategy .
However , I have to say - and I direct my remarks to the President of the Commission - that , although I know he is talking to Mr Špidla , one of the problems is that Commission keeps reinventing and complicating things .
We now have 10 objectives from the Commission , which are mentioned in passing here , but in fact we need to focus on what the priorities are .
I want to focus on what I think is the key to what we are talking about : unlocking business potential .
It is right that you put that there , but what are Member States doing about it ?
My colleague , Mr Hökmark , talked earlier about the transposition of the Services Directive .
I say to the Council : take the Services Directive and its implementation and what you are intending to do and spread it to all areas relating to unlocking business potential .
With the Services Directive you are required to screen all aspects of your domestic legislation that discriminate against companies wanting to offer services across the single market .
It cannot be just service companies : it should be all companies of all sizes .
I ask you to take that commitment forward and to do that .
The second crucial thing in the Services Directive is that for the first time individual Member States are required to provide information to companies that want to access the single market and encourage them to use that vast opportunity .
Creating a single market is a shared responsibility .
We are working very hard here to deliver the framework , but how hard are you really working in the Member States to ensure that companies take advantage of that ?
That is the way that we will deliver the jobs and growth that this economy desperately needs .
Mr President , I believe the spring Council must reassert the original Lisbon Strategy to address in an integrated way the interdependent policies on economic , social , employment and sustainable development .
To do otherwise is to invite the disintegration of Europe and a retreat into protectionism .
High-quality jobs are a key to this strategy : a Europe of excellence cannot be built on the back of low pay , labour insecurity and inequality in the workplace .
The Laval judgment is a perverse interpretation of the legislative intentions of this Parliament and its co-legislator , the Council .
Both must , therefore , react as a legislator to reassert our intentions by legislating to close the loopholes identified by the European Court of Justice .
One immediate legislative option is to annex to the Posting of Workers Directive the Monti-style social clause , which we have already included in the Services Directive .
The Commission must in the mean time insist on all Member States properly and fully transposing the Posting of Workers Directive into national legislation .
Indeed , Member States must immediately revise their domestic labour-led legislation to ensure that the perverse Laval judgment does not undermine their systems of labour relations and collective bargaining .
Finally , let me say that Mrs Sinnott , as usual , is wrong in her interpretation .
She is wrong to state that the Laval judgment means that only a minimum wage is applicable in Ireland : it means that all legally binding agreements must be applied in Ireland , and that is far more than the minimum wage .
However , there are agreements in Ireland that are not legally binding and that has to be addressed .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , Commissioners , Mr President of the Council , I appeal to the European Council on behalf of my Group to properly incorporate European transport policy into the integrated guidelines .
The reason is that business and employment in the EU cannot thrive without a sustainable European transport policy and the requisite trans-European networks .
Without effective transport corridors , without cooperation between transport providers and without intelligent transport systems , neither trade nor tourism can be expanded inside the European Union or with third countries .
That is what we need , however , in order to boost employment .
Mr President of the Council , when talking to your colleagues in the Council , please bear in mind that it is crucial for the Member States to include transport policy in their national plans for growth and employment .
Unfortunately we are seeing Member States devote an ever diminishing amount of funding to the maintenance and expansion of national infrastructure , be it railway networks or road networks .
The same goes for the promotion and application of transport systems .
Nowadays you can order everything over the Internet , but it can only be delivered by lorry or by rail .
You can book any holiday you like , but in order to reach your destination you need a decent airport and decent transport links .
If we want growth and employment , therefore , we must have the requisite infrastructure and decent transport systems . These must of course be environmentally friendly .
We are therefore of the opinion - for reasons of sustainability - that logistics must be given every support .
This is also important for national planning .
Although logistics is primarily the task of companies themselves , we , the Member States and the European Union , can nevertheless help promote logistics by cutting red tape , for example customs procedures at ports .
We need environmentally-friendly policies .
I therefore appeal to you , for the sake of growth and employment , to make transport policy the central plank in your strategy .
( PL ) Mr President , the spring Council will meet at a critical juncture .
Economic growth within the Union is slowing down , we are having to cope with uncertainty on the financial markets , oil prices are rising and so is inflation .
All this is creating an atmosphere of uncertainty and fuelling fears for the future .
In the light of this state of affairs , I find Mr Barroso 's assessment of the situation unduly optimistic .
It is hard to rejoice in the creation of six million jobs , as this took place during a period of cyclical growth acceleration during the last two years .
It is also hard to predict that constant high efficiency in the workplace will be achieved , on the basis of one or two years in which efficiency has increased .
Europe 's potential rate of increase remains very low .
I therefore feel that on the occasion of the forthcoming Council , the European Union must send out a clear message to European citizens , indicating that it is in a position to counter the aforementioned threats .
The fear and uncertainty arising from the current economic situation must be countered by decisions rather than by words .
To date , summits have all too often ended with declarations that have led to nothing .
In the situation in which we now find ourselves , we are expecting the Member States and the Council to take specific decisions . I urge the Council representative present in the House today to take due note of this .
Finally , all this is particularly important because the Treaty of Lisbon is to be ratified over the next few months .
This Treaty needs to inspire European citizens and fill them with hope . That is why the forthcoming summit must send out a clear signal to the citizens of Europe that it will improve the situation .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr President of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , unemployment is falling , the European Union has gained from globalisation , we are doing better than the United States , and the EU is on the right course .
Let us pursue this course with determination , commitment and self-assurance .
Let us make the Member States take their responsibilities more seriously .
Let us make the public aware of our successes and goals .
Secondly , climate protection and a reduction in energy dependence must give a new lease of life to research , innovation , growth and employment .
Thirdly , let us be frank about the fact that the euro / dollar exchange rate is attenuating energy price rises : they are up 160 % in euro , 340 % in dollars .
Fourthly , the euro , enlargement , the internal market , the Lisbon Strategy and the Treaty of Lisbon , which strengthens the social market economy and enshrines fundamental social rights : these form an overall package which should help the European Union along the road to success .
Fifthly , education , training , research , innovation and reform of our social , health and pensions systems are the biggest challenges still lying ahead of us .
Sixthly , Mr President of the Commission , the Barroso EIT must feature in the conclusions of the spring summit , with a date set for deciding on its location .
Parliament has given the financial green light .
Seventhly , the Small Business Act will trigger a further initiative in this House , without any doubt .
The SME Intergroup will put forward the principles we have in mind by the end of this month .
My final point is this : Mr Schultz , the Commission President and the Commission are not our opponents .
Our opponents are the lack of power , political capacity and leadership of some governments and parliaments in the Member States .
Our opponents are egotism , nationalism and protectionism , not more Europe and not a strong Commission .

( FR ) Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , I wish to make a single request of you when you go to the European Council : defend this institution when it tells you that the EU 's social and economic situation requires more attention to be paid to social issues , requires us to make our economic policies coherent with our targets and our strategy legitimately drawn up for climate change and energy independence ; when it tells you that , if the Lisbon Strategy is to succeed , we need more economic coordination ; when it tells you that , if we are to deal successfully with the American subprime crisis , we need better regulated finance markets .
Do not let the Member States say that such matters are none of our business : that is not acceptable in a modern democracy .
Mr President-in-Office , at the request of certain Heads of State or Government who are legitimately concerned at the situation of the financial markets , you will examine the consequences of this situation on the EU 's real economy .
I ask you therefore to seize this issue , and do not be content with a few proposals that may seem attractive or popular but do not deal with the substance of this issue .
The substance here is that we have an integrated financial market and a Central Bank conducting a monetary policy in the interest of the European economy as a whole , but we have no European financial market controller to deal with the challenges and problems involved .
( RO ) By tradition , the first European Summit of the year is dedicated to economic issues .
Thus , the Slovenian presidency of the Council of Ministers placed on the agenda of the meeting of the heads of state and government an important debate concerning the second cycle of the Lisbon strategy , reviewed for the period 2008-2010 .
In my opinion , certain aspects related especially to the second objective of the Lisbon strategy , namely the degree of employment , must not be absent from the themes you will address over the following days .
Although intensely promoted as a principle in the resolutions of the European Parliament , the European mobility of labour has much to suffer in practice .
The arbitrary restrictions imposed on access by workers from the new Member States contribute to reduced mobility .
In this sense , at the end of 2008 , the European Commission will have to assess the measures on the restriction of labour mobility imposed by certain Member States on Romania and Bulgaria .
Recent statistics show that the significant trend of migration from the two countries is not a fact and none of the states that allowed access by Romanian or Bulgarian workers recorded imbalances in the labour market .
However , according to the current legislation , Member States can continue to maintain these restrictions in force , which is indeed a fact in relation to the states having joined in 2004 .
As the barriers in the labour market are often imposed in response to certain political requirements of the day , I believe that one of the measures that could be discussed would be a review of the transition period system and mainly of the formula 2 + 3 + 2 .
A welcome measure would be to obtain the mandatory opinion of the European Parliament on the pursuance or halting of restrictions after the first two years following the accession of a new Member State .
Such an involvement of the European institutions would reduce the discretionary and arbitrary way in which the limitations on the principle of European freedom of movement are often applied .
Mr President , tomorrow the Spring Council takes place and EU leaders have much to talk about , whether it is turbulence in financial markets , globalisation or demographic change .
On globalisation , we need to know from the Council where the current round of world trade talks is actually taking us .
There has been much speculation and some analysis of the latest papers as they pertain to agriculture , but there has been little official word from the Commission or Council on this vital matter .
Commissioner Mandelson was with us here last night but I regret that the questions on the WTO were not reached , and this House does not have information directly .
Against that background I am calling on the Spring Council and the Irish Prime Minister , Taoiseach Bertie O 'Hearn , to raise this issue at this important meeting .
A month ago Commissioner Mandelson indicated that , in the non-agriculture sector , the talks had moved backwards , not forwards .
On agriculture , he suggested that the EU could live with the proposals on the table .
I fear that this is a mistaken view .
Some analysis I have seen suggests that the common agricultural policy would be decimated by the current deal on the table , and this is a step too far .
I would just like to say that , from an Irish point of view , we are voting - we think - on 12 June on the Lisbon Treaty , so I tell the House that there is much debate already and more to come .
I think it is very good that people are engaging in this campaign , and that it will strengthen the Irish links with the European Union - which is to be welcomed .
But , given that there are people putting forward protocols which are not on their websites just yet - I have looked at Mr Bonde 's and have not seen it - I think that perhaps it would be appropriate for the Council to comment on the Laval judgment .
It is being bandied about and misinterpreted by many , but I do think it would be good for us all to know what the Council 's view is on this .
In fact the Treaty of Lisbon , as I read it , is very strong on the social dimension and has no desire to mistreat or abuse workers throughout the European Union or elsewhere .
Therefore , people in Ireland should vote ' yes ' to this important Treaty .
( PT ) I want to start by wishing the Slovenian Presidency every success and to say that I strongly believe that the next European Council should concentrate on economic and development issues .
President Barroso is to be congratulated for having prioritised these issues since the start of his term in office .
The right action has been taken by reviewing the Lisbon Strategy , removing the red tape and injecting new life .
In spite of the turmoil caused by the international financial crisis and rising energy prices , particularly among fossil fuels , the development in public debt and public deficits , economic growth and job creation have indisputably been positive factors .
We must keep going in this direction and not succumb to the difficulties .
We need an improved Lisbon Strategy rooted in a pact for growth and employment which invests in knowledge and innovation , which supports sustainable development , which includes an environmental agenda and which takes advantage of the potential of small and medium-sized enterprises .
Economic growth is vital , not only to guarantee a good standard of living for Europeans , but also to sustain the economic and social cohesion policies , because the joint commitment behind the European project is based on a logic of solidarity .
This is why I , too , call on the Council presidency to remind Member States that solidarity is a necessary condition for the success of our Union and that the exaltation of national egos can only be negative .
In addition to economic issues , there are issues of mobility and security .
We therefore happily welcomed , two months ago , the much-anticipated enlargement of the Schengen area and the abolition of internal borders .
This is now a common area .
Visa policies , border control , data and information sharing , and police and judicial cooperation are tools for ensuring our security and our freedom .
We must work together and present a united front to our partners in the world .
I hope that at the European Council this solidarity will be reinforced and that it will be clear to the Czech Republic , Estonia , Latvia and anywhere else that the negotiation of visa policy with our US partners is a European issue .
Here , too , the unity of Europe is a necessary condition for its success and credibility .
Mr President , following on from Ms McGuinness 's reference to the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty in Ireland , I comment that in my own country , the United Kingdom , good progress is being made in both Houses of Parliament and it is anticipated that the United Kingdom will ratify the Treaty in good order shortly .
I do not wish to score points against political opponents , but it was disappointing to those British Conservatives who favour the Treaty that the British Liberal Party abstained .
However , I am sure Mr Watson could explain the reasons for that .
At this Spring Council there will presumably be reference to the recent change of government in Russia .
It is very important - and increasingly in this House - that the European Union has a common foreign policy with regard to the Russian Federation and to some of the proposals , for example the Nord Stream pipeline .
Again , I do not want to anticipate , as this House will be debating the Russian elections on Thursday .
However , the motion for a resolution , which apparently we will be able to approve , raises concerns about the treatment of the electoral observers and about what happened to those opposition candidates denied the ability to stand in those elections , and calls for the immediate release of some 50 demonstrators who were arrested in a violent way by Russian Interior Ministry men .
I hope the Council will take this extremely seriously .
Obviously , we wish to congratulate President Medvedev and Prime Minister Putin .
We look for good and harmonious relations , but we cannot have them if this House and this European Union is divided .
Germans , Dutch , British , Poles - all of us - must have a common view about our relations with the Russian Federation and about how we go about ensuring the energy supply .
We do not have to approve Nord Stream ; we might well approve the Amber pipeline .
I look forward with great interest to the Council 's conclusions in relation to the EU common foreign policy and common foreign energy policy , and in particular to good relations with the Russian Federation .
Mr President , I would like to make three points .
Firstly , it is crucial that freedom of services should be applied in all Member States .
I am following the messages of my colleagues Mr Hökmark and Mr Harbour .
Secondly , support for small enterprises to enable them to share and use the fruits of innovation : the Small Business Act is clearly necessary .
Thirdly , as regards the Lisbon Strategy , I would ask you , President Barroso , to remind the European Council that implementation of the Baltic Sea strategy you kindly supported could become a practical contribution to the Lisbon Strategy and , indeed , maybe one of its success stories .
( FR ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , I would like to hear your opinion on EU monetary policy .
Mr President-in-Office , you stated that you would have an exchange of views on the operation of the financial markets .
It could be a good idea for the Heads of State or Government to arrange an exchange of views on EU monetary policy .
Mr President of the European Commission , I would like to know how you feel about the application of Article 105 of the Treaty , which makes provision for price stability , but also makes provision , on the assumption that prices are stable , for attention to be paid to economic growth .
Do you feel the European System of Central Banks is operating correctly at present ?
( SK ) Mr President , allow me to begin , on the 50th anniversary of the European Parliament , by wishing this House many future wise decisions on behalf of European citizens .
As we have heard in the course of the debate , and this is something I believe too , we will increase the competitiveness of European economy and create new jobs if we improve the business environment .
When adopting effective legislation in this area we must take into account the suggestions of the representatives of small and medium-sized enterprises and make use of their practical knowledge .
That is why I welcome the adoption of the package dealing with the introduction of products onto the market .
It was adopted by the European Parliament and the Slovenian Presidency , with the efficient help of the Commission , in particular Commissioner Verheugen , who was personally involved .
Mr President , Slovakia is preparing to adopt the euro : this will increase the competitiveness of the Slovak economy and it will be the final step on Slovakia 's road to joining the established countries .
I believe that the Commission and the Slovenian Presidency will make a decision in Slovakia 's favour , on the basis of the evaluation of the results of the Slovak economy , which is in an excellent condition , so that we can adopt the euro on 1 January 2009 as planned .
( LV ) Thank you , Mr President , for letting me speak .
I would hope that during the 50th anniversary of the European Council we will not forget one of the European Union 's key slogans - ' Health in all EU policies ' .
It is not enough for us to mention it only in specific forums ; we make statements , but we do very little .
As statistics show , the health situation in Europe is worsening .
Increasing numbers of specialists are leaving the European Union , morbidity from many illnesses is worsening , and the health priority to which the Slovenian Presidency has made a commitment - the fight against cancer - should at least be supported in the Council too . Thank you .
( FR ) Mr President , the President-in-Office mentioned property investment funds in connection with finance policies .
The President of the Commission did not mention this specific problem in relation to housing .
I wish to ask the Commission , since it is putting 2010 forward as European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion , if it intends to approach the problem of housing from the point of view of investment packages and finance policies , especially property investment funds on European markets .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the EP 's policy department has commissioned a study on the problems that climate change will pose for us .
The damages in Europe are estimated at between EUR 24 and 194 billion .
I would suggest that , in accordance with the Barcelona objective , we take 3 % of this sum - in other words between EUR 1 and 6 billion - and use it to give the European Institute of Innovation and Technology a head-start in the field of climate change .
It should focus on energy efficiency , specifically in the fields of generation and consumption .
( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Lisbon Strategy leaves us in no doubt that the quality of education , research and innovation is a pre-condition for economic success and that support must be given to improving this quality .
The Seventh Framework Programme and the European Institute of Innovation and Technology , both vital to developing and improving quality , are concentrating predominantly on existing so-called centres of excellence and take into account their potential .
However , most of the centres of excellence are in the old countries of the Union .
I want to point out that the new countries , too , have quality education and research institutions , including universities , which should be systematically encouraged to strive for the mark of excellence .
This would lead to enlargement of the high-quality education and research base of the European Union .
I am sorry that I cannot let any other Members speak , and I did not see anyone on the left asking for the floor .
Therefore , you cannot accuse me of not calling anyone .
People must at least ask for the floor .
( Interjection from Martin Schulz )
I merely wished to make that point , Mr Schulz , and to add that the PPE-DE Group was not too enthusiastic about the introduction of the ' catch the eye ' system , but it was above all PPE-DE Members who asked for the floor .
Allow the President to finish speaking ; that , too , ensures a better balance .
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) I would like to thank all the Members of the European Parliament who took part in this very interesting , very dynamic and rich discussion , which will be useful in the final preparations for the European Council session tomorrow and the next day .
We will try and take into account as many of the opinions and proposals put forward in this debate as possible .
I would also like to try and answer at least some of the questions .
Firstly , I would like to repeat that the European Council session this week is devoted to three main issues : launching the new phase of the Lisbon Strategy , the energy and climate policy package and the financial stability problem .
These are the three primary topics .
The Mediterranean Union is not among the primary topics .
I would like to thank Mr Schulz for his question and make it clear that an in-depth debate on the Mediterranean Union has not been planned for this session of the European Council .
However , the Presidency will respond to the wish expressed by a Member State and enable the proposal for a Mediterranean Union to be presented , probably during the dinner for the heads of state and government on Thursday evening , but we are not planning any special debates on the subject .
I will now turn my attention to the main topics , although I will first mention the Presidency 's opinion on a Mediterranean Union .
I will remind you of the words of our Prime Minister and President of the European Council , Mr Janez Janša , in this assembly on 16 January : ' We wish to strengthen institutions and processes such as the Barcelona process and Euromed , but we do not need duplication or institutions that would be competing with EU institutions and would only cover part of the European Union and neighbouring countries .
The EU is a total entity and only as a whole will it be effective in establishing peace , stability and progress in its neighbourhood and beyond . '
This is the position of the Presidency and I believe it will be taken into consideration in the future .
Now a brief word about the main topics .
The Lisbon Strategy : several opinions expressed the need for a change in the structure , mechanisms or integral guidelines of the Lisbon Strategy .
However , I would like to emphasise here that both the European Council and the Commission are of the opinion that the Lisbon Strategy is effective .
The Council and the Commission agree that the Lisbon Strategy is producing results .
They agree that the real economy in the European Union is in relatively good shape compared with some other global players .
Therefore , our view is that the mechanisms , existing structures and guidelines of the Lisbon Strategy should be preserved and that attention should be paid to its implementation .
It is a fact that circumstances change and that our measures should be adapted appropriately , but those adaptations may be made by changing the text accompanying the guidelines , which has actually been done .
I would like to say a few additional words about the social dimension . It is one of the key dimensions of the Lisbon Strategy .
The Council is very aware of that and I fully expect it to express this in the conclusions of the European Council session .
There cannot be any doubt about that .
It has been said that the Treaty of Lisbon , if and when ratified , will change the balance between social and other dimensions .
I am convinced that that is not true .
The European social model will not in any way be damaged by implementation of the new Lisbon Treaty - on the contrary .
I would like to thank Mrs McGuinness for the information about voting day in Ireland .
I wish them all the best .
I hope the Irish voters will decide in favour of the European Union .
Regarding the other important set of topics , that is to say the climate and energy package , I would say the following : yes , Mr Watson , we are aware that it would be useful for governments - and not only governments but perhaps also European institutions and other important players - to set an example in achieving greater energy efficiency , reducing energy consumption , and the like .
Maybe we will be able to reach an agreement and maybe not .
The fact is that it would be useful because energy efficiency certainly is and will be an important element of the climate and energy package debated by the European Council .
Let me reiterate that we have initiating commitments from March last year , when Germany held the Presidency .
We now have to implement them .
We have quantified targets which we must reach by combined efforts .
We must agree on how to share out those efforts .
I have already said that it will not be possible to reach that agreement tomorrow or the day after tomorrow .
However , we can agree on some basic principles of sharing these efforts among the Member States and on some limits regarding the time frame .
I have said that we wish the agreement among the Member States to be reached before the end of the year and the joint decision with the European Parliament as soon as possible in 2009 .
A few words about financial stability , which will be the third important topic of the European Council session .
For this session of the European Council , ECOFIN has prepared an interim report on the situation on the financial markets , and I would like to say something more on that subject .
The impression is being created that European organisations and institutions are standing idly by while the crisis rages out there in the financial markets .
I must stress that European organisations are not standing idly by .
I would like to emphasise that they are taking action .
At the debate on this topic yesterday , initiated by Mrs Berès , Commissioner Almunia responded by saying that before we act we must establish with certainty which measures are really necessary and which ones may cause even more damage .
ECOFIN will therefore continue to tackle this problem .
After this European Council session , that is to say as early as April , an informal meeting of the ECOFIN Council is planned to take place in Slovenia .
The central topic of this meeting will be the problem of financial stability .
We expect the European Council to offer some concrete guidelines in this matter .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I will end by reiterating my conviction that the most important things in all this are cooperation and synergy , especially among the three key institutions of the European Union : the European Parliament , the Commission and the Council .
The Slovenian Presidency will do its utmost to make that synergy as strong as possible .
Allow me to announce that the President of the Council will give a report to the Parliament on the European Council session this week .
President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , at the end of these discussions I feel we can say there is in fact broad agreement in the House that the Lisbon Strategy ought to be pursued , that it is a success and that we must work harder on it , especially in terms of implementation , particularly the practical implementation by our Member States of the priorities originally set .
There are , of course , a number of differences as to emphasis ; where should the emphasis be placed ?
I must , however , underscore the general backing for the Lisbon Strategy and the clear conclusions of the European Parliament that indicate that it is working and that it is our answer to globalisation .
I must underline the substance of the issue , and first and foremost Europe 's attitude to globalisation .
The fact of the matter is that , even in a more difficult economic climate , due to financial instability in particular , European exports are increasing and Europe is still far and away the leading recipient of foreign direct investment .
Europe has assets at its disposal to deal with globalisation .
We must therefore maintain our course , and I wish to thank all those who have so clearly supported this posture , especially Mr Daul , Mr Watson and so many others .
Protective Europe must also be protected now , as a number of you , including Mr Désir , pointed out .
We agree on this point ; the question is how to protect it .
We believe that we can protect Europe not by shutting ourselves off but by enabling others to open up as we are opening up .
That is the issue .
Europe , the world 's largest trading power , with steadily increasing exports , cannot now embrace protectionism .
That would be against our own interests .
The best solution is to make sure that others open up themselves , not only in relation to trade and access to their markets , but also in more ambitious environmental terms and in terms of social rights .
Internally we can of course do more within the social framework , and I wish to say that the message the Commission will take to the European Council is a message of social commitment .
In particular , we are in favour of a social agenda based on access , solidarity and opportunity .
Some of you mentioned the Laval case .
I must tell you again what I have already said to you many times , and what I also said when addressing the Swedish Parliament : the Commission 's interpretation of the Laval case is not , as a number of people have suggested , a contradiction between the principles of the internal market and the principle of defending workers ' rights .
On the contrary , we feel that the flexicurity model and , in a general sense , what is known as the Scandinavian model of labour relations , is a progressive model that has produced some excellent results in Europe .
It is our plan , we are anxious to state , to combat all forms of social dumping .
There can be no doubt about the Commission 's position on this matter .
I thus wish to emphasise this aspect , for it seems to me we must avoid at all costs falling into the trap of viewing the social aspects as being contrary to competitiveness in Europe .
As several of you mentioned , including Mr Crowley and others , we need an open Europe with an open economy and society , but we also need a Europe that welcomes social inclusion .
Let us therefore resist this tendency .
Let us also resist the tendency to play social aspects off against environmental aspects .
Here I wish to emphasise the Commission 's determination .
We are absolutely to determined to follow through the commitments made unanimously by the European Council in March last year .
During Mrs Merkel 's German Presidency there was unanimous support for a number of targets .
What I can tell you is that during the next phase the Commission will be even more determined to build a genuine European energy policy and to combat climate change .
If there have been a number of changes in terms of recent developments , this confirms both the urgent nature of the situation and consequent determination .
Here I wish to echo the words of Mr Turmes and Mrs Harms , among others , and state that social issues must not be played off against environmental issues .
The problem of energy or energy-intensive industries merits a separate reply .
We want competitive European industry .
Our aim is not for Europe to become an industrial wasteland : quite the contrary , in fact .
Our goal is ' greening ' , an industry that can turning its sights towards achieving a new compatibility with our targets in terms of fighting climate change .
It would be a huge error to view the competitiveness of European industry as contrary to the fight against climate change .
That is why in our proposals , and the Commission has stated this clearly , we support specific guarantees for energy-intensive industries .
We do not want to see our industries moving away to other parts of the world .
Now we need to know what our main objective is at this stage .
Our objective is to have a global agreement on climate change and to participate in the Copenhagen Climate Change Conference with proposals that will encourage others to move .
However , if there is no global agreement , we are prepared to take protective measures - and I am not afraid of using the word - for the benefit of Europe 's energy-intensive industries .
Finally , ladies and gentlemen , we must hold our course .
I wish to thank all those who stressed the importance of holding our course , especially Mr Ferber , Mr Karas and many others .
The Lisbon Strategy is a strategy for all seasons .
The greatest danger would be to take a step backwards now in the face of a new global economic situation .
What we must do , on the contrary , is hold our course for the European economic reforms , but these must be economic reforms for an open Europe , a more socially inclusive Europe , a Europe that is more resolute as regards the environment .
We see no contradiction between these objectives : quite the reverse , in fact .
We feel that we must now focus on implementing the Strategy .
It has been a sound Strategy and it will continue to be sound in terms of social , economic and environmental development in Europe .
If I may interpret what the President of the Commission said : it was Mr Langen , not Mr Ferber , who spoke .


( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to make use of one of our Rules of Procedure and make a personal statement relating to several comments by colleagues from other groups about my speech addressed to the President of the Commission .
I do not wish to go back over the debate here ; I think it has become clear that there are both agreements and divergences .
Not even the Commission President 's closing words can obscure the fact that there is a particular political message associated with his insistence on the Lisbon Strategy and the unaltered guidelines of the Lisbon Strategy .
His message is that these guidelines do not need altering in any way .
Our message is that they must be altered so as to improve social inclusion in Europe .
That is the difference !
( Applause )
However , Mr President , two things are unacceptable and I wish to make this perfectly plain .
If Mr Watson and , in particular , Mr Karas are trying to create the impression in this House that the slightest critical remark addressed to the Commission is sacrilegious because it creates a split between the European institutions , we cannot go along with that .
It is the European Parliament 's duty to tell the Commission in what direction to go .
( Applause )
Furthermore , it is my duty as Chairman of this Group to point out that we perceive a social imbalance in Europe .
If you believe otherwise , that is your affair .
It is not , however , a criticism of the Commission to say that we would like it to alter its guidelines .
To turn this criticism into a disagreement between the institutions serves only one purpose , a political and ideological purpose .
I caution you : if you want to force the Commission into the Liberal and PPE-DE corner , if you create an impression that it is a Liberal / PPE-DE Commission , then you are making a mistake because you are portraying this Commission in ideological terms .
We do not want that ; we stand by our policy of cooperation with the Commission .
You , not we , are pushing Mr Barroso into the right corner !
( Uproar and applause )
We want a policy of social justice , however .
That is what we are advocating here , and we will not be drawn into an institutional debate when we are conducting a political debate !
( Applause )
( FR ) Mr President , I will be very brief .
If we wish to reply to what our colleagues have been saying all morning , as Group Chairman , this must be included in the Rules of Procedure .
We can skirt around the issue or divert to the sidelines .
If we wish to renew the debate , we will do so .
Mr Schulz , I will simply say that my group and I concern ourselves with social issues just as much as you do , and we are all ...
( Applause )
I wish to say , ladies and gentlemen , that it is possible to focus on social aspects when one has actually earned a little money , but we cannot imitate the Socialists and spend money we have never earned .
( Applause from the right )

Mr President , I will be very brief , but since Mr Schulz mentioned my name , let me at least say the following : Mr Schulz , I had no wish in what I was saying in any way to attack you personally , but I think we have a serious debate here about how to create competitive economies and how to stimulate competitive economies consistent with social cohesion and environmental stability .
I do not believe that the way to create those economies is to argue that the market does not work because it does not produce the goods we want .
I believe , as the President of the Commission was saying this morning , that the most recent evidence from the global economy is that the market can produce those goods and I think that is something around which we can unite and indeed prosper .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Rules of Procedure only permit further reactions from Members who have been the subject of personal remarks .
The other Members who have called for the floor have not been the subject of personal remarks .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( RO ) The decision to dedicate the forthcoming European Council to the Lisbon strategy is welcomed and necessary .
I believe that the discussion in March must be focused on assessment of the concrete results achieved to date and on the adjustments to be made in order to transform the strategy into a real success .
Two key elements should be pursued to ensure sustained economic development associated with the achievement of prosperity in EU .
On the one hand , the EU must continue its policy on the consolidation of the education , training and innovation system , and 2009 , declared the year of innovation , must be fully used to this end .
On the other hand , it is necessary to develop the European policy on migration and integration of migrants as a factor of European growth .
At the same time , the EU will not be truly stable and prosperous unless it effectively and firmly promotes these goals externally , in the areas close to Europe , especially in the Black Sea region .
On these grounds , I believe that the European Council must address the issue of energy security and successful implementation of Nabucco project , while taking account of the alarming situation in some of the neighbouring countries following the recent elections in the area .
in writing . - ( HU ) The upcoming Spring European Council will launch the next three-year cycle of the Lisbon Strategy .
The focus will be on climate change , on the challenges arising in relation to energy , and on financial market stability .
In the globalised world , continued success for Europe requires that we deal effectively with all three issues .
It is vital to formulate a common European Union position in the shortest possible time .
We have acknowledged the progress made with the implementation of the Lisbon Strategy since spring 2006 , and we support the continued efforts aimed at adopting directives on issues relating to the overall economy , but even more importantly , ensuring that these extend to all Member States .
It is becoming increasingly urgent to reach an agreement on issues relating to climate and energy matters .
We need to find an effective solution to Europe 's energy dependence while at the same time ensuring that European products retain their economic competitiveness .
We have witnessed the rise of the sovereign wealth funds , and we must ensure that their activities are conducted in a transparent and trustworthy manner .
Effective legislation needs to be put in place concerning the operation of these funds .
It is timely that the Council should be addressing this issue and we must develop a united European position as soon as possible in order to eliminate the uncertainties currently surrounding this issue .
No less importantly , the Spring Council must put in place every possible but indispensible measure to strengthen the prudential regulatory framework in the interests of ensuring financial market stability .
The crisis , which could affect European citizens , is not yet over ; the worst may yet be to come .
If this Council meeting had a motto , it would have to be ' there is no time to waste ' .
In the statements made today before this House in preparation for the spring European Council , we once again heard the same speeches by the main persons responsible for the European Union .
They once again insisted on the increasingly neoliberal path of the Lisbon Strategy , which involves flexibility in labour relations , or in other words , more attacks on the rights of workers and more precarious and badly-paid work , while the profits of economic groups and the financial sector continue to increase .
They insisted on the liberalisation and privatisation of structural sectors and public services , seemingly indifferent to the consequences of this policy for millions of people on low incomes .
They still do not want to alter the situation of poverty affecting nearly 78 million people , 25 million of whom are workers on low wages .
They are still allowing youth unemployment , which is reaching rates double those of overall unemployment and which affects many young people with higher education who cannot find work , and even less so work that has anything to do with their education .
They do not want to alter their policies in order to prevent their consequences on the European Union , particularly on the weaker economies , and to avoid worsening the social situation : hence the importance of us insisting on the replacement of the ' Lisbon Strategy ' with a European strategy for solidarity and sustainable development .
in writing . - It is essential that the Council follow up on the commitments made on climate and energy policy .
Clearly the challenge will be to follow the rhetoric with actual delivery of objectives .
Scotland has much to contribute in terms of renewable energy resources , including wave , tidal , offshore wind and even solar energy .
The new Scottish Government is working to the limits of its devolved power in trying to maximise the potential for Scotland , and to encourage connectability for our surplus electricity into European networks .
Scotland would be in a much better position to contribute to Europe 's climate change objectives if we were full participants in the European Union as an independent Member State .
An independent Scottish Government would be a constructive player in the EU , keen to develop the best interests of Scotland , obviously , but also willing to work with partners in Europe for our mutual benefit .
in writing . - ( HU ) Today 's debate has been preceded by heated discussions over the past few days .
The old , worn-out liberal slogan of ' let the market function and it will solve all the problems ' seems to have been resuscitated .
I , meanwhile , am happy to belong to the sort of political family that has spoken out very firmly in defence of Europe 's social values and has reminded us of the fact that protecting human dignity is a duty that binds the 27-member European Union together .
The Commission and the Council have a duty to ensure that the new challenges and growing risks facing Europe have the effect of reinforcing solidarity .
Europe 's decision-makers and its parliament of elected representatives , meanwhile , must act together to prevent the emergence of poverty rivalry , to prevent the economy and market competition from bulldozing the weak - children , immigrants , older people , and families .
Together they must accept that they are responsible not only for those who earn their living through work , but also for those who have been pushed to the margins of society .
The new social face of Europe that emerged in the Lisbon process does not choose between economic or market values and human destinies .
In this Europe , the goal is not merely to improve the number and quality of jobs in general ; activities that sustain human lives and that are sustainable in the long term are just as much a requirement that we should consider a common value .
Accordingly , social welfare provides assistance in times of transition .
If these values genuinely foster a desire to mobilise for action , then the 2009 elections could result in European institutions that are even better integrated and more humane than before .
in writing . - ( FI ) The European Union is full of big words .
Once again this morning they have been used to speak about the Lisbon Strategy .
The truth is that there has been slow progress in the matter and the target set has not been achieved .
The Presidency 's expressed desire to broaden the Strategy to embrace the social dimension is presumably just Euro election propaganda : there is no mention of how this might be done and so there is no evidence it is anything else .
The Presidency should have also focused on the small tasks .
One would have been to provide the Member States with a consolidated version of the Treaty of Lisbon .
The fact that the Slovenian parliament ratified the Treaty without one does not serve as a good model for democratic countries .
in writing . - The EU summit agenda seems to make us freeze .
Global warming will trigger a dangerous contest over energy resources .
The Solana / Ferrero-Waldner report points to the Kremlin 's grab for the Arctic .
The ice is melting , so ' the scramble for resources will intensify ' .
Geo-strategically speaking , the thawing Arctic will open new trade routes for everybody ; for Russians , too .
In the meantime , the EU broke the ice in Kosovo .
The local warming hit the ceiling .
Serbia lost part of its territory .
Islam has made another step forward .
It is amazing that the EU has sent its troops to fight against radical Islam in Iraq and Afghanistan , at the same time it covers the assailants ' civilisation in Europe .
The Archbishop of Montenegro regrets that the United States has acted like the Old Testament Ahab , Great Britain forgot its struggle for the Falklands , now it dares to threaten the fate of a Christian country , while Germany does not seem to bear in mind 1914 , 1941 and Kragujevac any more .
Apparently , the Archbishop seems to forget that the German soul embraces to Hegel , Feuerbach and Nietzsche , rather than to Goethe and Schiller .
However , the Archbishop remembers that the Italian Mussolini had incorporated Kosovo to the fascist Albania .
Statement by the President
The Conference of Presidents has asked me to make a statement , before voting time , on the situation of the hostages in Columbia .
I hope this will bring peace and order back to our proceedings .
The sixth anniversary of the kidnapping of Íngrid Betancourt fell on 23 February , and the eyes of the international community and the European Parliament are once again trained on the human tragedy which many of the 700 hostages kidnapped by the FARC in Columbia have been enduring for several years under inhumane conditions .
This is yet another occasion to demand their immediate release on humanitarian grounds .
( Applause )
Since the state of health of many of the kidnap victims , including Mrs Betancourt herself , gives extreme cause for concern , we demand their immediate release on humanitarian grounds and the dispatch of an international medical team to provide the hostages with rapid medical assistance .
We welcome the efforts of President Uribe to seek dialogue aimed at a humanitarian settlement .
We declare our solidarity with the victims , with the hostages and their families .
( The Members of Parliament rose to their feet and applauded . )
1 .
Request for waiver of the immunity of Mr Hans-Peter Martin (
2 .
Energy statistics (
3 .
Statistics on plant protection products (
4 .
Common organisation of agricultural markets and specific provisions for certain agricultural products as regards the national quotas for milk (
5 .
CAP " Health Check " (
6 .
The situation of women in rural areas of the EU (
7 .
Sustainable agriculture and biogas : review of EU legislation (
- Before the vote on paragraph 41 :
rapporteur . - Mr President , we agreed to change paragraph 41 and not to propose a specific biogas EU directive but to integrate it into the draft renewable energy directive .
The text is as follows : ' Proposes the comprehensive inclusion of the promotion of biogas in the framework of the draft renewable energy directive with special emphasis on the following elements : ' .
Plus we agreed to delete point ' ( a ) ' .
( Parliament agreed to accept the oral amendment )
Voting time
The next item is voting time .
( For results and other details of the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
( PL ) Mr President , the conditions were not that favourable for speaking .
I wish to refer to the vote on increasing milk quotas by 2 % as early as next month .
I believe that Parliament 's decision in this regard will promote the development of agriculture , especially in those countries that unfortunately have been suffering from quota reductions so far . This has been the case of my country , Poland .
I should also like to take this opportunity to state that during yesterday 's vote on the European Institute of Technology , I intended to vote in favour of adoption of that report , and not as I did in error .

( PL ) Mr President , the amendments contained in the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1234 / 2007 establishing a common organisation of agricultural markets and on specific provisions for certain agricultural products as regards the national quotas for milk seem entirely justified .
The plan to increase the current limits on milk quotas by 2 % is particularly welcome .
I represent Poland in this House , and my country is the fourth largest milk producer in the European Union . At present , it produces 12 billion litres of milk a year .
In the context I just referred to , the aforementioned amendment is particularly important for farmers and milk product processors in Poland .
In addition , I should like to state that I support the opinion contained in the text of Amendment 13 , namely that milk production is particularly important in regions with poorly developed agricultural infrastructure , where comparable alternatives in agricultural production often do not exist .
- ( LT ) Recently we have observed a continuous increase in market demands for milk .
Such a situation restricts competitiveness and causes price increases .
In my country , Lithuania , the milk procurement price increased by 40 % in 2007 .
Therefore , national milk quotas should be increased to enable lower milk prices to be achieved within the internal market as well as to allow the possibility of exporting more milk to third countries .
In 2006-2007 nine EU Member States reached their allocated national milk quotas .
To increase EU milk supply , these countries , as well as the other Member States , should be allowed to produce more milk .
In Lithuania national milk quotas for 2006 / 07 have almost been reached .
Milk production is still increasing .
I welcome the Commission 's decision to increase national milk quotas by 2 % from 1 April 2008 .
However , looking towards the future , I would like to encourage the Commission to examine the possibility of increasing national milk quotas by 5 % and gradually lowering fines for overproduction .
( DE ) Mr President , like the Green Group , I voted against the report on national quotas for milk .
I object to the 2 % increase in quotas because such measures lead to an erosion of milk prices and threaten farmers ' livelihoods .
I am in favour of quantitative controls on milk production after 2015 , because otherwise cattle rearing in mountainous areas and disadvantaged regions , where the rearing of dairy cattle helps to preserve the countryside , would be jeopardised .
Liberalisation would cause milk production to be concentrated in just a few regions and intensive farms .
Those who lose out will be small producers , who can no longer cover their production costs owing to such low prices .
( DE ) Mr President , I should like to give an explanation of vote on the Jeggle report .
I voted against the report because , like my Bavarian CSU colleagues , I am against raising milk quotas .
We already have a situation where milk prices are dropping sharply .
Prices for some products have fallen by over 30 % .
Our dairy farmers ' earnings have been inadequate for years , and now for the past six months they have obtained reasonably decent milk prices .
If the quota is raised , it means that milk prices will come under pressure and our dairy farmers will once again have to expect to be underpaid for their work .
In Bavaria we have 48 000 farms employing 90 000 people in the rearing of dairy cattle , and another 50 000 jobs in upstream and downstream sectors , making a total of 140 000 jobs .
I cannot understand why quotas should be extended in this important sector , since it is to the disadvantage of the farmers concerned .
I could have agreed to an extension in the new Member States , because the quantities available there are indeed inadequate .
Mr President , as I walked into the Chamber today , I heard the President of the Commission talk about the need to improve the EU 's competitiveness .
Yet here we are talking about milk quotas , a phrase that makes the European Union sound like the ' EUSSR ' .
It has been argued that keeping quotas makes prices high so we can keep farmers in business .
But at what price ?
At the same time , they have led to the EU 's share of the world dairy market falling .
Why ?
Because quotas actually stop efficient farmers from expanding while elsewhere quotas remain unused .
Quotas may guarantee production but at too high a cost for consumers , too high a cost for efficient farmers and too high a cost for EU economies .
It is time to scrap the quotas and trust the free market .
( PL ) Mr President , I support this report , which only proposes a 2 % increase in the quotas for 2008-2009 , because that was what was required in order to achieve a compromise .
I actually requested a 4 % increase , because I believe that would enable us to ascertain how to retain the market , which in turn would allow us to draw conclusions on the basis of which we could take a decision on potential departure from the quota system in its present or amended form . Alternatively , we could decide to abandon it altogether .
I am referring to changing the quota system after 31 March 2015 .
A larger quota increase is essential , notably in my country , Poland , where production quotas per head of population are far lower than in the old Member States .
In addition , consumption of milk products in Poland is low .
We should be able to respond to increasing consumption with our own production , because we enjoy good conditions for the latter , yet the farmers were assigned low production limits .
This information indicates the need for higher milk quotas in the future .
( DE ) Mr President , I voted enthusiastically for the Goepel report .
The rapporteur 's work was very comprehensive and very positive .
We could not of course include everything we would have liked , but the most important thing is that the preconditions have been created for introducing the relevant derogations in mountainous areas .
The situation there is not comparable with others and hence requires special protection , special consideration and special support .
May I also take this opportunity to refer briefly to yesterday 's vote on the Albertini report ?
It appears from the voting list that I voted against Amendment 5 .
It was in fact my intention to vote in favour , since over the past few parliamentary terms I have been very active on this issue of the Alpine Convention and the Commission 's signing of the Transport Protocol .

( CS ) I supported the report by Mr Goepel on the common agricultural policy because I consider it to be a much better document than the existing proposal by the Commission .
I appreciate the much more realistic and just way of setting up a rate for degressivity of direct payments , although in principle I am against making up artificial criteria for the size of enterprises in the process of reducing direct payments , because such a policy would in particular put large farms in the new Member States at a disadvantage .
Reducing direct payments to large farms more than to other farms is not just .
The notion that these large farms are in the hands of one owner who is the recipient of generous subsidies is wrong .
On the contrary , their ownership structure is often diversified ; in most cases these are cooperatives made of a large number of members : smallholders .
These are precisely the end recipients of direct payments and they would suffer the most .
I would also like to caution against the oft-discussed modulation , in other words transferring funds from the direct payments pillar to the rural development pillar .
It will keep the funds in the national envelope but with the result that the farms will be discriminated against directly by the Member State .

( PL ) Mr President , the European Union 's role is to legislate and to devise solutions that ensure , firstly , stability and development for farms , secondly , a suitable income level for farmers , comparable to levels in other occupations , thirdly , food security for society and fourthly , the availability of affordable food for low earners .
I believe the report by Mr Goepel is in line with the role I have just outlined .
It is important to bear in mind , however , that farmers are engaged in a very specific activity , namely production out in the open that is dependent on climatic conditions . Production cannot therefore be increased overnight , for instance by introducing a second shift .
Agricultural products represent a vital area of commerce . The conditions and principles of trade on the global market therefore have important consequences for European agriculture .
I have in mind the WTO negotiations .
Agriculture is not simply production .
It also helps to preserve the landscape and impacts on the environment : hence the complex nature of the tasks involved and the need to introduce suitable instruments providing support , within the framework of the common agricultural policy .
Mr President , I would like to give an explanation of vote because I have always been consistently against the common agricultural policy .
The first political speech I ever gave was along those lines .
But even I have to admit that , over the process of this last time period for the CAP , there have been some minor improvements .
I am concerned about many of the aspects of this report - the rejection of the reduction in the total budget for the first pillar for the period until 2013 , and in a recent meeting with farmers in the village of Pitsford in my constituency , even the smallest of farmers understands the global problems that the common agricultural policy that we have in Europe is creating for those poorer people out in developing countries whose products cannot compete with our subsidised ones .
So I did vote in favour , but with a heavy heart .
( DE ) Mr President , for the same reasons that I gave in the case of the Jeggle report , I and my CSU colleagues voted against Lutz Goepel 's report .
Both Elisabeth Jeggle and Lutz Goepel have delivered excellent reports , and we could certainly agree with 98 % of the points made in the Goepel report .
However , the key question is this : it says in the report that milk quotas should be increased by 2 % on a voluntary basis , and I cannot agree to that .
Furthermore , I must energetically contradict those who have said that dairy products are too expensive .
I have some statistics here , stating that in 1970 a German industrial worker had to work for 22 minutes to buy 250 grams of butter ; today he only needs to work four minutes .
In those days he had to work nine minutes for a litre of milk ; today only three .
Food is cheap , and the danger of raising quotas is that milk prices will fall again .
Mr President , as a follow-on from the last explanation of vote , the speaker said how much less workers have to work in order to afford things like butter , milk and other agricultural products .
I know that many of my constituents welcome that , especially those on lower incomes , because it helps them if they are spending less on foodstuffs .
But we heard the President of the Commission talk about the need for a competitive Europe as I walked into the Chamber today .
But how can we really achieve this when we continue to have the common agricultural policy ?
How are we really going to become a competitive economy if we continue to spend more than 40 % of the EU 's budget on agriculture - a sector that produces less than 5 % of the wealth ?
How can we continue to give government-to-government aid to developing countries with one hand while with the other hand hindering farmers in developing countries through our subsidies and our import tariffs ?
How can we continue to hold up negotiations at the World Trade Organisation because we will not move sufficiently , because of the common agricultural policy ?
It is time to scrap subsidies ; it is time to scrap tariffs ; it is time to scrap the common agricultural policy .
Mr President , I voted for the Goepel report , not because I support the common agricultural policy but because I support its reform : in particular , its focus on upland farms .
I come from a long line of sheep farmers and now represent Yorkshire and the Humber in Parliament , and I have been focusing on the problems of our hill farmers in recent months .
Only a few days ago , on 28 February , the Yorkshire Post had the headline ' Hill farmers are urged to come up with survival ideas ' .
It went on : ' many small hill and moorland farmers are crumbling under the pressures of grant changes , bureaucratic costs and low prices caused by competition from other countries .
Movement restrictions imposed in response to last autumn 's foot-and-mouth scare and the arrival of the disease bluetongue are adding further pressure . '
Yesterday I had a meeting with Commissioner Fischer Boel .
I pressed on her the importance of encouraging the British Government , in so far as grant aid is made available to hill farmers in England , to increase the subsidies because they are the second lowest in the European Union .
That is a scandal .
( GA ) Mr President , as regards the health check on the Common Agricultural Policy , I would like to say that I am against the clause contained in it about payments that are taken from farmers to increase rural and environmental development schemes from 5 % to 13 % .
I think that this is wrong .
I think that the decision should be made by each Member State .
We are discussing food production .
We are discussing food safety in Europe .
That is the reason why the European Common Agricultural Policy is extremely important for us .
It is very clear that people in Europe don 't understand how important this is .
I am extremely unhappy with the World Trade Talks which threaten the European Food Policy and I said the same to Commissioner Mandelson at a meeting we had yesterday .
( CS ) Mr President , I would like to comment on Mr Tabajdi 's report on sustainable agriculture and biogas .
Although I did not support this report , I would like to stress its positive part that deals with waste separation , in particular in municipal agglomerations , and with using bio-components in the process of biogas production .
However , this system carries high economic costs , higher than simple waste disposal in landfill sites or incineration , and that is why we should pay attention to it .
I therefore consider it very important to encourage local authorities in particular to increase solid communal waste collection , to separate and further use bio-components , and to create special financial instruments or possibly simplify the use of EU Structural Funds .
( PL ) I voted in favour of the report on the situation of women in rural areas of the European Union as this is a very important and interesting subject .
In taking up this issue , the European Union has shown itself in a different light .
The aforementioned subject is very close to my heart , because of my origins , my professional interest and also my activity as a Member of Parliament .
Despite the positive changes that have taken place , women still carry out many more tasks than men , particularly in relation to the home and the family .
Women are particularly overburdened in rural areas .
Since Poland 's accession to the European Union it has been noted that living conditions in the country have improved and incomes have risen .
This is helping to improve the daily lives of women in rural areas .
It is true that this is only the beginning of the changes , but at least something is happening .
( DE ) Mr President , the situation of women in rural areas deserves our undivided attention .
By improving their situation the full potential for development in rural areas can be tapped .
New communication technologies and hence new jobs must be created .
The relevant infrastructure is needed , in other words transport routes to open up rural areas , but good training opportunities are necessary above all else .
All of this and much more can halt the population exodus from rural areas .
Over half of the EU population lives in rural areas today ; 45 % of European gross value added is produced in rural areas and 53 % of available jobs are located there .
Women assume greater responsibilities in rural areas than has so far been acknowledged , especially in respect of their obvious social commitment .
Mr President , it is always a pleasure to rise on a position taken by the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality in this place .
For a long time now I have wondered why this thing still exists , the Women 's Committee , in this place .
We have a Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , and obviously women are lesser than everyone else and therefore , bizarrely in this place , we need a separate committee .
If you look at some of the recommendations in this report - of which I know the rapporteur on my particular side has done an awful lot of work to make sense - we call on Member States ' to provide [ ... ] financial support for unremunerated work ' .
We are asking for ' compulsory registration of assisting spouses ' .
Are we going to eartag people like me who live in a rural area and are married to a woman in a rural area ?
There are some really good recommendations in this report , actually , that do deserve thorough scrutiny and better oxygen of publicity , but the fact they come from this committee in this place actually means they are going to be buried much quicker .
I appreciate the gavel , Mr President , but I do hope that you understand why so many of us do not take seriously the recommendations of the Women 's Committee in this House .
( NL ) My name is not Martin Schultz , my name is simply Frank Vanhecke , and I am clearly not a first-rate Member of Parliament and consequently have no right at any time , in any debate , no matter what time or for how long , to express my opinion , and therefore I must now and then turn to the voice of the polls like a mere mortal and not remotely like the holiest of holies , Mr Schultz .

That said , I now want to speak about Mrs Klaß 's report .
You see , I do not deny that women in remote areas and in other places undoubtedly experience difficulties now and then , and I am naturally , like all right-minded people , in favour of taking measures to improve the position of people from areas that are discriminated against , including by means of education .
That goes without saying , like kicking down an open door .
The first question that I ask myself : does this come under Europe 's jurisdiction ?
Is it a task to become embroiled in at European level or is this report the umpteenth example of Europe 's obsession with sickness insurance , social insurance and so forth .
I think that the latter is the case .
I think that the subsidiarity of this report in particular has been trampled underfoot .
I think , as we can all see , that Europe is becoming a sort of Big Brother , which honestly frightens me .
( FR ) Mr President , I first wish to congratulate Mrs Klaβ on her report on the situation of women in rural areas .
Indeed , since I was the author of a report in the 1990s on the status of assisting spouses , particularly in the agricultural sector , like Mrs Klaβ I deplore the fact that the European Commission has not followed up this report , which was also referred to again in a 2003 resolution when we called for a revision of the 1986 Directive on equal treatment for men and women carrying out independent activities , including agricultural activities .
Those millions of invisible workers , assisting spouses working in family businesses , craft industries , commercial activities and agriculture , are mainly women .
Ten years ago we recommended a European framework statute to provide , among other benefits , social rights and independent pension rights for assisting spouses working in agriculture .
The Commission 's failure to act in this area despite many requests from the House is totally unacceptable .
I therefore hope that it will finally take seriously our call to present an amendment to the Directive before the end of the year .
Mr President , I also wish to speak on a personal issue and state that I do not agree with the remarks of my British colleague .
I would be extremely pleased if a Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality were not necessary , but if certain men , who constitute the majority , had a little more consideration for the situation of women , equal treatment and equal opportunities , we would not need this kind of committee at all .
( DE ) Mr President , I had originally intended to vote against this report .
However , after Mr Tabajdi made an oral statement on paragraph 41 I finally voted in favour .
I voted against paragraph 18 , where it says that biogas has led to competition over feedingstuff .
I cannot go along with that : 4 000 biogas plants in Europe certainly do not lead to a distortion of competition .
Besides , biogas enables us to turn surplus agricultural land in Europe to good effect .
Our colleague suggested that the common agricultural policy should be abolished ; well , biogas is also a way of helping out developing countries .
What is more , Europe receives 80 % of Africa 's agricultural exports and 45 % from Central and South America .
We are not the ones preventing these countries from exporting , therefore ; other countries entirely are responsible for that .
Written explanations of vote
in writing . - ( PT ) In its January 2007 energy package , the European Commission presented a proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation on energy statistics .
However , the European Parliament considered that this proposal contained a large number of gaps , which it sought to fill with a series of amendments .
Although we are critical to a certain extent of some amendments , we agree that , in their present state , the statistics produced by major international organisations such as Eurostat are structured by accounting instruments dating back to a time that was completely dominated by fossil fuels and designed to depict the operation of the energy sector solely from the supply point of view .
Developments over the last 30 years have gradually resulted in an increasing gap between the original aim of such instruments and their ability to represent energy realities .
As a result , there is an increasing risk as the years go by that distortion of our understanding and assessment of energy realities will lead to decisions that are not supported by the facts .
It is noted that the Commission proposal is the result of work carried out in 2003 , 2004 and early 2005 and largely ignores some key documents on energy issues published by the Commission itself in March 2006 ( the Green Paper on energy ) and in January 2007 ( the energy package ) .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted for this text , which requires the Member States to participate in collecting the necessary data to put together effective energy statistics .
This is a sine qua non for enabling the EU to fulfil its stated aim : phasing in a consistent European energy policy and speaking with a single voice on the international scene .
The Commission will have to ensure that these statistics are comparable , transparent , detailed and flexible .
The EU has undertaken to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 20 % by 2020 and to make renewable energies account for 20 % of total EU energy consumption by 2020 , with the target set at 10 % for biofuels .
The energy statistics system must adapt to these undertakings and take account of the increasing importance of energy efficiency , renewable energies , greenhouse gases , development of nuclear power and the emergence of biofuels .
Greater attention must also be paid to security of supply for the main fuels .
More timely and more accurate data at EU level are needed to anticipate and coordinate EU solutions to possible supply crises .
in writing . - ( SV ) The collection of independent and accurate statistics helps consumers as well as business and the public sector to take a variety of decisions .
I support the Council Regulation on energy statistics but entirely reject the motivation behind the contribution of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy .
I do not think that the great merit in collecting necessary information is that it helps the EU 's institutions to develop a consistent European energy policy or enables the EU to speak with a single voice on the international scene .
in writing . - The goal of Mr Turmes 's ' Energy statistics ' report is to outline a common Europe-wide framework that facilitates the availability of complete , accurate and up to date information on energy .
With citizens and policy makers becoming more aware of the importance and complexity of the energy situation , we require such measures .
I voted in favour of this report .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the report by my colleague Belge Bart Staes on statistics on pesticides .
I welcome the European Commission 's action , which , since the Sixth Environment Action Programme of 2002 , has recognised that the use of pesticides has a significant impact on human health and on the environment .
Consequently , their use should be approached from the perspective of sustainable development and should be the subject of comparable harmonised Community statistics on production , import , export and marketing with a view to the preparation and monitoring of Community legislation in this area .
It is important to note that it is not just agricultural activities that utilise pesticides ; they are also used by firms responsible for the maintenance of green spaces , road services and rail transport .
Finally , I support the idea of clarifying the term ' plant protection products ' by replacing it with the term ' pesticides ' in the Regulation and explaining clearly what it means .
in writing . - ( PT ) I agree with the Commission proposal because it is essential to have detailed , harmonised and up-to-date statistics on sales and use of plant protection products at Community level in order to correctly monitor the risks associated with using these products .
The proposal to create a legal framework laying down harmonised rules for the collection and dissemination of data concerning the placing on the market and use of plant protection products is vital , as the calculation of risk indicators requires suitable data but , according to experts , the existing data on plant protection products lacks accessibility , transparency and reliability .
Although I do not agree with some details in the report , such as the inclusion of biocides , these do not detract from the Commission 's basic ideas .
The report in fact makes some very positive proposals , such as the inclusion of non-agricultural areas in the future legislation and the correct protection of commercial data .
As a result , I voted in favour of the Staes report .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted for this report .
We are now getting an inkling as to the disturbing long-term consequences of omnipresent waste from pesticides : cancers , endocrinal disorders , reduced male fertility , poorer immune defence systems , behavioural problems .
Exposure to pesticides can also increase the risk of asthma in children .
Monitoring the risks relating to the use of pesticides thus means that we need suitable indicators .
The indicators must supply data that are available , transparent , relevant and reliable in order to reduce the risks and harm to the environment and human health .
The active components of biocides are also used as plant protection products , and have almost the same effects on health and the environment .
This category must also be clearly defined and taken into account in the statistics .
To allow the figures to be as realistic as possible , the statistics must cover the use of plant protection products not only in agricultural activities , but also in non-agricultural activities such as the upkeep of green spaces , road services or rail transport companies .
A quantifiable reduction in the use of these products must be genuinely implemented in the long term .
in writing . - The need for mandatory collection of figures regarding the sale , use and distribution of plant protection products is a move that I support .
It will allow for the adequate evaluation of the risk to human health and the environment that these products could carry .
Biocides should form part of the proposed regulation to ensure coherence of definitions with the Pesticides Package .
The regulation must further include the non-agricultural use of plant protection products .
I am satisfied that the report moves to meet these requirements and voted accordingly .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the advisory report by my German colleague Elisabeth Jeggle on the increase in milk quotas from 1 April 2008 .
It aims to respond to the growing demand for milk within the European Union and on the global markets .
I welcome the compromise that enables the Member States to increase their production quotas by 2 % on 1 April 2008 .
It should help to restore a balance between the countries that exceed their quotas and those that under-use them in order to limit the penalties for surpluses at EU level .
in writing . - We support the Jeggle report on national quotas for milk , which provides for a 2 % increase in the milk quota .
In the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development I put forward amendments calling for a greater increase in the milk quota of 3 % .
That did not get through committee and did not today get through plenary .
Our group supported the consensus view of allowing for a voluntary increase in the milk quota of 2 % , and we urge the Council to take the lead of Parliament and give the green light for milk producers to increase production by 2 % from April .
We support the idea of providing for a milk quota balancing mechanism which would allow countries with overproduction to use up underused quota in other member states .
It seems unjust to penalise producers who can and wish to increase production in some Member States at a time when the EU overall is not maximising its quota .
That said , today 's vote is a signal to producers that the quota regime is being slowly loosened up in the run-in to the phasing out of quotas in 2015 .
in writing . - ( PT ) Although the report of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development moves away from the Commission proposal by arguing for a voluntary 2 % increase in milk quotas for Member States and ignores the end of the quota regime , the fact is that it does not take a stand against the dismantling of the current quota system or against the liberalisation of the sector after 2015 , as planned by the Commissioner , but which we reject .
Hence the reason for our abstention .
We fear that this 2 % increase in quotas for Member States , albeit optional , will allow the large countries and their large producers to increase their production , leading to a fall in prices for producers and thus resulting in a dumping situation , which may serve as a pretext for easier justification of its subsequent dismantling .
Any quota increase should be linked to a Community study .
Starting from current consumption levels in each country , this study should define the minimum desirable consumption targets , which should be accompanied by national and European policies to support an increase in production in deficit countries .
In this way , the ' regionalised ' increase of milk quotas can be promoted , particularly in the most remote and mountainous regions , which can be supplemented by the creation of a ' premium ' to support the organised collection of milk from producers in these regions , thus guaranteeing them a decent income .
in writing . - ( PT ) In the milk sector , long-term stability and predictability are essential for producers and any problems in the system which should continue until 2015 must be given full attention .
The changes now proposed in terms of increasing quotas , together with a reduction in the fines indicated in the Goepel report , mark the start of the system 's dismantling well before 2015 .
Despite recent variations in the milk market , both Portugal and the EU produce less than their quotas , which is why , instead of increasing these , balancing adjustments should be made between countries as 18 out of the 27 are producing below capacity .
This 2 % increase , voluntary or not , is therefore an initial sign to the market that regions with a greater competitive capacity will benefit to the detriment of least-favoured regions .
Despite the Jeggle report improving the Commission proposal , I abstained from voting to express my disagreement with what is , in practice , the start of the dismantling of the milk quota system .
in writing . - The compromise reached in the Agricultural Committee on Elisabeth Jeggle 's report dealing with milk quotas is satisfactory .
A 2 % increase in milk quotas is needed to allow Europe to respond to increased market demand .
Though I would feel that this should be implemented across the EU , giving Member States the choice to implement the quota is a better compromise than other alternatives .
I do not support any amendments to the contrary and have voted in line with these views .
in writing . - ( FR ) It was said that there were milk lakes , butter mountains and fridges crammed with meat .
Then Brussels invented some Malthusian recipes to clear production .
There were the MGQs , set-aside , slaughter premiums and quotas ... for milk .
Thousands of dairy cow breeders disappeared .
New Zealand lorded it over the milk market .
Then things changed .
There were milk shortages .
Prices soared .
Brussels finally realised the folly of its policy to stifle production .
Thus we decide to raise the quotas by 2 % . This , it should be said , is also done for a ' soft landing ' because quotas will be abolished in 2015 and the market handed over to integral liberalism , with the consequent risks for our stockbreeders in the mountains .
Thus we ruined stockbreeders in the 1980s and prevented young people from entering the market , since it was not possible to ' buy ' the operator 's ' licence ' , which was the quota .
Now we are heading for increased desertification in mountainous agricultural areas if there are no longer any quotas to roll out as a safety net .
in writing . - ( DE ) Droughts and feed shortages , for instance in Australia , have led to a rise in milk prices .
Some Member States have not exhausted their original milk quotas even now , while others are reaching the limit or even struggling to remain within it .
For that reason milk quotas have in any event been raised by 0.5 % in some countries .
If a further 2 % rise in the quota were now to be applied simultaneously , the delicate balance between supply and demand would be severely disrupted and milk prices would fall as a result .
The main losers would be small farmers in rural areas , who have a role as guardians of cultural heritage and are dependent on milk production but have no opportunity to produce in bulk .
Farmers , not unjustifiably , feel they are being exploited , while consumers are being expected to pick up the bill for increased milk and food prices , none of which reaches the small producers .
It is high time we did something about this .
A temporary market situation must not result in these planned measures with their long-term effects .
Consequently I have voted against the Jeggle report on a further increase in milk quotas .
The organisation of the milk market is subservient to the sector 's monopoly undertakings , which control most of the market and have started to advocate its full liberalisation in order to maximise profits .
The Commission 's proposal for a ' soft landing ' policy and a 2 % increase in quotas every year until 2014 , when the current regulation expires , amounts to an intensification of the unequal distribution of quotas between Member States . The proposal would slowly kill off small and medium-sized livestock enterprises , which are struggling to survive , particularly as a result of the steep increases in feed prices .
We are radically opposed to the liberalisation of the market in the dairy sector . We believe that a non-linear increase in national quotas is vital so that additional increases can be given to Member States where production quotas have traditionally been insufficient .
This is true of Greece , where production covers barely 50 % of domestic consumption .
We support the livestock farmers clamouring for direct support measures for small and medium-sized enterprises , above all in mountainous and island regions , and in other particularly problematic ones , especially when the current situation is leading to the abandonment of agricultural and livestock activity .
in writing . - ( DA ) The Danish members of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament have voted against the report on the CAP ' health check ' , as the report opposes improving the cross-compliance system and transferring money from direct support to rural development , as the Commission had proposed .
In the delegation 's opinion it is necessary for environmental reasons , among others , to introduce 20 % compulsory modulation and to strengthen the cross-compliance system .
in writing . - ( SV ) I am voting against this report because I think that an increase in quotas should have been allocated to producers of organic milk .
The increase which is now proposed will mainly benefit the large-scale producers at the expense of small producers .
in writing . - On behalf of the British Labour Members I wish to explain the reasons why we voted as we did on this report .
We strongly support the 2 % increase in milk quotas for the year 2008 / 2009 proposed by the Commission , allowing European farmers to respond to increased market demands .
We have farmers in the EU more than capable of responding to the increased global demands for milk and it would be unacceptable to deny them the opportunity to take advantage of the favourable market situation .
We are , however , unhappy that Parliament supports a voluntary , as opposed to compulsory , 2 % increase in milk quotas .
For me , the 2 % increase is also a step in giving milk producers the option to produce more and thereby helping the transition to greater market orientation .
This is in line with the soft landing ahead of the milk quota system in 2015 , as envisaged in the CAP Health Check .
While I understand that many countries do not fulfil their current quota allocations , including the UK , I strongly believe , that in line with the abolition of milk quotas in 2015 , we need to get farmers used to the idea of having the option to produce more .
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 163 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure ) .
in writing . - I was in favour of the position that the EU milk market should be opened up more rapidly than planned in an existing draft proposal and voted for an increase of the milk quota , although an increase of 5 % as demanded by Poland was not presented to plenary .
No majority for this proposal could be found in the EP .
Poland 's restrictive milk quota threatens to transform the country from a net exporter of dairy products to a net importer within five to seven years .
The EU allocated Poland by far the largest quota offered to any of the 10 accession countries , representative of Poland 's position as the EU-25 's fourth largest milk producer when it joined the EU in May 2004 .
Poland 's quota , nevertheless , is seen as small relative to the larger quotas of Europe 's top three milk producers - Germany , France and Britain .
The quotas are the legacy of bygone era when Europe 's dairies produced infamous lakes of milk and the EU had to help to keep prices from collapsing .
The raising of the milk quota can be seen as the beginning of phasing out the quotas as the EU milk quota system is due to expire in 2015 .
in writing . - ( PL ) I voted in favour of the adoption of Amendments 18-21 , namely block 1 .
I did so in view of the shortage of milk for domestic consumption and for export in European countries , since this shortage means that children in poorer families are malnourished and Member States ' opportunities for export reduced .
The amendments were in fact rejected , but I nevertheless voted in favour of adoption of the document as a whole , because increasing milk quotas by 2 % is at least a step in the right direction , even if it is too small a step .
Increasing quotas by 3 % and then abolishing them altogether in the future , as our Parliament has already called for in the course of debates , would be a far more beneficial solution .
It is , however , preferable to increase quotas even if only by 2 % than to make no changes at all .

in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of the Goepel report on the CAP ' Health Check ' to honour the work done in the Committee on Agriculture by the Socialist delegation .
It achieved acceptable results on matters which have always been very important for the development of agriculture in the European Union .

The results are still not the best possible but we hope that , thanks to the efforts and the spirit of compromise shown by Mr Capoulas and my other colleagues on the AGRI Committee , who in some instances have disregarded their own national interests , it will be possible to achieve much more ambitious results at the next stage , namely in the legislative package to be unveiled in May and examined under the French Presidency . We need to be more ambitious , in particular as regards a fairer redistribution of aid , greater transparency , better rural development policies , an effective safety net for risk management in the event of natural disasters , and the role of agriculture and its contribution to combating climate change as well as concerning biofuels .
Today 's result enables the European Parliament to hold a broader debate on the future of the CAP , which must be adapted to social and economic change while continuing to be one of the mainstays of Europe .
in writing . - ( FR ) It was important for the House to issue its opinion on the general guidelines for the future ' Health Check ' .
The Socialist Group in the European Parliament has won a number of major victories , such as the criticism of the decoupling of aid ( livestock breeding and small crops ) , CAP objectives in terms of food safety , preservation of ecosystems , land upgrading , the redistributive effect of degressive capping , of modulation , safety nets , recognition of the role of interprofessional associations , agriculture 's contribution to climate change , etc .
However , unlike the PSE Group , I was keen to support a number of points :
partial decoupling of direct aid must be maintained for animal premiums , but care must be taken not to include only intensive or large-scale animal husbandry ( para .
26 , para .
32 )
historical references cannot gauge certain farmers ' compliance with high environmental standards ( para .
16 )
maintenance of progressive capping of direct aid , since this would permit a fairer distribution of CAP resources ( para .
67 )
criticism of surveys on GMOs , reminder that it is impossible to implement coexistence , support for the precautionary principle ( Amendment 30 )
rejection of the abolition of milk quotas in 2015 ( para .
76 )
in writing . - We support the general thrust of the report on the Health Check on the CAP .
However , it is important to point out that the particular situation for Ireland which has fully decoupled all direct payments from production needs to be taken into consideration .
In particular , the commitments made to all farmers in the Agenda 2000 reforms that there would be a reduction in bureaucracy .
So far the experience has not been entirely positive .
On the specific issue of maintaining the payments to producers , we cannot accept a move towards a flat rate payment per hectare regime .
Farmers have budgeted on the current system remaining in place until 2013 .
In addition , moves to increase modulation and take more of the direct payments from producers are unwelcome .
We would have welcomed a high increase in milk quota but in line with our view on the Jeggle report we have accepted the consensus opinion on a 2 % increase for the coming marketing year .
In the long term , however , it is the threat posed by a bad deal at the WTO which looms large over EU agriculture .
Such a deal must be resisted .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the Goepel report on the CAP ' Health Check ' because it calls for essential measures to support the development of agriculture , one of the largest sectors in the European Union .
In this respect , I would highlight the report 's argument that funds must be made available to maintain the dairy industry in regions such as the Azores .
I would also highlight the significant commitment of Mr Capoulas Santos and the important contribution made by his amendments .
in writing . - ( PT ) This resolution 's criticism of the Commission proposal is inadequate , although it does include two of the many proposals made by ourselves .
However , its general approach is negative , particularly as it insists on decoupling production subsidies by calling on the Commission to push through the decoupling policy at a faster rate .
However , experience has shown that decoupling direct aid from agricultural production has harmful effects : hence our vote against the motion for a resolution .
However , we do feel that the report 's rejection of any renationalisation of the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) is positive , as , too , is the call for measures to restructure and boost key agricultural sectors ( such as the dairy , beef cattle and sheep sectors ) .
We are also pleased that the proposals we made on the need for the European Commission to take account , in the World Trade Organisation negotiations , of the specific characteristics of agricultural production as a food production sector and a structuring element for territorial balance , preservation of the environment and the safeguarding of adequate levels of food safety have been adopted .
We also regard as positive the adoption of our call to the Commission and the Member States to take the necessary measures to prevent speculative activity , capturing of the market in food products and the formation of cartels by food companies .
in writing . - ( SV ) The current health check on the common agricultural policy offered the Commission and the European Parliament a chance to take ambitious and determined steps in order to get the continued development of the policy under control .
It is crucial that the reform of the common agricultural policy continue to develop on market-oriented lines , which will mean that consumer choice is the key factor in farmers ' decisions on production , while at the same time we reduce the total cost of the agricultural policy .
The current strong growth in global demand for agricultural products provides a favourable environment in which to hasten the deregulation of the agricultural policy .
The moderate delegation deplores the fact that neither the Commission nor the European Parliament has taken the opportunity to do this .
We have therefore voted against the report .
in writing . - I abstained on the final vote on this report .
While it contains many good elements it does not go far enough .
Any CAP reform must first decrease subsidy and increase the role of the market in agriculture . Second , look at promoting the wider rural economy rather than focusing on farming alone .
Third , it must promote ' good ' food rather than put quantity before quality . Only on this basis can we establish a CAP that matches the needs and requirements of the new millennium .
in writing . - ( PT ) Except for the issue of milk quotas , I regard the Commission proposal as highly appropriate .
The Goepel report improves it in many aspects , although it does make some amendments with which I cannot agree .
On the one hand , I support the idea of capping subsidies , as proposed by the Commission , because , bearing in mind the ever-increasing weight of public opinion on subsidies for farmers and following the implementation of the SPR ( Soil Protection Review ) , which has made the system clearer and more transparent , certain imbalances have become apparent .
It is therefore essential to find a fair way of limiting the level of subsidies paid to large farmers .
On the other hand , I feel that keeping the funds from modulation in the respective regions will not help to solve the major regional differences that exist in European agriculture .
Finally , as regards milk quotas , I am against the 2 % increase in 2008 and also the reduction in fines as I consider that these measures will result in the milk quota system being dismantled before 2015 , with harmful consequences for the most vulnerable regions that depend on milk production and for all their farmers who have invested in this sector and will therefore see their expectations come to nothing .
For all these reasons , I abstained from voting .
in writing . - ( FR ) The CAP ' Health Check ' established by the Commission is not a health check at all : it is an unconfessed new reform .
It is also another step towards the economic reorganisation of the world on which Brussels 's Europe has been working for years in Washington 's footsteps : in southern countries and the United States , agriculture ; in the north , services and industry , amid fierce competition from emerging nations .
European agriculture is simply sacrificed , and will soon be handed over to market forces alone ; a rigged market , too , for it has been left defenceless against imports and denied access to export markets .
Agriculture is not a sector like any other .
Since it feeds human beings , it is a matter of national independence and sovereignty .
The quality of foodstuffs affects public health .
Working the land affects land-use planning , protection of the environment , biodiversity , management of water resources , organisation and population of rural areas ... but it is still a productive activity .
Dispensing with all proactive agricultural policies is worse than a crime : it is a huge mistake .
It is a great pity that , apart from a few positive elements , the rapporteur did not question this logic .
in writing . - ( SV ) In Sweden both the previous and the present governments have made positive statements on the forthcoming ' health check ' of the EU 's long-term budget and the common agricultural policy over the next few years in the expectation that it will lead to very considerable changes and reforms .
Now we see the Federalist majority in the European Parliament taking the view that the Heads of State or Government undertook in 2002 to maintain the first-pillar agricultural funds in full at the same level until 2013 and that that undertaking should be respected .
How can the 2002 agreement be interpreted in such different ways ?
The Christian Democrat / Conservative and Social Democrat majority in the European Parliament thinks that reforms are only to take place after 2013 .
The Swedish Social Democrats and Alliance for Sweden have told voters in Sweden that reforms will be introduced directly into the long-term budget on the basis of the ' health check ' in 2008-2009 .
Which side is interpreting the 2002 agreement correctly ?
Junilistan considers unequivocally that reforms to the common agricultural policy and a reduction of its costs in the EU budget must take place directly after the completion of the health check .
All other solutions would be a betrayal of the voters in the six Member States which , in 2005 , did not want to expand the EU 's long-term budget .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted for this report , which recommends , in particular , taking into consideration the special characteristics of regions in difficulty and sensitive sectors such as livestock farming , and making the rules for farmers simpler .
The aim is to improve the functioning of the common agricultural policy on the basis of the experience gained since 2003 , and to adapt this to the new challenges and possibilities presented in 2008 in a European Union with 27 Member States .
The report claims that direct aid will still be necessary after 2013 , not only in the event of problems on the markets , but also to offset the services rendered by farmers to society and the very high standards in terms of the environment , health and animal welfare .
In relation to risk management , the Commission should receive a message from the House in this report in the perspective of the future CAP reform .
Private or mixed insurance schemes must be developed as a matter of urgency with public financial backing , ensuring that the Member States remain on a level playing field .
The Commission should consider introducing a European reinsurance system in the future for climate-related or environmental disasters , and the risk-prevention measures should be funded under the first pillar ( support for the agricultural markets ) .
in writing . - I strongly support the notion that we need to secure appropriate funding for rural development , many people living in rural areas are not directly involved in agriculture or have a part time involvement in agriculture , in order to ensure balanced regional development we must ensure a balance of development between urban and rural .
However , this must not be attained at the expense of the first pillar .
The development of rural areas is a worthy objective in its own right and must not be constrained by relying on modulated funds .
in writing . - I voted for the successful amendment 29 , which calls on the Commission and the Member States to take measures to prevent capturing of the market in food products and the formation of cartels by food companies , and I hope that some action will be taken to prevent supermarkets from forcing food producers to accept economically unsustainable prices for their produce .
I also supported amendment 30 , which sought more restrictions on GMO crops , noting that it is impossible for GMO crops to coexist with conventional and / or organic crops , and calling for the withdrawal of the GMO species already introduced by some Member States .
Such action has clear public support , as shown by opinion polls carried out thus far .
in writing . - ( DE ) In order to prevent high-quality food in Europe from becoming scarce and very expensive , many people must now come to understand that agriculture in the EU needs to be competitive , sustainable , multifunctional and comprehensive , as well as being competitive internationally .
We still need the CAP , and it must ensure that agriculture is reliable , predictable and stable in the future .
The compromise we are voting on today represents a commendable job of work by our rapporteur , Lutz Goepel .
This compromise does not fully satisfy me , however , particularly because the proposed modulation of over EUR 10 000 , even if it is apparently only 1 % , cannot reasonably be expected of farmers in my country .
The fact that these resources are to be returned to the regions in which they accrue is small consolation for individual farmers .
Just imagine if we were to impose pay cuts on employees , for example in the public sector .
The proposals on a basic safety net and a crisis management system are welcome .
It must also be clear that Article 69 is not a panacea , even though it is acceptable to make more use of these facilities to finance measures to assist , for example , young farmers , afforestation and early harvests .
Even though we still have no right of codecision on agricultural policy , I would nonetheless caution the Commission against being too obstinate .
in writing . - The CAP Health Check will set the tone for future reform in this area and Lutz Goepel 's report on the Health Check is one that I have trouble fully supporting .
The Health Check should truly look towards creating a market driven sector that is committed to rural and environmental sustainability .
We need to move away from the culture of protectionism and market distorting subsidies that the current CAP facilitates .
The policy should also encourage third countries , especially developing countries , to trade with us .
I have reflected these concerns in the way I have voted .
If it is to succeed , the review of the common agricultural policy demands different priorities and , of course , greater resources .
The abandonment of agricultural land and reduced production are leading to the decline of the countryside and the devaluation of the role of the primary sector in the social and economic framework .
We call for a radical reshaping of the CAP . Measures are needed to help small and medium-sized farmers to continue production .
The rural population , diversity , environmental protection and public health must be maintained .
We seek a common policy of agricultural insurance against all eventualities relating not only to weather , but also to food and market instability .
We oppose the priority of harmonising agricultural policies with the WTO 's targets and negotiations .
We seek an agricultural policy that provides high-quality , cheap food for all , and for this reason I am voting against this report .
in writing . - ( PT ) All policies must clearly correspond to a need and must effectively meet this need .
Given the current situation in terms of agricultural markets , consumption patterns , environmental requirements and future trends , the assumptions , concepts and rules of the common agricultural policy must be reconsidered and reformed .
The central axis of this reform must include certain key ideas , such as the importance of the rural world 's viability , the need to prevent the disappearance of European agriculture , farmers ' incomes , the need to bring into this market young entrepreneurs and creative models of production and management , and also consumers ' interests , which , even though we are all consumers , are very often not vigorously represented .
Despite the immediate disadvantages that a generalised fall in agricultural prices may bring for certain sectors of society , in both developed and developing economies , this reform will have a series of virtues ( there will immediately be higher consumption among people in countries experiencing accelerated development ) and potential benefits , which must be taken into account .
This is the approach that I hope will be adopted , by both the EU institutions and the national governments .
in writing . - ( SV ) There are two things that an EU supporter has to explain ( if not defend ) when he goes home and talks about his work in the EU .
One is Parliament 's travelling circus shuttling back and forth to Strasbourg .
The other is the question of subsidies to agriculture .
In both cases the present system is equally impossible to defend - and explain .
There are no good reasons for us to travel to Strasbourg .
There is also no reason why EU taxpayers should subsidise the British Royal Family , which is currently one of the main beneficiaries of the system , while at the same time African producers are excluded .
The Goepel report adopted entirely the wrong approach ; I therefore voted against it .
I did so mainly because I think its intentions point in the wrong direction : more direct support , fewer reforms , less market orientation .
The Commission has made a fair amount of progress in changing over to a more up-to-date system of support to agriculture .
It is regrettable that Parliament seems to want to turn the clock back .
in writing . - On behalf of the British Labour members I wish to explain the reasons why we voted as we did on this important report .
First and foremost we believe a thorough overhaul of the CAP is needed so that we can move away from direct payments to farmers towards a system that encourages rural sustainability .
In this regard we would like to have seen full decoupling of direct payments but appreciate that many Member States have a difficulty with this .
A key point for me is that reform of the CAP should not be seen as an issue of big farms versus little farms .
It should be an issue of efficient versus inefficient .
Therefore I and the British Labour delegation will be voting in favour of amendments in favour of increased funding for rural development , opening up trade with developing countries , and against amendments that seek to employ protectionist measures for EU farmers .
We would like to see the Commission proposing the scrapping of degressive capping and addressing the issue of direct payments in a more radical way .
We will not vote against the report but abstain in the hope that when the legislative proposals come forward Parliament will recognise the need for radical reform .
( Abbreviated in accordance with Rule 163 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
in writing . - The need to reform the CAP has to be on-going .
Unfortunately Parliament 's report is not ambitious enough .
in writing . - ( CS ) Regarding the report by Mr Lutz Goepel on the CAP ' Health Check ' , since I am one of the Czech Republic 's representatives in the European Parliament I consider it my duty to draw urgent attention to the following facts . The Proposal by the Commission for the revision of the common agricultural policy should result in legislative texts that the Council and the European Parliament will table in May 2008 at the latest .
The Czech Republic fully supports European agriculture that is dynamic and centred on sustainable development of farming and food industries , whose priorities are to guarantee both food safety and energy security .
For the Czech Republic , modulation and degressivity of direct payments are the most vital measures among those to be debated in the course of the revision of the CAP .
Measures such as degressivity - reducing direct payments according to the size of farms - would have a selective impact on only some Member States and a negative effect on the competitiveness of the agricultural sector in countries like the Czech Republic .
At the same time these measures would clearly lead to the organisational break-up of farms .
For these reasons in particular it is difficult for the Czech Republic to accept the current proposal for modulation and degressivity , and not just the Czech Republic , I would imagine .
in writing . - ( NL ) In the Lisbon Treaty the five CAP objectives remain unaltered in relation to the current Treaty .
The Treaty stipulates , among other things , that reasonable prices must be ensured .
This objective is now more relevant than ever for consumers .
Another problem is the efficiency of European agricultural policy at present .
We must , after all , not be blind to the negative side of the current CAP : farmers must be able to earn an income but also work efficiently so that young people also continue to choose a career in agriculture .
I have often repeated the words of Ms Fischer Boel , Commissioner for Agriculture and Rural Development , when she says that you do not need to be sick to have a health check .
We must dare to ask whether the current agricultural policy is adapted to the development of the ( world ) market and to the needs of the EU27 .
Furthermore , the debate regarding the ' Health Check ' is an opportunity for the agricultural policy to remain accountable to public opinion .
Ladies and gentlemen , European citizens expect food security , food safety and a stake in food sovereignty .
With this own-initiative report , Parliament is laying its cards on the table and delivering a solid text to the Commission .
The proposals for a ' health check ' of the CAP constitute a new attack on small and medium-sized farmers .
Small and medium-sized farmers are suffering from the results of the 2003 CAP review : unemployment has risen because thousands of small and medium-sized holdings have disappeared .
In Greece , tobacco-growing has fallen by 70 % , two in five sugar factories have closed , agricultural revenue has dwindled and vineyards are set to decrease .
The Commission 's new proposals are divorcing aid from production and transferring direct aid resources for farmers to the second pillar , to the benefit mainly of businessmen .
The proposals completely abolish intervention and reduce agricultural subsidies from 2009 . This will hasten the demise of small and medium-sized holdings .
These measures are intended to achieve greater support from landowners and multinational food companies . Thus land will be more rapidly concentrated , production and trade in agricultural products will be in the hands of the few , and the CAP 's fundamental inequalities and injustices will become more acute ( 20 % of holdings receive 80 % of subsidies ) .
The references to agriculture contributing to the protection of the environment are hypocritical , since the eradication of thousands of small and medium-sized holdings is adding to the devastation of the regions , while the use of crops for biofuels will contribute to the increase in food prices .
We are voting against the EU 's proposals for a ' health check ' of the CAP .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the report by Mrs Klaß on the situation of women in rural areas of the European Union because I consider that rural development policies must take account of the gender dimension .
In this way they can help to achieve the targets of the Lisbon Strategy in terms of growth , education , employment and social cohesion .
I believe that women play a vital role in promoting local and social growth .
This is why the proposals to improve the living conditions of women in rural areas , by , for example , creating education and training infrastructures at all levels , promoting equal access to the labour market , providing incentives to encourage women 's entrepreneurship and developing high-quality social and health services , are essential for sustainable rural development .
in writing . - ( PT ) We welcome the fact that various amendments have been adopted which improve the final report , including one of our proposals stressing the need to give the greatest possible value to the work of women , including that of immigrant women , who do not belong to families owning farms but provide labour in the fields and are especially affected by discrimination in the world of agriculture .
We therefore voted in favour of this report .
However , we regret that our other proposals on the situation of women in rural areas were not adopted .
This situation is heavily influenced by the general agricultural situation and women are suffering the consequences of unfair measures in the CAP ( common agricultural policy ) , which have led to the increasing abandonment of small and medium-sized holdings and family-based agriculture .
We therefore continue to stress the need for an in-depth review of the CAP with priority being given to the protection of family-based agriculture and small and medium-sized holdings in order to support production and guarantee incomes .
in writing . - ( PL ) Whilst not undervaluing the importance of towns and large conurbations , it is important to keep in mind that the major part of European social and economic life takes place in rural areas .
That is why I was delighted to welcome the report by Mrs Klaß on the situation of women in rural areas .
Our debate on this subject dovetails appropriately with the general debate linked to the celebration of International Women 's Day .
I support the main idea contained in this report , namely that the development of rural areas cannot be based exclusively on agriculture .
The EU 's agricultural policy aims to ensure genuine sustainable development for rural areas , thus providing the local population , women included , with additional opportunities to better develop their potential .
This involves women assuming a more important role in the life of local communities , playing their part in the creation of new enterprises and becoming involved in the developing service sector .
It should be strongly emphasised that the governing principle that should dominate when it comes to defining the operation of rural areas is equality of opportunity between men and women .
One of the ways in which this may be assessed is in terms of women 's access to the labour market .
Unfortunately , female employment indicators are lowest in rural areas , because women who work on farms are not always counted as part of the labour force . Such women also have fewer opportunities for paid jobs than women in urban areas .
This unfavourable situation can only be remedied by changing the mentality of the local population and through the new financial incentives the EU is making available precisely to rural areas .
in writing . - I supported the Klaß report , which deals with many important issues facing women in our rural areas .
Low pay , lack of accessible services such as childcare , and social exclusion are issues which are all too common within rural communities .
Member States must work to ensure that these issues are addressed and that living conditions in rural communities are fair for all our citizens .
in writing . - ( DE ) I am in favour of measures to assist women in rural regions because this particular group is severely affected by unemployment and , as a result , by poverty and possible social exclusion .
As mentioned by Mrs Klaß in her report , regional policy and the development of these often disadvantaged regions and their populations are among the European Union 's political priorities .
Given that women 's rights to equal opportunities are being undermined even in economically prosperous regions , it is essential to provide support for women in poorer rural regions and develop their opportunities to participate in working life .
I would like to draw particular attention to the current inadequate regulations on insurance cover for assisting spouses , most of whom are women .
Here , a swift and efficient amendment of the law is required .
The lack of legal status in relation to the right to maternity and sick leave , especially for self-employed women and assisting spouses , must also be improved .
in writing . - I welcome the Christa Klaß report on the situation of women in rural areas of the EU .
The goal of trying to reduce feminine migration from rural zones has my full support .
By introducing measures to recognise , protect and promote the role of women in the rural sector we will not only improve equality between men and women in such areas , but stimulate economic growth and encourage sustainable development in the sector .
I voted in favour of the report .
in writing . - ( FR ) Equality of the sexes in rural areas ought to arouse much greater EU interest .
The situation of women 's rights , in fact , and their place within rural society require substantially more determination by the Member States and the Commission .
On the one hand , women are subject to a particularly unfavourable legal status when they work in the agricultural sector as assisting spouses .
The European Commission must make a clean break with this legal inequality , which deprives certain European women of access to social security , maternity and sick leave , or acquisition of pension rights in the event of divorce .
On the other hand , there is insufficient support for economic initiatives and female entrepreneurship .
The Member States must , for instance , offer economic incentives to businesses that diversify women 's work , and in a more general sense support the development of infrastructure and new technology in rural environments .
By and large , the Commission must conduct a more thorough analysis of programmes to encourage rural development from the female standpoint .
Rural areas account for 56 % of the EU 's population .
I wish to lend my wholehearted support to the proposals in Mrs Klaβ 's report , because women can certainly contribute their dynamism and creativity .
in writing . - ( FR ) The situation of women in rural areas has been discussed many times at numerous international conferences on women ( 1975 , 1980 , 1985 and 1995 ) on agricultural reform and rural development ( 1979 ) and on population ( 1994 ) , and also by the European Commission and Parliament .
The accumulation of texts , however , is rather pointless since the observations are always the same : an increase in the ' masculinisation ' of the rural population and no improvement in the status of spouses assisting with agricultural operations .
It is high time strategies were developed to curb the exodus of women from rural areas , particularly women with qualifications .
It is also time to take account of the development of the broad guidelines worldwide , particularly the removals of controls on trade and finance , and the privatisation of agriculture in a strictly regulated and quota-ridden commercial sector .
Times are changing , but not so the mindsets and customs that all too often prefer the role of women in agriculture to be mere co-operators or unpaid employees , frequently working in strictly family businesses .
The report proposes changes to this status and we will thus vote in favour of it .
in writing . - ( FR ) I wish to congratulate Csaba Tabajdi on his excellent report , and the research and summary he has carried out so successfully .
However , I wish to state that I voted against paragraph 27 :
' 27 . Stresses , in this context , the importance of green gene technology and calls on the Member States and the Commission to put more effort into researching the latest seed and plant protection technologies , to ensure that biogas production does not compete with high-quality food production and to enable the proportion of biomass per area unit to be significantly increased ; '
I feel biogases ought to be supplied mainly by agricultural waste .
It is not a matter of developing GMO seeds and pesticides in order to promote a much more intensive form of agriculture .
This would harm the environment and cancel out all the advantages of biofuels .
As the title of the report infers , we must encourage sustainable agriculture above all .
I will be responsible for the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development on the draft directive on promotion of renewable energy sources .
in writing . - ( PT ) This report covers several important issues and makes some findings which we support .
In particular we agree that , before using ' dedicated ' biomass , we should firstly use the various sources of waste that have an energy and an economic value , thus reducing or solving serious environmental problems .
It is also good that the report confirms that biogas has more energy potential than liquid biofuels , a fact that has been ignored by the European Commission .
However , we feel that certain issues should have been considered in greater detail , in particular the difference between biogas and the extremely important biomethane , which is an upgrade of biogas .
A clear distinction must be made between biogas and biomethane .
The latter can and must be produced from waste water treatment plants , sanitary landfill and industrial waste , plus , of course , livestock effluents .
Switzerland and Sweden are already producing biomethane and using natural gas networks for its distribution .
In the Gothenburg area in the south of Sweden , there are already around 4 500 vehicles powered solely by biomethane .
In the US , there are numerous producers of biomethane , which is distributed in the form of liquefied biomethane .
We therefore stress the need for the European Commission to give its full attention and priority to the funding of biomethane projects across Europe .
in writing . - ( PT ) The Tabajdi report stresses the potential of agricultural biogas and suggests adopting a directive on biogas production .
I voted in favour of the Tabajdi report because I believe that using biogas has two benefits : firstly it can contribute to the security and sustainability of the EU 's energy supply , and secondly it allows farmers to develop new sources of income .
The contribution of biogas to achieving the targets recently set by the Commission in terms of the contribution of renewable energies by 2020 could be particularly important .
in writing . - ( PL ) I voted in favour of the report on sustainable agriculture and biogas : a need for review of EU legislation .
The rapporteur , Mr Tabajdi , has rightly pointed out that it is time to begin exploiting the energy potential of biogas . As he indicates , biogas may come to replace natural gas .
I agree with the statement that investment in the production of biogas from different sources should be encouraged , drawing on EU funds allocated to regional and rural development for that purpose .
in writing . - As highlighted in Mr Tabajdi 's report on Sustainable agriculture and biogas , there is a large potential for biogas that the EU has yet to exploit .
The call for the Commission to produce a coherent biogas policy is one that I support .
There is a need for biogas policy formulation to be encouraged across the EU if we want Europe to adequately diversify its energy production .
Through biogas we have an opportunity both to increase renewable energy production and contribute to sustainable economic , agricultural and rural development .
I support the report 's recommendations .
in writing . - ( DE ) Biogas installations operated by small farmers are a rational solution : here , slurry and other waste can be utilised for the production of biogas before being composted into high-grade fertiliser or coupled to fodder drying , in both cases closing the ecological cycle .
An increase in support for biogas installations is to be rejected , however , in order to exclude the possibility that high-value foodstuffs will be wasted on fuel and energy production .
Under no circumstances should major companies lease cropland from farmers for the production of so-called bioenergy and biofuels , with this land thus being lost to food production , leading to a situation in which we are inundated with monocultures , pesticides and genetic technologies while forfeiting our self-sufficiency capacity in food production .
Optimising existing systems and introducing processes for the more efficient use of these systems are to be welcomed , but other issues are problematical for the reasons stated , and I have therefore voted against the report .
in writing . - ( PL ) I voted in favour of the report by Mr Tabajdi on sustainable agriculture and biogas : a need for review of EU legislation .
In my view , there are significant economic and environmental reasons for supporting the motion for a European Parliament resolution on sustainable agriculture and biogas , especially as this will entail the need to undertake a more detailed study of European Union legislation on the matter .
This would represent considerable progress towards achieving the target set by the European Commission in the White Paper with regard to increasing the amount of energy obtained from renewable sources from 6 % in 1995 to 12 % in 2010 .
The potential for biogas recovered from natural materials such as annual manure has still not been fully exploited .
If production of such biogas were intensified , not only would this contribute to reducing carbon dioxide emissions , it would also help to increase competitiveness by providing farmers with possible new sources of income .
It should be remembered that this is one of the cheapest sources of heat energy . It would be of significant help to Member States of the Union as they endeavour to become less dependent on natural gas supplies .
I support the stance of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , which is urging the European Commission to incorporate the new biogas production strategy into the Kyoto mechanism at the earliest opportunity .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
We have finished our work for the afternoon .
The sitting is suspended .
It will resume at 3 p.m. for a formal sitting to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the European Parliament .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.05 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Formal sitting - Celebration of the European Parliament 's fiftieth anniversary
( Short performance by the European Union Youth Orchestra , conducted by Pavel Kotla )
That was a beautiful rendition by the European Union Youth Orchestra with Pavel Kotla conducting .
Thank you very much .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to welcome you all very warmly here to the Chamber to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the constituent session of the European Parliamentary Assembly .
First and foremost , may I suggest that together , we welcome by acclamation all the former Presidents who are with us here today : Emilio Colombo , Lord Henry Plumb , Enrique Barón Crespo , Egon Klepsch , Klaus Hänsch , José Maria Gil Robles , Nicole Fontaine and Josep Borrell Fontelles .
Welcome to all of you , esteemed former Presidents of the European Parliament .
( Sustained applause )
May I also extend a very warm welcome to Janez Janša , the President-in-Office of the European Council , and José Manuel Durão Barroso , the President of the European Commission .
Of course , Mr Barroso , you are a familiar face here in the Chamber , but you are especially welcome today .
( Applause )
It is a particular pleasure to welcome Lluís Maria de Puig , President of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe , here to the Chamber of the European Parliament .
A warm welcome to you .
( Applause )
It is a pleasure to welcome the Presidents and Speakers of the Parliaments of Belgium , Herman van Rompuy , of Italy , Fausto Bertinotti , and of the Dutch Senate , Yvonne Timmerman-Buck , who together with other representatives of the Parliaments of Bulgaria , the Czech Republic , Estonia , France , Germany , Hungary , Ireland , Latvia , Lithuania , Luxembourg , Poland , Portugal , Romania , Slovakia , Slovenia and the United Kingdom have joined us here in the European Parliament today and whom I would also like to welcome .
( Applause )
I welcome the Presidents of the other European institutions : for the European Court of Justice , Peter Jann , the President of the First Chamber ; for the European Court of Auditors , its President Vítor Caldeira ; for the European Economic and Social Committee , President Dimitris Dimitriadis ; for the Committee of the Regions , Luc Van den Brande ; and the Ombudsman , Nikoforos Diamandouros . Welcome to the European Parliament .
( Applause )
It is a pleasure to welcome the local and regional representatives : the Mayor of Strasbourg , Fabienne Keller , the President of the Regional Council of Alsace , Adrien Zeller , the President of the Conseil Général du Bas-Rhin , Philippe Richert , and the Prefect of the Region of Alsace and Bas-Rhin , Jean-Marc Rebière .
Welcome to the European Parliament .
( Applause )

Ladies and gentlemen , seat 146 is occupied by our colleague Astrid Lulling , who is the only one of us to have been a Member of the European Parliament in the days before it was directly elected .
( Sustained applause )
Almost exactly 50 years ago , on 19 March 1958 , the Common Assembly of the three European institutions - the European Economic Community , the European Atomic Energy Community and the European Coal and Steel Community - convened for the first time here in Strasbourg in what was then the ' Maison de l 'Europe ' .
The Assembly consisted ' of representatives of the peoples of the States brought together in the Community ' , as stated in the Treaty of Rome , which had entered into force a few weeks earlier .
Today , we are celebrating this anniversary because we are the direct successors to that Parliamentary Assembly , and its original 142 Members , in a line of continuity .
The first President of this Common Assembly was the great Robert Schuman .
In his inaugural address , he said that the Assembly would play a key role in developing the European spirit , ' for which ' , he said , ' the Assembly was and remains the crucible ' .
I believe that this is as true now as it was then .
At the same time , Robert Schuman warned his colleagues , at that constituent session , that parliamentary work with 142 Members - from six countries at that time - would require discipline from everyone and of course this is even more relevant today , with 785 Members from 27 countries , as we all know !
Not long after the constituent session , our predecessors began to call their institution the ' European Parliament ' , albeit informally at first , for the term did not appear in the European Communities ' founding Treaties .
It was not until four years later , in March 1962 , that the Parliamentary Assembly took a decision to style itself the ' European Parliament ' .
Although the founding Treaties of the European Communities stated that the Assembly ' shall draw up proposals for elections by direct universal suffrage in accordance with a uniform procedure in all Member States ' and that ' the Council shall , acting unanimously ... lay down the appropriate provisions , which it shall recommend to Member States for adoption in accordance with their respective constitutional requirements ' , it was not until 1976 that the Council - on the basis of the European Parliament 's recommendation of 20 September 1976 - adopted a legislative act for the conducting of direct and universal elections to the European Parliament .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Parliamentary Assembly initially had virtually no powers of its own .
Our predecessors know that developing the European parliamentary dimension would be a long process and that this would require a clear compass , commitment , patience and stamina from them and subsequent generations .
Step by step , the European Parliament secured more and more powers of its own , becoming ever more conscious of its responsibilities and scope for action , and I believe I can say on behalf of everyone here that today it is genuinely worthy of its name .
( Applause )
Today we are the representatives of almost 500 million Union citizens and we reflect all the different strands of the political spectrum in the European Union .
We are the freely elected Parliament of the European Union , united in our efforts to achieve the best and most convincing solutions .
We have become self-assured and a major player in European politics .
Ladies and gentlemen , we have reason to derive great satisfaction from that .
This process began in 1958 and there have been milestones along the way , on our shared path towards European integration .
In 1971 the European Community was given its own budget , and since then the European Parliament has played a key role in the adoption of successive budgets .
In 1979 the first direct elections to the European Parliament were held .
In 1986 , with the Single European Act , the name ' European Parliament ' finally took legal effect .
With the entry into force of the Maastricht Treaty 15 years ago , the European Parliament was finally granted full codecision powers in initial areas of Community policy , enabling it to make a real contribution to the framing of legislation , and apply the brakes , if necessary , against the will of the Council .
The Amsterdam Treaty further enhanced these codecision rights , while the Lisbon Treaty will establish codecision as the rule in the crafting of European legislation , and therefore refers , appropriately , to the ' ordinary legislative procedure ' .
Today , we are 785 Members from 27 European nations .
We represent more than 150 national political parties , most of which have joined together to form the seven parliamentary groups .
We are both a legislative and a budgetary authority , on an equal footing with the Council .
We exercise oversight over the European Commission and elect its President , and the Commission cannot take office without our approval .
We are an advocate for the primacy of Community law , and we are the citizens ' chamber of the European Union .
Three weeks ago we adopted the Treaty of Lisbon , which will further strengthen our powers .
In future , decisions on important issues of current concern to citizens in the European Union can be taken only if a majority in the European Parliament gives its consent .
This also applies to key issues of justice and home affairs .
However , this is no reason to be complacent and it is certainly not the outcome of an inevitable process .
We had to fight every inch of the way .
I would like to thank everyone who , over the past five decades and in the capable hands of our Presidents , has worked to strengthen the parliamentary dimension of European integration and rendered a valuable service to that process .
Thank you to the Members of the European Parliament , past and present !
( Applause )
Jean Monnet once said : ' Nothing is possible without people , and nothing is permanent without institutions ' .
I would also like to take a moment to remember Paul-Henri Spaak , the first President of the Common Assembly of the European Coal and Steel Community ( ECSC ) - the institution that preceded the European Parliament - who , with his report after the Messina Conference in June 1955 , made a major contribution to the preparation of the Treaty of Rome .
The path towards parliamentary democracy in the European Union has followed a logic that is familiar to us from the history of the European nation states .
What we have created is an institutional balance between the national and the European level , which is a major success and reflects the interaction between the various levels of shared governance in Europe .
An important element of this balance is the European Parliament 's good cooperation with the national parliaments , which is of special concern to us .
I am very happy to see that almost all the national parliaments of the Member States of the European Union have sent high-level representatives to be with us today .
( Applause )
I would ask all of you - the Members of the European Parliament and the members of the national parliaments - to play your part in the endeavour to maintain that cooperation in future .
The Treaty of Lisbon and the Charter of Fundamental Rights will make a decisive contribution towards making democracy and parliamentarianism in the European Union a reality at all levels .
We can be proud , ladies and gentlemen , of our consistent and unequivocal support for the Reform Treaty and for the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
( Applause )
We do need the critical public and critical monitoring of our work .
However , we are also entitled to fairness .
The European Union , in all its diversity , is more complex than any other community in the world .
I would ask the media - which play a vital role in our communication with citizens - to bear that in mind .
The European Union should not be used as a scapegoat for national failures .
( Applause )
One of the greatest successes of our European vision over the past 50 years has been the assertion of democracy and freedom all over Europe .
Today , Estonia , Latvia , Lithuania , Poland , the Czech Republic , Slovakia , Hungary , Slovenia , Bulgaria , Romania and reunited Germany are members of the European Union - an achievement which we could only dream of and which has become a reality in our lifetime .
Today - as the Berlin Declaration of 25 March 2007 says - we , the citizens of the European Union , have ' united for the better ' .
That is a cause for great joy .
In taking stock of the past 50 years , it is important that we look to the future .
We should remind ourselves self-critically which aspects of Europe 's parliamentary dimension are still unsatisfactory .
Unlike the national parliaments , we still do not have the possibility , in the budget procedure , to decide on the raising of our own financial resources .
Parliamentary government generally entails parliamentary control of the military ; however , the European Union 's common foreign security and defence policy is still incomplete and does not provide for proper linkage between national and European responsibilities .
We still do not have a uniform electoral law , which means that we are still lacking an important prerequisite for effective European political parties that can stand for election to the European Parliament with single lists of candidates .
With patience , stamina and a good compass , the European Parliament has fought to assert its position in Europe ever since the first session of the European Parliamentary Assembly , and it must and will continue to do so in future .
As Europe 's directly elected supranational assembly , the European Parliament is held up as a model for similar efforts in other regions of the world .
I witness this , and so do you , when we visit other parts of the world .
When Robert Schuman took office as the first President of the European Parliamentary Assembly on 19 March 1958 , this positive development of Europe 's parliamentary dimension would have been almost impossible to predict .
However , Robert Schuman had a vision .
He spoke of the European idea which , he said , had to be revived , describing this as ' la relance de l 'idee européenne ' .
Today , after the crises surrounding the failed Constitutional Treaty , what could be a better leitmotif for the task that lies ahead ?
On 19 March 1958 Robert Schuman , in his brief address , expressed his concern that a technocratic view of matters could cause European integration to wither away .
This is as true today as it was then .
Robert Schuman was realistic , modest and clear in his description of the opportunities available to the Parliamentary Assembly , which he presided over until 1960 : ' Nous désirons contribuer ' , he said in his warm and resonant voice , ' à créer un noyau de la structure européenne . '
Robert Schuman ended his first address as the President of the European Parliamentary Assembly by pledging to work to unify our continent , to unify Europe , which he believed must see itself as a community of values uniting the free nations of our continent : ' Ainsi seulement l 'Europe réussira à mettre en valeur le patrimoine total qui est commun à tous les pays libres . '
I would like to build on this .
The European Union is a community of values .
Our institutions are not an end in themselves , but are there to serve our values : the dignity of the individual , human rights , democracy , law , and economic and social prosperity .
They serve the principles of solidarity and subsidiarity .
Europe means respect for each other , respect for our diversity , respect for the dignity of all our Member States , large and small .
This respect cannot be imposed , but is an essential prerequisite for our mutual understanding and common action .
Respect for European law , which enables us to resolve our conflicts amicably and achieve a balance of interests in a peaceful way , must be continually renewed through the unwritten rules that govern our relations in Europe : consideration and respect for one another .
( Applause )
I would like to encourage and urge everyone - no matter where we stand on the political spectrum - to continue to show this respect for each other .
If this mutual respect - marked by tolerance for one another 's convictions but remaining true to our own , while being prepared to strike compromises - is successful , the European Union and the European Parliament can stand as a model for peace in the world .
Our European legacy is preserved in the peace and unity of our nations , which have joined together to form the European Union .
We honour Robert Schuman and all the Members of the first European Parliamentary Assembly by endeavouring to be true to their legacy , by working for a responsible and open European Parliament that is close to citizens , but which has the resolve , when necessary , to provide political leadership .
If we continue to work resolutely here , we have no reason to fear the judgment of those who come after us and who , in 2058 , will take stock of our work today as they celebrate the European Parliament 's 100th anniversary .
Colleagues , ladies and gentlemen , let us rejoice together in the freedom , peace and unity of our European continent , which we are privileged to serve .
( Loud and sustained applause )
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) ' My address cannot be devoid of emotion . '
This is how the first President of the European Parliamentary Assembly , Robert Schuman , addressed this respected House for the first time on 19 March 1958 .
Fifty years later , on your festive anniversary , we feel exactly the same .
Here I am addressing not only 142 national , but also 785 directly elected Members of the European Parliament .
Looking back at the road we have left behind and at the blossoming of European democracy over the last 50 years should make us proud and very grateful to the fathers of the European concept .
At the same time we are charged with the responsibility to continue the European story of peace , cooperation and prosperity to the best of our ability .
Let us recall the year 1958 : society faced with the consequences of two destructive wars , the world of bipolar posturing by western and eastern powers , the cold war , the Cuban revolution , the first chip , nuclear experiments and the launch of the first space satellite .
One hundred and sixty-eight million Europeans were united as the six members of the European Union , which healed war wounds , prospered economically and , together with the Euroatlantic Alliance , secured peace and democracy in the area .
Sadly , the greater part of the remainder of Europe lived in a totalitarian environment of civil and economic stagnation or even regression .
In 2008 we are faced with a completely different picture : the multipolar world is concerned not only with economic and political competition , but also increasingly with cooperation in search of solutions to the present challenges .
The elimination of borders that divided Europe from the Berlin Wall , the elimination of the Iron Curtain and the monitoring of internal borders will continue at the end of this month with the elimination of aerial borders within the enlarged Schengen area .
The territory of the European Union is more than three times larger than 50 years ago and it has three times more inhabitants , 23 official languages , a stronger internal market and a common currency .
On average , the life expectancy of its citizens is eight years longer .
Twenty-seven leaders of governments and nations - one third of us were living in totalitarian regimes 20 years ago - will be making decisions around the same table tomorrow .
Today almost the whole of Europe lives in freedom and democracy .
We should be aware of this achievement and celebrate it .
The life and work of the European Parliament since 1958 clearly reflects the progress achieved through integration over the last 50 years .
After the initial advisory role , in the early seventies you gained the first real competences in respect of the European budget , and at the end of the seventies you had the first direct elections .
With new agreements you obtained stronger competences in adopting legislation and appointing the top European political representatives .
The new European Commission is also unable to exist without your confidence .
In the same way that the Treaty of Rome brought new responsibilities to Parliament in 1958 , the Treaty of Lisbon , 50 years later , represents a big step forward for the European Parliament .
The codecision procedure will spread to almost all European policies , and the role of Parliament in democratic supervision , the creation of international agreements and the appointment of the top European representatives will be strengthened .
I was very pleased when at the plenary session last month you adopted the report on the Lisbon Reform Treaty with a large majority .
I would also like to congratulate all the Member States which have already successfully concluded ratification procedures , and I hope that they will soon be followed by all the remaining Member States .
Where the first 50 years of the European Union were devoted to the European agenda , our political and economic development and reforms , the next 50 years will certainly be focused on the global agenda as well .
This is clearly indicated in the list of topics for tomorrow 's session of the European Council .
It is absolutely clear that we can find appropriate solutions to the Lisbon challenges , the ecology and energy issues and the turmoil in the financial markets only if we take global trends and players into account and include them in our activities .
This applies to human rights and intercultural dialogue too , where you , the European Parliament , certainly have a leading role .
I would like to take this opportunity , on behalf of the European Council , to express recognition of your role in pointing out human rights violations and monitoring elections and of the work of your delegations in international institutions such as the United Nations Human Rights Council .
Your role within the framework of joint Parliamentary assemblies is also important and gives added value to European Union policies regarding third countries and regions .
Through your activities and meetings with high-ranking guests during the Year of Intercultural Dialogue , you are strengthening one of the basic European traditions , that is to say the fact that mutual respect and understanding are the basis of coexistence in Europe as well as in the world as a whole .
The range of activities of the European Union is constantly broadening , but they are all governed by a single rule : success is proportional to the degree of unity among the Member States , sectors , common interest groups and generations and within regional , national , European and global factors .
Here the institutions of the European Union must serve as an example .
' Every person is a new world .
Only institutions that preserve the collective experience can mature . '
With this thought Jean Monnet takes us one step closer to explaining why the vision of the European Union is still often different from reality and why many Europeans , despite the very evident successes of the last 50 years , still doubt the benefits of European integration .
To understand and value freedom , peace and diversity , the absence of borders and the benefits and future prospects of a united Europe , we must always be aware that there are other , much worse alternatives .
That is why our common task is to keep the European collective experience alive .
From it we can draw strength to meet the current challenges .
Thoughts of the past must be united with those for the future .
Had we not joined forces 50 years ago , we would probably not be living in peace and prosperity today .
The same can be said about the next 50 years .
If we do not search together for low-carbon and energy-saving solutions , we will not succeed in slowing down climate change .
We will face ever more floods , hurricanes , drought , new diseases , endangered ecosystems and climate refugees .
It is essential that the results of European decisions and activities be sufficiently concrete and tangible for citizens to understand the crucial importance of the European Union in the preservation and improvement of their quality of life .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank you for your contribution to the development of the European Union over the last 50 years .
I know what it has all meant for our generations .
Actually , I was born in the same year as the European Parliament .
Until the end of this mandate and beyond , I wish you much success in your work , plenty of new ideas and steady persistence in the development of European values , democracy and way of life .
I am convinced that when celebrating the next round anniversary of this European house of democracy , we will again be able to celebrate visible progress in Europe .
( applause )
Many thanks to the President of the European Council .
I would now like to ask the President of the European Commission , José Manuel Durão Barroso , to take the floor .
President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President of the European Parliament , Mr President-in-Office , Presidents of the various European institutions , former Presidents of the House , ladies and gentlemen , representatives of the national parliaments , visiting guests , I am very pleased to be celebrating the European Parliament 's first half century with you today .
This anniversary has a considerable symbolic and political meaning for our Europe .
Fifty years ago Robert Schuman presided over a new single Assembly .
The three European Communities had just created the first version of a European democracy .
Since then , this fundamental political choice has been relentlessly reaffirmed at each stage of European integration .
Before anyone else , the founding fathers had the intuition that the emerging Europe required robust democratic European institutions to embody the increasingly stronger ties between the Six .
In accordance with Jean Monnet 's inspired vision , these institutions also had to be able to evolve to accompany what they sensed as the dual events of the future : deeper integration and geographic enlargement .
I must tell you it is still extremely moving to see you all here in this house of European democracy , representatives directly elected by nations who until very recently had been divided by dictatorships that prevented Europe from drawing breath in freedom .
( Applause )
The institutional triangle the founding fathers bequeathed us is a model unique to the world that has certainly proved its vitality and solidness after 50 years .
It has adapted to a substantial extension of the scope of the tasks entrusted to the Community , and now to the EU .
It has also coped with a significant dynamic enlargement of our Union .
We owe this success to the ingenuity and equilibrium of our institutional model , which does not follow a classic distribution of powers .
We also owe this success to our operating method , which respects both the Community method and the principle of subsidiarity .
The institutions , however , are not an end in themselves .
They remain at the service of an ideal and objectives .
They are at the service of our citizens .
The stronger the institutions , the better they can serve this ideal and our citizens .
Above all , the founding fathers wished to build Europe for the sake of peace .
They wanted to build that new Europe through solidarity .
They chose the economy as the driving force behind their political vision and their objectives .
Fifty years on , Europe at peace , enlarged to continental dimensions , needs strong institutions to cope with the challenge of its time : globalisation .
No Member State can take up this challenge alone .
Through its experience in opening up markets along with rules that embody its values of freedom , solidarity and sustainable development , only Europe simultaneously has the dimensions , the institutions and the instruments required to handle and shape globalisation .
To take up this challenge , the Europe of the 21st century must unite to reap success in the knowledge-based economy , provide jobs for European women and men , and make its economy more dynamic .
It must take up its rightful place on the world stage : a European power , bereft of arrogance , a Europe that will be in a position to propose - not impose , but propose - the values of freedom and solidarity to the world .
We will succeed if we maintain a constructive partnership between our institutions .
Within this partnership I wish to congratulate Parliament on its contribution to the European project in all aspects of the daily lives of all our citizens .
In its 50 years this House has gained many competences and a considerable amount of power .
I mean power that translates as legitimacy arising directly from the votes of European women and men .
I also mean power in the formal sense : codecision , budgetary power and democratic control over the European institutions .
What I really mean is political influence .
The EP has imposed itself simultaneously as a colegislator sharing responsibility within the institutional triangle and in European public life , but also by forging ever closer links with the national parliaments , a large number of which are represented here today .
The power acquired by the EP down through the years has served only to strengthen Europe as a whole .
A strong European Parliament is an essential partner for the other institutions , and - I must emphasise this - for the European Commission .
I think I may say that the relationship between our two institutions is increasingly close , solid and mature , and that pleases me very much indeed .
When the Lisbon Treaty is ratified , it will strengthen the Community institutions even further .
It will broaden the powers of the European Parliament .
It will bolster the dual democratic legitimacy of the Commission through stronger links to the European Parliament and European Council .
It will give the European Council a stable presidency , which will ensure that the preparation and monitoring of European Council meetings are more consistent .
It will develop the role of the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy , who will also be Vice-President of the European Commission .
By reinforcing the legitimacy and efficiency of our institutions , the Lisbon Treaty represents a major step forward for the European Union .
Today , and tomorrow , we must understand that there can be no zero sum game between the institutions .
None of our institutions should be strengthened to the detriment of the others .
On the contrary , we all want stronger European institutions if Europe is to be more efficient and more democratic .
All our institutions will gain from the consolidation of Europe 's institutional architecture .
Ladies and gentlemen , in relation to the date we are commemorating today a quote occurred to me from a great Portuguese author , Agustina Bessa Luis .
She said : ' At 15 , one has a future , at 25 , a problem , at 40 , an experience , but before the half-century , one really has no history at all ' .
Today the European Parliament , this house of European democracy , can proudly claim it has a fine history in its past , I am sure , but also in its future .
It is for that reason that I would like to offer you , on behalf of the European Commission and on my own behalf , my most sincere congratulations and my very best wishes for your work towards a united Europe .
( Applause )
Many thanks to the President of the European Commission .
I would now like to welcome Hans Joachim Opitz , who is also here with us today and is representing all the former Secretaries-General .
We now have the pleasure of listening once again to the European Union Youth Orchestra .
( Short performance by the European Union Youth Orchestra )
( Loud applause )
( The House rose and listened to the European anthem )
( The sitting was suspended at 4.15 p.m. and resumed at 4.20 p.m. )

Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
The Minutes of the sitting of Tuesday 11 March have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
( The Minutes were approved )
Announcement by the President
Ladies and gentlemen , I should like to make an important announcement regarding this afternoon 's vote .
For technical reasons , the results of roll-call votes displayed and announced by the president of the sitting do not correspond exactly to the actual number recorded by the voting system .
In no case has the result of a vote been affected , as the majorities have not changed .
That being the case , today 's midday votes cannot be called into question and are deemed approved .
The results that will be published as an annex to the minutes of today 's sitting will be the actual results .
It is understood that the technical services are making every effort to determine the reason for this malfunction and that all functions will be restored for tomorrow 's votes .
The European Union 's role in Iraq ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Gomes , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on a proposal for a European Parliament recommendation to the Council on the European Union 's role in Iraq .
rapporteur . - ( PT ) Madam President , as this House is about to vote on a report on the European Union 's role in Iraq , it is important to look at some of the lessons learnt from the history of that country .
On 16 March it will be 20 years since the chemical attack on the Kurdish city of Halabja , one of the most deadly operations in the Anfal genocidal campaign conducted by the forces of Saddam Hussein against his own people .
Halabja was not a one-off ; there were many Halabjas throughout Iraq .
For decades , given the passivity and occasional connivance of European governments , Saddam Hussein 's regime subjected the Iraqi people to a strategy of systematic brutalisation with devastating consequences which are still being felt today .
That is why , as rapporteur , I wanted the fundamental axiom of this report to be the moral and legal responsibility of Europe towards the Iraqi people .
No people have suffered more in recent decades and few countries are strategically more important to Europe 's security .
Besides being a matter of duty , Europe must realise that it has an interest in consolidating a federal and democratic Iraq where the rule of law prevails and where human rights are respected , including the rights of women .
In 2003 my party , the Portuguese Socialist Party , and myself personally were opposed to the decision to invade Iraq supported by the then Prime Minister of my country , Mr Durão Barroso .
I still maintain this position .
However , this report must not be used to reiterate our well-known positions on an issue that has divided Europe in the past .
This House is being called on to give its opinion on the present and future contribution of the European Union to a secure , prosperous and democratic Iraq that is at peace with its neighbours .
It was with this in mind that I made two trips to Iraq in January and February , in preparation for this report .
One trip was to Baghdad , Nassiria and the Marshlands region , and the other was to Kurdistan in the north of the country .
With a budget of 48 billion dollars for 2008 , what Iraq is not lacking is money .
It does not need any more budget support or soft loans .
What Iraq needs and what Iraqis are asking for is technical assistance and institutional empowerment so that the State and civil society can function properly and so that the country 's vast resources can be put to good use for the population , including the millions of internally displaced persons and refugees in neighbouring countries .
This report does not just encourage greater involvement of the EU in Iraq .
We also demand that the EU 's presence in Iraq be governed by transparency , visibility and efficiency .
Parliament is delighted to observe the Commission 's growing concern about perfecting the use of European funds in Iraq in an extremely difficult context .
In this respect , we feel that the Commission and the Member States can and must have a greater presence on the ground , with personnel and projects , particularly in those areas of the country where the security situation permits this , as is the case with the Kurdish region .
On the other hand , we demand regulation of contracts for private military and security companies .
I would stress that in this report the European Parliament is calling for the first time for the establishment of clear guidelines on the use of these companies by EU institutions .
The main message of this report , which must be conveyed to the Commission , the Council , European companies , non-governmental organisations and public opinion , is as follows : Europe today has a unique opportunity to contribute positively to the future of Iraq and , as a result , the region .
The interaction with the Commission during the preparation of this report and the consensus reached on this report in the Committee on Foreign Affairs have convinced me that Europe is prepared to take on this challenge .
I must end by personally thanking all my fellow Members who proposed amendments and suggestions and in particular the shadow rapporteurs , Mrs Hybášková , Baroness Nicholson of Winterbourne , Mr Brie and Mr Özdemir for their contributions , which have greatly enriched this report .

President-in-Office . - ( SL ) Firstly I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Gomes , for her report on the role of the European Union in Iraq .
We will pay great attention to today 's debate and carefully study proposals by the rapporteur and the entire assembly .
Allow me to take this opportunity to particularly welcome the recent decision by the European Parliament to establish an ad hoc delegation for Iraq .
It will certainly contribute to the strengthening of relations between the European Union and Iraq in all areas .
In close cooperation with the Iraqi government and other players , especially the United Nations , the European Union is strengthening relations with Iraq and supports the central role of the United Nations in Iraq , and it will continue its close cooperation with UNAMI , the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq .
It will also guarantee support for this mission in realising the role assigned to it by United Nations Security Council Resolution 1770 .
The European Commission Humanitarian Aid Office , ECHO , is cooperating in the work to improve the humanitarian situation in the whole region and not only in Iraq .
Negotiations on the trade and cooperation agreement with Iraq are also an important factor in strengthening relations between Iraq and the European Union .
We were pleased to learn that the negotiations were proceeding very well .
The EU is firm in its support for the process , in which the neighbouring countries are also cooperating .
We will continue to stress the importance of dialogue between Iraq and its neighbours .
Here I must emphasise that the territorial integrity of Iraq must be preserved .
As we know , the Presidency has expressed great concern about the recent operations by the Turkish military on Iraqi territory .
We would like to underline the great importance of uninterrupted dialogue and cooperation between Iraq and Turkey and we are strongly encouraging both governments and the Kurdish regional government to find a peaceful solution to the situation and to avoid conflict .
The success of efforts for national reconciliation are of crucial importance for long-lasting and permanent progress in improving the security situation .
The European Union is prepared to support Iraq in its commitments to continue this process .
I would like to end by stating that the European Union has already allocated large resources for aid to Iraq .
It is still contributing to renewal of the Iraqi security sector , especially through its Integrated Rule of Law Mission for Iraq , which has been extended to summer next year .
As we know , the Iraqi authorities greatly value this mission .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , first of all , please allow me to take a little more time , because this is a very important issue for me .
First , let me commend Ms Gomes and all the other Members of Parliament involved in the preparation of this important report .
Ms Gomes has visited Iraq twice since December in order to get the clearest possible picture of what is and what is not happening in the country .
I have sent my two directors in charge of the area to Iraq , one of whom , Mr Tomás Duplá del Moral , is here with me today .
I will tell you more about that later .
Ms Gomes 's analysis is clear , comprehensive and above all it starts from the right place .
We have no choice but to deal with the challenges Iraq faces now and in the future .
Five years after the fall of Saddam Hussein we may be entering a new phase of a gradual process .
However , the process is still fragile , limited and unstable .
The security situation seems to be slightly better , partly as a consequence of the US surge , but also because of two other important factors : the activities of the Sunni Awakening Councils , armed and paid by the US , and most importantly Moqtada al-Sadr 's ceasefire , which has now been extended for another six months .
The number of deaths among Iraqi civilians still remains very high and there is great uncertainty about the sustainability of these efforts and of improvements .
Turkish incursions in the north contribute to complicating the situation , no matter how calm and measured the central and the Kurdish regional governments ' reactions may have been - at least for now .
On the political front , the Legislative Council approved an important package of laws : the 2008 budget , the provincial powers law and a limited amnesty related to the debaathification process , thereby giving satisfaction to Sunnis , Shias and Kurds .
However , with the Presidential Council 's rejection of the provincial powers law , there is still uncertainty as to whether this limited progress can be consolidated .
The economic front shows a total reliance on the oil sector , difficulty in attracting foreign and even domestic investment , and lack of job creation opportunities .
Collection of taxes and tariffs is very incipient and the amounts remain marginal .
The capacity to spend the investments planned in the budget , while growing , is still limited .
However , economic activity , including investments , seems at this stage to have more potential in the safest Kurdish area .
National reconciliation remains central in the political agenda and there are many initiatives and foreign-driven events .
However , while domestic efforts to build up genuine Iraqi ownership and perspectives on the future of the country continue , a shared and clear vision is still lacking , and efforts are guided by sectarian , religious or ethnic interests , considerations or grievances .
This is also what my director reported to me .
Let me take this opportunity to remind you of what we are already doing in and with Iraq and what we can set out to do under still difficult circumstances in the future .
Our intervention extends over a wide range of activities covering the political , economic , assistance and humanitarian aspects .
First , the trade and cooperation agreement : it is a political endeavour , setting the basis for contractual relations between the European Union and Iraq for the first time .
Our hope is that this will help Iraq to address its own reform agenda and facilitate its reintegration in the international community after years of isolation .
We have just wrapped up the fourth round of talks .
Rapid progress continues on areas from human rights to combating terrorism , from energy cooperation to the environment .
Secondly , the neighbours ' meetings , which the President-in-Office of the Council mentioned , could contribute very substantially to reducing interference , improving security and allowing political dialogue and reconciliation among the various factions .
I have personally invested a good deal of effort to help this happen , having participated in two conferences , in Sharm el Sheikh and in Istanbul .
I will continue to do so in the future if I can , to keep pressing home the need for Iraq 's neighbours to take up their responsibilities .
Visits to Baghdad by the Secretary-General of the Arab League , Amr Moussa , and most recently even the Iranian President are to be taken as good signs in this direction .
As Ms Gomes points out in her report , the task of helping Iraq stand on its own feet cannot fall on the shoulders of the donor community or the Iraqis alone .
On the subject of assistance , I need not remind this House that the EUR 829 million of Community funds devoted to Iraq since funding started under my predecessor in 2003 were committed with the full support of the Council and the European Parliament .
We have never been naive about the difficulty of delivering an effective programme in Iraq .
We did as this Parliament and all our Member States recommended , by working with the UN and its agencies , with the World Bank and the multi-donor Trust Fund .
Working with them was the only viable option available .
The United Nations had an extremely hard time after the assassination of Sergio Vieira de Mello and a good part of its staff when its office in Baghdad was blown up .
The new Special Representative , Staffan de Mistura , has taken on his job with remarkable commitment and is highly appreciated .
You recently met the Deputy UN Special Representative , David Shearer , and I think you had a good exchange of views on their mission and the risks still existing .
I could mention many projects , but I shall do that when I answer your questions later on .
At the moment I shall just say that I think it is important substantive work , all the more important given the very limited capacity - and I agree with Ms Gomes on this - of the Iraqi Government to deliver results .
From basic needs in health and education , through assistance with democratisation , elections and human rights promotion , to humanitarian and refugee support , we have persisted with an extremely comprehensive programme , using the best available means in the most challenging circumstances .
We have tried to ensure that specific attention is paid to the needs of vulnerable groups , not least displaced Iraqis , whether inside Iraq or in the neighbouring states .
Last year a substantial package of EUR 50 million was provided for refugee support .
The Commission also intends to allocate EUR 20 million from its humanitarian budget line for 2008 in support of IDPs / refugees and the most vulnerable groups in Iraq .
We have also started some bilateral projects , but there is no ideal solution .
In fact , every option has inherent and formidable drawbacks .
As I have already mentioned - and I am coming to a conclusion - last week on my instructions , my two directors responsible for Iraq from the External Relations DG and EuropeAid visited Baghdad with their teams .
They held fruitful but very frank discussions with the Iraqi authorities and other players .
The mission confirmed Iraq 's precarious security , the political and economic situation that I described earlier , the extreme weakness of the Iraqi institutions after Saddam Hussein 's years and the ensuing war , and the key role of our small delegation in Baghdad .
The Iraqi Government expressed its eagerness to work with the European Union .
On this basis , we shall try to fund , alongside other bilateral and international donors , and we will help to strengthen the institutions and the capacity of the administration of a state which remains weak .
We shall explore ways of taking more direct action as Parliament has asked - bearing in mind the security environment - and we would like to ensure the maximum efficiency , visibility and accountability of our assistance .
( Applause )
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on International Trade . - ( ES ) Madam President , this report must be welcomed .
The INTA Committee examined it and discussed it at great length , from the point of view of its competence of course , which is what I am going to talk about very briefly .
I would like to highlight a number of points contained in the INTA Committee 's text , which was only partially taken over by the rapporteur , although a significant part of the spirit of what the Committee on International Trade was saying has been incorporated . Firstly , Iraq has to be reintegrated into what we could call the international economic system and in that respect we must welcome its observer status in the World Trade Organisation ; that is clearly a positive step in the right direction .

Secondly , the Trade and Cooperation Agreement must be used as a very useful instrument to encourage internal reforms that bring Iraq closer to multilateral system disciplines .
Thirdly , I would like to highlight the need to ensure real transparency and non-discrimination in relation to public procurement in Iraq .
That is a point that the committee stressed and it will be presented as an amendment in plenary during tomorrow 's vote .
I feel that it is important to emphasise it : transparency and balance in all public procurement .
Finally , we call for the reinvestment of the revenue from the sale of petroleum in such a way as to ensure that it is managed by the Iraqi Government itself through competent bodies .
There could be a great deal more , but I believe that the report as a whole merits the congratulations of this House .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( CS ) Madam President , Commissioner , I would like to express my profound thanks to Baroness Nicholson , Mrs Ana Gomes and the Commission .
What once looked impossible is now a reality .
This Parliament , the European Parliament , united in its recommendation to both the Council and the Commission on the European Union 's role in Iraq .
Let us bury the past .
The situation is no longer deteriorating and stability is taking hold .
Young people are turning their backs on sectarianism and violence , the militia are losing support and the Mahdi Army is cooperating .
It is therefore vital for Europe to be present in Iraq .
The main task for Europe is to strengthen law and order , and to provide technical assistance to the police , the Ministry of the Interior , the courts and the prison systems .
It is also important to help Iraqis to benefit their huge oil reserves , through budgetary means .
The third requirement is to strengthen democracy by providing technical support for elections .
We also encourage European firms and companies to renew their commitment to Iraq .
For that , however , we need a common European position .
We are dealing with refugees , asylum seekers and displaced persons .
We need to have partners .
We need Iraqi partners who respect transparency , fight corruption and nepotism , and respect the rule of law , human rights and democracy .
We are prepared to offer assistance to the Iraqi Council of Representatives on a partnership basis , to teach their staff , to travel there and work through the ad hoc permanent delegation .
There is one important issue , and I am saying this as a person who first visited Basra on 7 April 2003 : the European presence there must not add to the problem .
All Europeans must work together in order to alleviate the human tragedy suffered by generations of Iraqis .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , Ana Gomes 's report is excellent , and constitutes a considerable feat .
On a topic as sensitive as Iraq which has divided us for so long , the report gives us a new and constructive perspective with none of the usual politico-speak , and this comes as no surprise from Ana Gomes .
It was also adopted by a considerable majority in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , and I wish to mention two points among the many that were made .
Firstly , Ana Gomes is calling for all instruments at the disposal of the Commission to be used creatively with a view to reconstituting appropriate capacities in Iraq in the fields of the rule of law , justice , human rights , good governance , women , health and education .
Ana Gomes says and writes this with a certain amount of force . Iraq does not lack money : it is potentially a rich country but has been completely torn apart in administrative and human terms .
She is therefore calling for bilateral projects in support of capacity-building and civil society , and points to the courage of the Commission , which has even opened a delegation in Baghdad to monitor these projects at closer range and provide greater visibility for the EU effort .
Secondly , beyond Iraq itself Ana Gomes is concerned with the plight of the Iraqi refugees .
A recent report by the High Commissioner for Refugees claims that there are over two million refugees in neighbouring countries , but it is in Syria , with 1 400 000 refugees , and Jordan with almost half a million , that the situation has reached boiling point .
Child labour and prostitution have also been reported despite these countries ' best efforts .
Ana Gomes is calling on Europe to show greater generosity in taking in refugees , and on the Commission to provide more support for its aid programmes .
In short , this report must be given very serious consideration in the short term , and perhaps also in the medium term , when it comes to any future policies on Iraq , especially budgetary policies .
I wish to remind the House once more that the rapporteur visited the country twice just before she submitted her analysis of the situation .
In due awareness of the difficulties on the ground , one cannot but admire her courage .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , I too offer my warmest congratulations to our rapporteur .
Ms Gomes has produced a truly exceptional report , whose findings are derived directly from her first-hand experience on the ground .
I congratulate the Commissioner for her own constant and assiduous attention to the most important elements of the Iraqi problem and the Head of Delegation , Mr Uusitalo , whose work I have seen on the ground on a number of occasions .
First-class work by the Commission - I warmly congratulate you and Mr Uusitalo .
The Council of Ministers has also given a lot of attention to the question of Iraq .
Now today we in the Parliament are giving it our attention too , so at last the key institutions of the European Union have come together .
Of course , together we can achieve much more .
Iraq today has a true parliament and a wholly secular constitution .
Iraq is one of the very few nations in this region to have a democracy - a secular democracy - despite its flaws .
We therefore must do all we can to help the Iraqis strengthen the democratic process .
I believe strengthening ties between our respective parliaments is one of the key ways in which we can assist .
I am most honoured to be the new chairman of the delegation that the Conference of Presidents has recently created .
In October last year - and again in January with Ms Gomes - I had the opportunity to address the Iraqi Parliament in plenary session .
It was a great honour and we learnt immediately how much assistance they need .
To help Iraq reverse the dismal administrative situation she has inherited , we need also to make close partnerships with the public service ministries and to use all of our experience in the enlargement process to help capacity-building and institution-building .
For , like us , the people of Iraq demand democracy and have a right to good governance .
They also demand and need the provision of basic human rights , of essential public services and the full complement of those privileges that we have in our democracies in Western Europe .
I would suggest that the price of a stable Iraq exerting a benign influence regionally and nationally is worth every effort to attain .
Once Turkey joins the European Union , as I hope she will , Iraq becomes our neighbour and we therefore see her as part of the wider neighbourhood .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , I too would like to congratulate the rapporteur on the report before us .
Ladies and gentlemen , in a few days ' time , on 20 March , five years will have elapsed since the forces of the international coalition started the second war in the Persian Gulf .
Unfortunately , not all the Member States of the European Union took the political decision to support the United States at the time . The lack of unity evident in 2003 continues to impact negatively on the role the European Union could potentially play in the reconstruction of Iraq .
After all , we do have a range of financial and political resources available . If properly used , the latter could assist in supporting a secure and democratic Iraq , thus contributing to an immediate improvement in the stability of the entire region .
Clearly , and in this I agree with the rapporteur , Iraq needs more than financial assistance . It also requires support to help rebuild its national institutions and civil society .
It should be borne in mind that during decades of dictatorial rule , Iraq 's public administration was directed towards control of the population rather than towards public services .
As we draft a new European Union strategy for its future commitment in Iraq , we must not overlook the need for dialogue with the United States , notably in the area of foreign and security policy .
I am convinced that good cooperation with the United States is a key factor for the building of a safe and stable Iraq .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Madam President , I would also like to thank Ms Gomes for her excellent report .
I should like to start by underlining that any reflection on the EU 's involvement in Iraq must learn from the mistakes of the past , considering that the invasion has been such an enormous political and humanitarian catastrophe .
Our starting point should be recognition that Iraq 's problems can only be resolved by giving real and comprehensive sovereignty , including over oil and other resources , back to the Iraqis and I would therefore call for the withdrawal of all foreign occupation troops .
I followed the opinion on the report in the Committee on International Trade and from that perspective I observed that the military occupation of Iraq was followed by an economic one , whereby the US privatised public property , liberalised trade and established rules regarding foreign direct investments in clear conflict with international law .
That is why we need to be a bit cautious in the areas of trade and investment .
The report before us welcomes Iraq 's observer status at the WTO as a key step towards driving Iraq 's integration in the international economy and it looks forward to the EU-Iraq trade and cooperation agreement .
I just want to make sure that Iraq has sufficiently built up its own capacities for negotiation and evaluation .
Otherwise we risk that country becoming once again prey to outside interests .
Similarly , the report calls for help and encouragement for European firms to bid for contracts to rebuild Iraq .
Again , let us be sure that we do all we can to build up the capacity of Iraqi companies , as well as the negotiating capacities of the Government , so that we can move forward in a more positive way for everyone .

on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we are positively disposed towards the Gomes report , which contains some distinctive points such as defence of territorial integrity and the need for a reconciliation process within Iraq . At the same time , however , we believe that the European Union must call upon Turkey to put an immediate end to its invasion of northern Iraq .
We also endorse the call for the revenue from petroleum sales to be invested for the good of Iraq , but we cannot ignore the laws laid down by the United States , which have handed over Iraq 's energy resources to large US multinationals , allowing them to export all the proceeds and make huge profits .
One such company is that of Vice-President Cheney , Halliburton .
We can certainly endorse the call for transparency concerning the rules and legal status for contractor organisations , but we cannot ignore the fact that there are private armies employing tens of thousands of people in Iraq operating completely outside of any rules .
The report calls for the EU Code of Conduct on Arms Exports to be made legally binding , but we cannot forget that this war has cost $ 6 000 billion , which could otherwise have been invested in attaining the Millennium Goals .
This war and occupation have caused hundreds of thousands of deaths ; this war and occupation were , and still are , illegal , entered into in complete violation of international law , unilaterally and against the wishes of the majority of Member States , the United Nations and international public opinion .
We should call for the immediate withdrawal of the occupying troops .
They must be replaced by a UN mission geared solely to guaranteeing security ; all belligerent activity must cease .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Ms Gomes has gone to great efforts in writing about the European Union 's role in Iraq .
The complicated situation in Iraq calls for a clear and committed policy . The proposed EU policy on Iraq , however , raises some serious questions .
These questions dovetail in particular with my working visit to Kurdistan .
The rapporteur cited Kurdistan as a region where stability and security are barely guaranteed and where the international collaboration for development must be further expanded .
Of course , EU presence in the region is very important , and I also want to underline that .
There is harsh internal and external criticism of the Kurdish Government concerning respect for human rights , however , and the position of the Assyrian Christian minority in Kurdistan in particular is worrying .
' Is there any possibility of a future for these groups in Iraq ? '
That is a serious question .
In short , Members of the Council and the Commission , how can you make an effective contribution towards lasting peace and stability in the Kurdistan region and towards the establishment of a democratic legal ruling structure ?
In conclusion , Madam President , I would like to make one last point . The millions of displaced Iraqis deserve our full attention and support .
The rapporteur recommends to the Council that the EU Member States should welcome Iraqi refugees .
Members of the Council and the Commission , how feasible is this excellent suggestion ? Thank you .
( BG ) Mr. Chairman .
Dear colleagues , I support the report of Ms Gomes because it gives crystal clear picture of all the problems accompanying the establishment of the new democratic government in Iraq , as well as the ways to overcome them .
First of all , I urge the occupation forces to immediately withdraw from Iraq because the war and the occupation of that sovereign state were unlawful and the decision on them was taken in full violation of international law , i.e. unilaterally and contrary to the views of the majority of the Member States of the United Nations and the international community .
I hope that the emerged situation would not endanger the peaceful population of 3,500 members of the People 's Mujahedin Organization of Iran ( PMOI ) in Ashraf who find themselves under incessant pressure .
I am confident that democracy cannot be built in non-democratic and violent methods in any country of the world .
I am going to vote for the report of Аnа Мaria Gomes because the problems of Iraq can be resolved only through relinquishing real and comprehensive sovereignty back into Iraqi hands .
Madam President , Commissioner , President-in-Office of the Council and Ms Gomes , I want to thank you for everything you have said and for all the work you have done until now .
I believe that this report sends a very important message to the rest of the European Union : that this House wants to look forward ; it does not want to look backwards ; it wants to be engaged in the future of a democratic and federal Iraq in support of that future .
I will say three things about the report , and I am particularly proud that this report is coming from the European Parliament on the day we celebrate 50 years of the achievements of the European Parliament .
Today we celebrate what we have achieved in reconciliation in Europe .
And the lessons we have learned over the past 50 years are lessons we need to transfer as experience and knowledge to our friends in Iraq so that they can use them and rebuild their country in a successful way .
The report outlines , of course , the achievements , but it does not shy away from the challenges being faced the Federal Republic of Iraq and the Commissioner very aptly outlined them .
I would like to point out one thing as a footnote to her statement .
That is that the achievement on the security front is the primary responsibility of the Iraqis , supported by the internationals of course , but it is the responsibility of the Iraqis .
No one can ensure the security of Iraq except the Iraqis ; nobody can ensure the resolution of the political problems except the Iraqi politicians and their political process .
We call for a new strategy , a European strategy for Iraq .
I spent a large part of 2006 working in the Council representation in Baghdad helping them .
The message I was receiving from everyone every day was , ' Where is Europe ?
We want to talk to Europe because your experience is vital to us . '
This , today , is a response to that call .
Finally , this House in its report reaffirms the commitment of the European Parliament to support the reconstruction and the building of the Iraqi Parliament , an extremely important role , and thank you Council for recognising the contribution that this Parliament has made by selecting and approving a Delegation for relations with Iraq .
I think today we are faced with a vital challenge : actually to use what we know and what we have in support of political process , not through weapons , but through words , not through arms , but through deeds in Iraq and help the people there .
( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I also wish to congratulate Mrs Gomes on the quality of her work on an extremely sensitive and complex issue .
We are all aware of the extent to which the conflict in Iraq was a source of deep divisions between the Member States .
We are aware that our duty now is to help build a safe , unified , prosperous and democratic Iraq .
Personally I wish to highlight a greater drama , largely concealed by our governments : I am talking about the Iraqi conflict that has dumped almost 4.5 million people on the streets , the greatest population displacement in the Middle East since 1948 .
Concerted action is urgently required at European level .
My main concern is the immediate and long-term fate of the Iraqis forced to flee their own country .
Approximately 2.3 million people have found refuge in neighbouring countries , chiefly Syria and Jordan , but also Egypt , Lebanon , Turkey and the Gulf States .
By taking in almost 2 million refugees , Syria and Jordan have made an extremely laudable effort .
The role of the EU and the international community is , of course , to ensure that all these refugees return home in the long term , but at this point in time return is not an option for many of them .
Some particularly vulnerable refugees need to be transferred to Western countries .
According to the UNHCR , 6.6 % of Iraqis living in Syria , some 100 000 , have to be resettled .
I thus call on my colleagues to support the amendment in favour of resettlement programmes in 2008 for the EU to take in some of the most vulnerable refugees now in the hands of the UNHCR .
By way of conclusion , I urge the House not to turn its back on our values .
We must fully respect the 1951 Geneva Convention and refuse any forced returns to Iraq .
( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Fernand Braudel claimed that history began in Sumer , but today the long history of Christian minorities in Iraq seems to have drawn to a close .
We , the nations of Europe , cannot endorse this enormous injustice by taking no action .
These people welcomed Islam and together they built a country that was prosperous before it was ravaged by fanaticism and wars .
Now these minorities must resign themselves to flight .
Iraq cannot build a future without their presence and skills .
A future is not built by partitioning a country : it is built by rebuilding its economy , with mutual recognition of different communities and cultures and application of the rule of law .
If the EU takes the firm decision to intervene in Iraq , it must constantly remember in its plans the dramatic reality of all these minority communities .
Their future must be the yardstick of EU action , and the reality of mutual respect between communities the criterion for the allocation of its aid .
This action will thus be a credit to our nations .
( RO ) Admitting the progress achieved lately by Iraq internally and at foreign affairs level , the European Union must encourage the Iraqi authorities in continuing their efforts to develop democratic , stable , lawful state institutions , of a federal type .
Taking account of the ethnic and religious realities , I believe that only a federal Iraq can be viable .
I am referring to a federal Iraq and not to a divided one .
The European Union must also encourage the existence of a stable Iraq , with institutions capable of providing national sovereignty , state unity , territorial integrity , sustainable economic development and prosperity for the Iraqi people .
The European Union must actively support the institutional development of Iraq , strongly rooted in its realities , with due respect of the historical , religious , cultural and identity traditions of the Iraqi people and of all the ethnic and religious communities within its territory .
In this context , it is advisable to establish certain consultative bodies , made up of the leaders of all the ethnic and religious communities of Iraq , with a view to conferring more legitimacy on the central authorities .
Iraqi institutional development must be supported by the European Union by means of the Eujust Lex mission , as well as by adequate European financial tools .
I stress the necessity that European funding be addressed directly to the beneficiary Iraqi institutions .
Such funds should be managed by the European Union institutions in a transparent and visible way for European citizens .
I recommend that the European Union institutions use the experience and expertise of those Member States that already have a civil and military presence on Iraqi territory in the process of stabilisation and reconstruction of this country .
At the same time , I believe that European companies should be encouraged and supported in getting involved in the process of the reconstruction of Iraqi and in better developing their business in this area .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , Mrs Gomes , ladies and gentlemen , in the Committee on International Trade we of course focused primarily on aspects relating to trade and economic relations , but in some areas we went beyond that remit .
May I therefore comment on two points .
First of all , we are very pleased that we have this report , which makes it clear that the European Union has a visible role and commitment in Iraq .
We think it is absolutely vital that Iraq be integrated into the trade system and it goes without saying that the WTO is the right arena for that .
We will have to provide far more technical assistance than we have done up to now .
This technical assistance must focus on moving Iraq towards the European economic system and , to some extent , towards European business .
As for funding , we are rather sceptical about the prospect of everything being organised solely via the UN , the World Bank or the Multi-Donor Trust Fund .
We would very much like to see own capacity being built up , at least to a certain extent , and own project administration , which would then enable us to build up a store of data and expertise to assist with that effort .
We would very much like to see this aspiration being reflected in your decisions .
- ( EL ) Madam President , first of all let me congratulate Mrs Gomes , as well as the Commissioner , who we felt showed humane sensitivity regarding today 's events in Iraq .
However , Madam President , for some reason I still have the impression that we slavishly follow others , who destroy so that we can build .
This is not the first time .
Today we are giving EUR 820 million in aid to the Iraqis .
We cannot help the dead , who number many more than those whom Saddam Hussein accounted for .
I wonder whether those responsible for today 's dead will pay some day .
I say this because this also happened to us in Yugoslavia .
Madam President , if we quite rightly do not like dictators and their methods , then let us find a way to free ourselves from dictators .
We have no grounds for destroying countries just because we do not like dictators .
Because of this , what happened in Yugoslavia is happening today in Iraq , and we do not know when the tragedy of the latter will end .
( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Archbishop of Mosul , Monsignor Rahho , was kidnapped almost two weeks ago .
The three people with him were brutally murdered .
This is a serious incident .
The Fourth Geneva Convention explicitly protects civilian , health , religious and humanitarian personnel .
There are many non-violent peace activists in Iraq , the Palestinian Territories and Israel .
They are Christian , Muslim , Jewish or lay activists .
Following the kidnapping of the head of the religious minority , the House has two options for immediate action .
At tomorrow 's vote on the report by our colleague Ana Gomes we can adopt an oral amendment condemning the kidnapping of Monsignor Rahho to influence the war .
On Thursday we also have the chance to add a very short text to the agenda for urgent topics in order to adopt a position in our capacity as a European institution .
( PT ) Please allow me to say , Commissioner , that , following our debate on this issue , the United Nations clearly deserves the utmost respect .
Sérgio Vieira de Melo and everyone else who has died and who is risking their lives have our utmost respect .
This does not mean that we should not know what is happening and who is receiving the funds to be used in Iraq .
Please also allow me to say that the EUR 20 million which the Commissioner has spoken about today - and please forgive me as I did read about this two or three months ago - seem to me to be woefully inadequate to deal with the dramatic problems facing refugees and displaced persons .
Commissioner , these problems are of colossal dimensions and the oil in Iraq will be of little help as there are people who have no access to this oil .
I would be grateful , Commissioner , if more effort could be put into this issue because , as Mrs Patrie said , this problem urgently needs to be considered .
Madam President , Europe was against the war in Iraq .
However , irrespective of who was right and who was wrong , post-Saddam Iraq is a reality nobody can ignore .
Taking into account the impact of the Iraqi situation on the entire Middle East and beyond , the EU cannot continue to stay for the most part relatively on the margins .
Through its huge resources and expertise , the EU must engage in a significant way in supporting the consolidation of the new Iraqi state .
The Commissioner described the symptoms .
Now we need to see how we could cure them , and not only in concert with other international organisations - the EU can do better than that - but mainly on our own .
The strategic aim is to help the new , democratically elected authorities in that country to give credibility , and therefore authority , to the institutions of the new state .
A new , democratic , self-sustaining , oil-rich Iraq in the middle of the Middle East is in the interest of all .
( RO ) At present , the European Commission is negotiating a commercial and cooperation agreement with the Iraqi authorities , on which occasion the issues related to the enforcement of human rights are also being addressed .
I ask the European Commission to firmly request the Iraqi authorities to find solutions to the reintegration of external and internal refugees .
I also appeal to the Member States of the Union to assess the demands for asylum of Iraqi refugees as a priority .
The various feedbacks from the states on this matter prove once again the necessity of harmonising procedures on the status of refugees at European level .
It is essential that the commercial and cooperation agreement refer to the issue of inter-parliamentary cooperation as well .
I believe that the Delegation for relations with Iraq from the European Parliament can support the strengthening of the institutional capacity of the Iraqi legislative body .
The European Union must assist Iraq in becoming a viable partner in a sensitive region .
Congratulations and thanks to Mrs Ana Maria Gomes on the report .
( PL ) Madam President , if we want to be able to count on Iraqi partners who will help to create democracy as the basis of peaceful coexistence , investment will be needed .
I recall that when I was a student , we simply used to host young people from Iraq in our secondary schools .
Perhaps it would be possible for the European Union to make similar opportunities available to young Iraqis at the present time .
I have in mind inviting young people under the age of 24 , and enabling them to live amongst us and learn from the experience .
They would of course make a critical assessment of what they saw , retain what was positive and replicate it back home , whilst perhaps improving on what they deemed to be negative .
I hereby commend this school-based proposal to the House .
Visits of this type need not take place exclusively at university level . Clearly , policies depend on people , and there could be room for such a venture within your area of competence , Madam .
Madam President , this is a message from the European Parliament to the Council on the need to have a European strategy for Iraq .
It is time to stop arguing about recent differences and to concentrate on the EU 's proactive engagement there .
I would like to thank the Commissioner for a thorough account of the situation in Iraq , and there is cautious optimism in the air .
I think there is an understanding that things could become better .
This is what Ms Gomes so eloquently described as a golden opportunity for a positive contribution the EU could make .
For me , two points are essential .
For Parliament it is important to channel EU support for building democratic governance , and this was met with great interest on the part of Iraqi politicians .
Second , the EU is in an exceptional position to support the reconciliation process , and without this there could be only disintegration and further domestic warfare , so we need to make use of this opportunity .
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) I would like to thank everyone for expressing their positions and opinions on this subject , which will certainly be useful to us in our further activities .
I would like to add one comment and one answer .
Mrs Záborská 's question related to the kidnapping of the Chaldean Catholic Bishop .
I would like to draw your attention to the statement issued by the Presidency on 1 March , in which it strongly condemned the kidnapping and called for the unconditional and immediate release of the Chaldean Archbishop .
Now to the other issue .
Mr Mladenov and others have pointed out that the responsibility for security , that is to say for establishing a secure situation in Iraq , rests primarily with the Iraqi authorities .
It is also true that we have to help them in this matter , and I would like to mention the EUJUST LEX mission again .
It has been active in Iraq since 2005 and most Member States of the European Union are taking part .
Approximately 1 500 Iraqi high officials have been trained within this mission .
They have been employed in the police , the judiciary and prisons .
As I said , this mission will continue until the summer of 2009 and we think that it is an important advance in establishing a safer situation in Iraq .
I would like to thank Mrs Gomes once again for her report , which will serve as a very important basis for our further activities .
I should mention that these include a plan for the President of the General Affairs and External Relations Council , Minister Rupel , to take part in the April meeting of Iraq 's neighbouring countries , which is to take place in Kuwait .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , it was a good debate and it showed that we want to use the golden opportunity to finally reconstruct Iraq and make it a stable country in the Middle East , because I fully agree that this will be a very important goal for all of us .
I would first like to clearly state that you may rest assured that we will pursue our course of action .
Thank you for the positive words concerning our Head of Delegation who works there with a few staff members in very difficult circumstances - housed by the British Embassy , by the way .
He and his people are doing a very good job .
We have been working with the UN Trust Fund because , at the time , nothing else was possible .
After the visit by my directors and their assessment , we will cautiously see what we can do regarding capacity-building and institution-building .
We fully understand that this is very dear to many of you , but please also understand that security costs will be very high .
Whatever we do there directly will be very costly , otherwise it would not be possible .
Outside the Green Zone , circumstances are very difficult , except perhaps in the few areas where there are fewer security problems , one of these being the north .
I do not rule out gradually working more directly , for instance in the north , but I must stress that we always have to be sure that we do not discriminate between different groups .
This is something I would also like to say to Mr Belder .
This is how we have been working with our projects .
We have always tried to have projects that include all groups , including the Christian groups that are finding it very difficult in Iraq at this time with this Government .
Having said this , I would just like to bring to the attention of many of you who do not always see what we are doing that , for instance , we prepared successfully for the general elections held in 2005 .
We have rehabilitated hundreds of primary and secondary schools , which is not only for the benefit of the schools but also for the pupils .
Erasmus programmes are also open for some Iraqis , so we are pursuing that .
We are also producing and distributing millions of schoolbooks for six million primary and secondary students .
This is very basic but necessary .
At the same time we have rehabilitated almost 200 primary healthcare centres and 10 hospitals .
We have given support to the completion of eight immunisation rounds , each involving 4.7 million children aged under five .
We have completely rehabilitated the national drug quality control laboratory .
I could go on and on .
I think the Commission has done a great deal , on behalf of the Union , in difficult circumstances .
Now , we are aware that the key question will be how much we can do regarding capacity-building .
You can rest assured that we will devote a good part of our resources to this , always depending , as I have said , on the security situation .
According to our last assessment this is unfortunately not yet sustainable .
I would like to say a few words about refugees .
I have mentioned that we , the Commission , have naturally been working to assist refugees .
The entire package for last year was EUR 50 million from various Commission instruments .
These funds are aimed not only at supporting the IDPs in Iraq but also to help the Governments of Syria and Jordan in their countries .
We are of course in close contact with these countries .
We have given EUR 80 million to Syria and EUR 32 million to Jordan because in this small country the large influx of refugees has created a big problem .
Finally , I would just like to say that I am as convinced as the Council that the dialogue that the Parliament will now have with the Ad Hoc Delegation for Iraq represents an excellent improvement and progress .
We can only work together on that .
Let me assure you that we have been trying from the beginning to have a transparent flow of our money channelled through the United Nations .
In the future this will be channelled more and more directly .
rapporteur . - ( PT ) I should like to thank everyone for their kind words .
I must particularly thank my friend , Minister Lenarčič , who I worked with on the Security Council some years ago , dealing precisely with Iraq and the problems caused for Iraq by Saddam Hussein .
As I have said , this report aims to highlight the diversity of the situations existing in Iraq , contrary to the simplistic message of an Iraq of ' fire and sword ' that television programmes show us every day .
It must be viewed as a plan of action or a roadmap for the EU 's involvement in Iraq .
I believe that I am speaking on behalf of Parliament when I say that we want the Commission , the Council and the Member States to use our operational proposals as a basis when designing future programmes and projects to support the government and people of Iraq , naturally taking into account the security conditions .
I returned from Iraq impressed with the Iraqi enthusiasm for ' more Europe ' .
From President Talabani to the primary school teacher in one of the most isolated rural areas in the country , everyone had a thirst for political recognition and institutional support from the European Union .
We were bombarded with proposals for projects in the most diverse areas : training of officials at the Interior Ministry , support for local NGOs active in the areas of mine clearance , adult literacy , and sexual and reproductive health education , technical and institutional support for the Iraqi Parliament , and these are only some of the examples .
I feel that we must measure the success of this report , not so much in terms of the number of votes in tomorrow 's vote , but primarily by the difference that it will make to our actions on the ground in Iraq from now on .
Our parliamentary delegation to Iraq will of course play its part in this process and I am sure that we can count on the Commission , on Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner , whom I congratulate , and on her courageous team in Baghdad , competently led by Ambassador Uusitalo , as fundamental allies in the implementation of this roadmap .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday .
Written Statements ( Rule 142 )
This report fails to mention the responsibility for and complicity in the dissemination of false information which served to justify the military intervention in Iraq , such as the existence and location of ' weapons of mass destruction ' and links between the former regime and international terrorism .
It also passes over the responsibility for introducing into the country the Iranian Revolutionary Guard Corps and its Iraqi offshoots , resulting in the spread of terrorist groups and death and genocide squads whose main targets were and continue to be ethnic and religious minorities and the country 's elite .
The report does not make relations with the European Union or even the EU 's financial support of the Iraqi authorities dependent on their commitment to fight terrorism and genocide or on the pursuit and prosecution of those responsible inside and outside the security forces .
As a result it minimises the dramatic problems being experienced by millions of Iraqi refugees and displaced persons and the attacks on the most basic rights , freedoms and guarantees of Iraqis , particularly women .
The mention made of the crimes of Saddam Hussein 's regime would be acceptable if sincere and if this were not done while ignoring the current crimes and their perpetrators which have resulted in hundreds of thousands of deaths and millions of displaced persons .
in writing . - ( FI ) Madam President , I wish to thank Mrs Gomes for her valuable report .
Her practical approach has resulted in an unusually clear message to the Council and the Commission as well as to the Iraqi people .
The core of the problem is patently obvious .
Iraq does not lack money .
It lacks stability , political will , stable institutions and the administrative ability to spend money wisely .
It is in these areas that the Union has something to offer .
Firstly , Iraq is not a traditional place for development work : it is an exceptional area of activity .
For this reason , no lasting results will be achieved using separate instruments .
By bringing the instruments of development work and security under one umbrella the EU could step up dialogue with Iraqi society .
Let transparency be the byword : the Commission must allow democratic supervision of the financial instruments .
Secondly , the Union should commit itself specifically to supporting the parliamentary dimension .
We have to support the implantation of good governance and working practices in the Council of Representatives , provide training and resources for parliamentary work and , if necessary , provide expert assistance in the development of legislation - the federal state structure is a legislative challenge .
Thirdly , we need to insist that human rights lie at the heart of Iraq 's development struggle .
The status of the ethnic and religious minorities depends on the Union 's input .
The Christian Assyrians , Chaldeans , Syriacs and other minority peoples , such as the Turkmen , face continual discrimination and threats to their lives .
We have to make a more determined effort to stop this .
I hope that everyone here understands that this report is no longer about past mistakes .
Those mistakes are acknowledged , and complaining about them is not going to help the Iraqis .
We have to try hard to realise not just that the past places an obligation on us but that there will not be a future for Iraq otherwise .
in writing . - ( DE ) The report by Mrs Gomes on the European Union 's role in Iraq unfortunately sidesteps the two main issues of relevance to the situation in Iraq .
There are currently occupying troops from the US , the United Kingdom , other Member States and many other countries stationed in Iraq .
These troops have been there since the illegal invasion of Iraq in 2003 .
As we now know , the reasons cited in justification of this military action were entirely spurious ( such as the lies uttered by Colin Powell before the UN Security Council about Iraq 's alleged weapons of mass destruction ) .
All the proposed amendments , including those tabled by my Group , the GUE / NGL , that make clear reference to the many casualties of this war and the ongoing occupation and criticise the completely inappropriate military action against Iraq have been rejected .
As a result , this key aspect of the situation goes largely unmentioned in Mrs Gomes 's report .
I have therefore voted against the report because as it stands , it denies the real situation in Iraq .
That being the case , it would be disastrous to demand a more comprehensive role for the European Union , as this would make it part of the military and occupying regime .
Nonetheless , a number of the statements made in the report merit our support , but anyone who fails to speak out against war and occupation makes themselves an accessory .
in writing . - Several Member States of the EU have sent their troops to Iraq to participate in the multinational force , United Nations assistance mission and NATO-sponsored training of the Iraqi police force , Estonia being one of those countries .
The humanitarian situation cannot be improved in Iraq unless peace and stability in the country is established .
Unfortunately , both Republican and Democrat presidential candidates in the USA argue for withdrawing from Iraq , which will irresponsibly leave the country in a devastating situation .
I am confident that , if the European Union increased its involvement in Iraq by contributing funds , human resources and know-how in state-building , the deterioration of the country could be avoided .
The European Union should play a vital role in Iraq as a mediator between different political and religious factions to establish a well-functioning society .
in writing . - ( PL ) It is my impression that Mrs Gomes has tabled not one report but two .
One of these is a factual account , laying down the principles of our involvement in Iraq .
It is in stark contrast to the emotive and propaganda-like style of the justification .
One success was certainly achieved in 2003 , namely the removal of an authoritarian regime that was destabilising the entire region .
If the events of 2003 had not taken place we would not now be in a position to draft 25 pages of recommendations for a democratic Iraq regarding structural reforms , electoral law and the rights of minorities .
Fortunately , the vote will refer to the proposal for a recommendation .
That is why I will happily support this document .
It is right and proper for us to assume our responsibility for the success of a stable and democratic Iraq .
I am also pleased that countries that were divided by the intervention back in 2003 will today have the opportunity to take advantage together of the opportunities opened up by that war .
European code of conduct on arms exports ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the European Code of Conduct for Arms Exports .
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) Firstly , on behalf of the Council I would like to express satisfaction with the traditionally good relations and cooperation between the Council 's Conventional Arms Exports Working Group , COARM , and the European Parliament , more precisely with its Subcommittee on Security and Defence , SEDE .
I am convinced that this well-organised and excellent cooperation will continue into the future , which is why I welcome today 's debate .
Allow me to say a few words about the EU Code of Conduct on Arms Exports .
As we know , the code was adopted in 1998 .
It gave the European Union new impetus in monitoring the arms trade .
In accordance with this code , the Union started making annual reports that are actually reports on completed arms transfers .
This year we will make a tenth annual report .
I should also mention that these reports have become increasingly clear and informative .
Because of this code , in the last few years most Member States have started to publish their national annual reports on the export of arms and military equipment .
In 2003 the European Union defined its own list of arms and military equipment to be covered by the code and started more serious coordination of the policy for export to individual third countries .
The Member States also exchange information concerning rejected and completed arms exports .
This dynamism has been transferred to international organisations , especially those in which Member States of the European Union play an important part .
This applies especially to the Wassenaar Arrangement .
The code was improved in 2006 and 2007 , specifically with additions to the users ' manual .
As we know , the code is not a legally binding document . However , the Member States have a political commitment to abide by its provisions .
There have been attempts in the past to build on the code by adding a common position that would be a legally binding document by which the Member States would have to abide when exporting arms .
However , there is still no agreement on adopting such a common position .
The Slovenian Presidency is working for its adoption during the Slovenian period of office , that is to say in the first half of this year , or at least working to achieve substantial progress in this direction .
Maybe there is no better opportunity for this progress than that offered by the preparation of the European Union 's tenth report on the implementation of the code .
However , at the moment we cannot confidently predict whether our wish will be fulfilled .
Of course , this is not stopping us from trying .
We will therefore call on all Member States to give us their opinions on this issue and we will try to encourage them to work together on reaching a common position .
If there are no impediments , the Slovenian Presidency will take great pleasure in completing the adoption procedure and will submit a report to all interested institutions , primarily to Parliament .
Allow me to say a few brief words on two other priority topics : the common position on the brokering of arms and military equipment trading , and the efforts made by the Member States to adopt internationally binding agreements on arms trading .
The European Union adopted guidelines for the brokering of arms trading in 2001 , and the common position was adopted in 2003 .
By adopting this position , the Member States took upon themselves an obligation to adopt its elements into their national legislation and thereby regulate the brokering of arms and military equipment trading .
At the moment 20 Member States have adopted the elements of this common position into their national legislation , and seven have yet to complete the process .
The Presidency will follow progress in this matter , and the States which have not completed the process will be encouraged to do so as soon as possible .
Now to the last item : the international arms trade agreement .
This is one of the key projects in disarmament .
As you know , the European Council has recently adopted a decision to support the international agreement .
The framework for the composition of the group of government experts working in this field was confirmed at last year 's General Assembly .
Information about the initial work of this group is encouraging ; nevertheless , a lot of effort and work will have to be invested in this process .
Within our activities , we will closely follow the work of this group and support the process leading to the international agreement .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I took a little more time on Iraq but I shall be a bit briefer now , so I will try to make good on my time .
Even if the responsibility for controlling and monitoring the sale of arms rests primarily with Member States and thus with the Council , the Commission also has a clear interest through its contribution to the implementation of the EU small arms and light weapons strategy under the common foreign and security policy .
We greatly value the effective control and monitoring of EU arms exports .
We remain concerned that European controls should encourage other regions to adopt and apply - at the very least - minimum standards , in order to ensure that legitimate exports are not subsequently diverted , thereby exacerbating armed conflicts and human rights violations .
In this connection , the Commission continues to engage actively with Member States , third countries , international organisations and others in order to deal with the financing of illicit arms trafficking , often linked with illicit trade in other commodities ( particularly drugs ) , for example diamonds .
We in the Commission took advantage of our chairmanship of the Kimberley Process last year to push for the development of controls to prevent and deter the use of diamonds to fund arms purchases by rebel groups .
Further , in close collaboration with the relevant customs authorities , we intend to take forward measures under the new Instrument for Stability to combat illegal trafficking in arms by air , targeting particularly aircraft travelling to and within Africa .
We also play a role in the implementation of arms embargoes by prohibiting related technical assistance .
Within the European Union , control of firearms trafficking is crucial in the fight against insecurity and criminality , especially against organised crime .
The policy being developed to combat firearms trafficking involves the reinforcement of controls on the legal sale and holding of firearms within the Union .
This goes on to encompass the proper monitoring of the movement of firearms within the Union and the development of cooperation between national administrations in charge .
Besides these efforts , we can see that a significant quantity of firearms is also in the possession of criminals and available on the black market .
The unauthorised transfer of firearms across borders , and the transfer of unmarked firearms , are therefore important sources of these illegal weapons .
Steps are currently being taken at European level to enhance rules on record keeping and marking , to develop an export / import system for firearms for civilian use , and to improve cooperation between national law enforcement administrations .
Improving the traceability of firearms is a key objective , and externally - very briefly - we are also taking concrete steps outside the Union to handle the problems arising from explosive remnants of war and small arms in crisis regions , again under the Stability Instruments .
For instance , in Bosnia we are currently considering supporting a project to deal with unexploded ordnance and other explosive remnants .
Certainly we will continue to support Member States ' efforts to establish a treaty covering the arms trade , as our Council President has said , although we might not be under the illusion that this will not take a certain time .
But hopefully it will happen very soon .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , for nearly 10 years the European Council has dragged its feet on transforming the EU code of conduct on arms transfer into a legally binding document .
For the last two years there have been no technical barriers to adopting a common position on the code .
Why do we finally have to get our house in order ?
Firstly , there are currently estimated to be some 400 companies in our Member States producing arms .
Given that research and development costs in this industry are extremely high , companies naturally wish to maximise their profits by ensuring the longest possible production runs , selling licensing agreements and , in short , seeking markets wherever they can .
Companies from the 20 nations whose governments imposed strict guidelines on arms exports are clearly at an economic disadvantage vis-à-vis competitors whose governments show more leniency .
All companies should have a level playing field .
Secondly , we have documented instances of companies from EU states supplying arms to China , Colombia , Ethiopia and Eritrea .
How can we on the one hand applaud all efforts to promote economic development , democracy and human rights while we make the very implementation of this impossible by contributing to violent conflicts ?
Thirdly , we deploy military personnel from our Member States on EU and NATO peacekeeping missions but , by failing to apply this code of conduct , we risk that they may come under fire from weapons produced within our very states as a result of irresponsible transfer .
Fourthly , how can we envisage a future Europe with a common foreign and security policy when we lack such a fundamental element in the form of a common position ?
Finally , before we stand up in this Chamber championing human rights and democracy , let us ensure that we also take action that gives substance to our rhetoric .
The PPE-DE Group congratulates the authors of this motion for a resolution .
We trust that the overwhelming support from Parliament will help the Council in finding a way out of the current political impasse and finally make adherence to the code of conduct a legal requirement for all Member States .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PT ) The motion for a resolution on the EU Code of Conduct on Arms Exports expresses Parliament 's frustration at the current deadlock on this important instrument , as our rapporteur , Mrs Gacek , has just said and whom I must congratulate .
Ten years after its establishment , the Code is still a source of pride to those who believe that the European Union must take the lead in the global debate on controlling arms transfers .
We welcome the increasingly harmonised application of the Code , the detail in the annual reports presented by Member States and the outreach initiatives undertaken by the Council .
However , all these advances pale into insignificance beside the most important issue : the need to transform the Code into a legally binding instrument .
We know that transforming the Code of Conduct into a common position of the common foreign and security policy ( CFSP ) has been linked with lifting the embargo on arms exports to China .
Parliament rejects the blackmail that is at the root of this three-year deadlock .
No one can be unaware that the arms sold by Beijing to the Sudanese regime are feeding the conflict in Darfur and are also serving , for example , to oppress and repress the Burmese people at the hands of the illegitimate military regime .
This situation frustrates Parliament because we have long known the practical and theoretical reasons which should be sufficient to rid the Council of its hesitations .
A European foreign policy without common and binding rules on arms exports will always be incomplete and ineffective .
In addition , one of the most significant obstacles to the full harmonisation of the internal market in defence equipment is precisely the large number of export rules in the EU .
Finally , there is a question of principle : the European Union can only present itself as a responsible and coherent international actor in this area and can only lead the work to improve international legislation if it is seen as a model to be followed .
We are clearly counting on the Slovenian Presidency and Minister Lenarčič .
However , we have already indicated to the next country to hold the presidency , France , a country that has particular responsibility for this continuing deadlock , that the time has come to resolve the issues and recognise the importance of placing the European Union at the forefront of effective and responsible multilateralism .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , it is 10 years since the EU agreed a code of conduct for arms exports and it is shameful that this code has not yet been transformed into an effective instrument for controlling arms exports by all EU companies and governments .
As a result , European arms are still being channelled into conflict zones .
The EU finds itself in the incomprehensible position of supplying arms and fuelling conflicts in the very countries in which it is simultaneously pouring development aid .
How do we explain that to our citizens ?
How do we explain , for example , that some Member States are still prepared to trade cluster munitions while , at the same time , the EU is spending millions of euros on mine clearance ?
For example , in 2005 thousands of cluster bombs were used in Lebanon with devastating results , and then in 2006 the EU spent EUR 525 million on development aid to Lebanon , partly for the removal of unexploded ordnance .
Let us not kid ourselves that it is only countries outside the EU that are supplying arms to conflict states : 7 out of 10 of the world 's top arms-exporting countries are EU Member States .
Is it not time that we invested in conflict resolution for troubled states instead of arms sales ?
Mechanisms are urgently needed to control arms transfers and transhipments properly and to prevent the brokering of illegal arms by EU companies located outside the EU .
But the first step must be to turn the 1998 code of conduct into a legally binding instrument .
So I would beg the Slovenian Presidency to do its utmost to unblock the stalemate in the Council and get the common position adopted .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , as rapporteur for the control of arms exports from the European Union , I have had the opportunity to follow very closely the process of transforming the current Code of Conduct into a more efficient and effective instrument that ensures greater and better controls of arms exports from EU territory and by EU companies .
Nonetheless , in spite of the technical work done some time ago by the Council Working Group on Arms ( COARM ) , we still do not understand - and my colleagues have said the same - why the Council is resisting adopting the common position that would enable us to transform the current Code into a legally binding instrument .
In spite of the excessive secrecy surrounding debates of this kind , we know that only a few countries are opposed to such a step , notably France , which , it seems , is making this decision dependent on an end to the embargo on exporting arms to China .
We must stress once again that these are two completely separate issues : linking them in this way shows a huge lack of responsibility in relation to the numerous victims who have to cope every day with the consequences of our irresponsible arms exports policy .
I therefore welcome the commitment of the Slovenian Presidency to conclude this process of transforming the Code into a common position during its mandate , although I recall , too , that previous presidencies made the same promise to no avail .
I hope that you will succeed and you can count on our full support .
I would point out , too , that it is precisely the lack of control and current laxness that allow , both legally and illegally , European weapons to end up in the hands of terrorist groups , dictators and armed factions , who mortgage the present and the future of millions of people , to whom , as needed but not without a certain cynicism , we subsequently send our development aid teams .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , we all sit here at least once a year and discuss the issue of arms exports , while the rest of the time these exports carry on quite happily .
For years Parliament has been calling for a legally binding code of conduct and the Council has been unable to reach any agreement on the matter .
I would appreciate it if you could tell us quite frankly which of the Member States is obstructing this process .
The fact that this Code of Conduct is not legally binding is a disgrace .
While this has dragged on , the EU and its Member States have become the world 's number one arms exporter .
Weapons are designed to kill !
All arms exports are wrong .
Naturally , the Member States supply arms to crisis and conflict regions as well .
The Turkish invasion of northern Iraq , for example , which violated international law , was carried out with weapons from Germany , among others .
EU countries also wage wars , notably in Iraq or Afghanistan , and supply weapons to friendly countries that are engaged in warfare .
We have to put a stop to this once and for all .
Let us stop all arms exports .
Dual-use goods that have civilian and military applications must also come under the Code of Conduct , as must re-exports .
We have tabled amendments on both these topics for tomorrow 's debate , and I am very keen to see whether they will be adopted by Parliament .
As I have said , arms exports kill people every day , and they must be stopped as a matter of urgency .

President-in-Office . - ( SL ) I have understood that the common mood of the participants in this debate is support for the code to become legally binding as soon as possible .
I should add that the Presidency shares this objective and I hope , Mr Pflüger , that this year we will have more luck and succeed in achieving it or at least , as I said in the introduction , make major progress in this direction .
I would like to thank you for your support of the Council 's endeavours to reach a common position , and you can trust that the Slovenian Presidency will strengthen its efforts to this end .
I would like to thank Mrs Gomes , who pointed out that there is an attempt to include new players in the implementation of the code , namely those outside the European Union borders .
The previous Presidencies , for example in 2007 , included countries of the western Balkans , in particular , in these activities .
There are also activities relating to other countries , such as Turkey , Ukraine , north African countries and some other eastern European countries .
I will end by expressing my hope that , in the next debate of this topic in the European Parliament , the discussion will not be just about the code , but also about the common position .
I have received six motions for a resolution pursuant to Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday .
Written Statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - I strongly call on EU Member States to adopt the EU Code of Conduct on Arms Transfers .
The EU is based on common values and agreements , condemning illegal arms transfer and also arms transfer to countries which violate those values .
In fact , it is detrimental to the principles on which the European Community is based that several Member States ' governments give preference to their national political and commercial interests in continuing to sell arms .
The Lisbon Treaty strengthens the role of the EU as global player .
Therefore , it is of utmost importance that we take the EU Code of Conduct on Arms Transfers seriously in order to implement it in real terms and by all Member States .
Therefore , I would like to call upon the Council to give a plausible explanation why the adoption of this Common Position has been delayed .
Situation in Chad ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the situation in Chad .
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) As you already know , the situation in Chad has deteriorated in the last few weeks .
At the beginning of February the Chad rebels advanced on the capital N 'Djamena and took the larger part of it .
A few days later they withdrew , that is to say they were pushed eastwards towards the Chad-Sudan border .
Attacks on the Chad government by the rebel groups at the beginning of February not only started the smouldering internal crisis , but also revealed its regional dimension .
In other words , the rebels , aided by Sudan , arrived from Darfur .
This is why , when debating the situation in Chad , we must take into account two interconnected aspects : the internal political aspect and the regional aspect .
When in February the European Council condemned the attacks by the Chad rebels on the Chad government , on the one hand it appealed for a political dialogue among the government , the opposition and the rebels , and on the other hand it emphasised the urgent need for a political dialogue between the governments of Chad and Sudan .
We think that the governments of Chad and Sudan should be put under increased pressure to fulfil the obligations they undertook in various agreements .
The Council appealed to both governments immediately to stop assisting and supplying armed groups and to improve mutual relations .
As regards the internal political situation in Chad , a political solution to the argument is the only way to achieve peace and stability in that country .
The inclusive political process , which was indicated in the agreement reached in August 2007 between the Chad ruling party and the parties of the legitimate opposition , must continue .
In this context , the European Union supports the efforts of the African Union for a peaceful solution to the conflict .
The European Union joins the African Union and the United Nations in their unequivocal condemnation of the rebel attacks .
We share their concern regarding the risk of further proliferation of the conflict .
We are also concerned because of the deterioration of the humanitarian situation .
Ever-increasing hostilities have deepened the humanitarian tragedy and increased the already large number of refugees and displaced persons .
More than 160 people have died in the fighting and approximately 1 000 have been wounded .
Several tens of thousands of refugees have fled to neighbouring Cameroon and Nigeria .
At the same time , because there are about 250 000 Darfur refugees in Chad , the humanitarian situation is very serious and demands the urgent full deployment of the European mission EUFOR TCHAD / RCA .
At the moment the security situation in the capital N 'Djamena and in the greater part of the country , except in the east , has calmed down and is returning to normal following the latest fighting .
However , the state of emergency which was declared on 15 February and was intended to last a fortnight has been extended to the middle of this month .
This has caused the EU to declare its concern regarding the restriction of civil and media freedom in Chad .
Activities surrounding the deployment of the EUFOR mission resumed after a temporary interruption .
The commander of the operation , General Nash , concluded that he would temporarily halt activities following the rebel attacks , to allow an evaluation of the new political and security situation .
Deployment was continued without affecting the overall time frame of the operation , and the initial operating capability should still be reached by the middle of March .
The alarming situation in the region made the importance of the mandates of the EUFOR and United Nations missions even more obvious .
The EUFOR mission testifies to the commitment of the European Union to aid the stabilisation of the region .
Two things are required to reach the set targets : we urgently need security guaranteed by military and , secondly , the conflicting parties should be prepared to start a dialogue and negotiations .
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on my return from the mission to Chad from 20 to 22 January 2008 , I had already stated that Chad ought to be an EU priority .
The attempted coup at the beginning of February by armed rebel movements and ensuing events have served to reinforce this conviction .
I am still convinced that lasting stability in Chad depends on a political opening to all its internal components .
That is the task the European Commission took on last year by facilitating and backing the political dialogue , which , as you know , produced the inter-Chadian agreement of 13 August 2007 .
I strongly believe that it is only this dialogue that can create the political perspective needed to guarantee stability in Chad and consolidate democracy .
It must result in a reliable census and a review of the electoral system leading to free and transparent legislative elections in 2009 .
I conveyed this message with some force to President Déby ; this process had already begun through the monitoring committee .
Recent events in N 'Djamena caused setbacks to this process .
Even though there was an attempted coup against the government , the extrajudicial arrest of a number of opposition leaders , civilians and people working in the media is completely regrettable and unacceptable .
As a facilitator and observer of implementation of the inter-Chadian political agreement of 13 August , I was the first to voice my concerns on the subject to President Déby during my last visit to Chad on 27 February .
During the mission I urged President Déby and the political representatives of the presidential majority and the democratic opposition , that is , all responsible politicians in Chad , to relaunch the dynamics of political dialogue by restoring confidence among the various parties .
This requires commitment by all the political players concerned , including President Déby of course , who confirmed his desire to continue as the guarantor of implementation of this political agreement .
I was assured that the state of emergency declared in mid-February would come to an end in the terms laid down in the Constitution , i.e. in mid-March .
On the same occasion we requested and obtained from President Déby the release of Mr Lol Mahamat Choua , President of the Coordination of Political Parties for the Defence of the Constitution .
Bernard Kouchner and I requested a meeting with him .
We met him in person and he was thus released the following day .
I am also particularly pleased to learn that Mr Ngarlejy Yorongar is in Strasbourg at the moment and may have met some of you , but I am obviously still concerned about the fate of Ibni Oumar Mahamat Saleh , who is still missing .
This is why we successfully requested that President Déby establish an extended committee of inquiry with a substantial international presence , including representatives of the European Union , the OIF and the African Union .
This committee must shed light on the arrests and disappearances .
This will be an important initial step in restoring confidence and ensuring a return to normality in Chad .
The same message was also sent to members of the opposition .
The solution lies in joint responsibility on the part of the government , the presidential majority and the opposition .
I wish to conclude with a brief explanation of the regional context : the coup bid in Chad was largely the direct consequence of a deterioration in relations between Chad and Sudan .
It is extremely difficult not to see the influence of the Khartoum authorities on the attempted coup .
It is therefore essential to put an end to the cross-contamination of the situations in Darfur and Chad .
I welcome optimistically the regional initiatives for mediation between Chad and Sudan , which regional Heads of State or Government are now implementing , notably President Wade .
The present situation proves , were any proof still required , that European military and civil forces must be urgently and rapidly deployed .
I now wish to mention the MINURCAT Mission in accordance with UN Resolution 1778 of 2007 . The raison d 'être of this military operation has been ascertained as never before .
Hundreds of thousands of civilians are forced to live in extremely vulnerable conditions in eastern Chad , impatiently awaiting EUFOR deployment .
The Commission will continue to mobilise all political instruments for humanitarian assistance and cooperation in response to the situation in Chad .
I am awaiting the results of the mediation led by President Wade in order to determine or at least define when I will return , not only to Chad , but also to Khartoum .
It is vital that we carry out mediation and reconciliation work between N 'Djamena and Khartoum , since the tense interaction of a complete breakdown in relations between Chad and Sudan is obviously palpable .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , I am happy that this debate has remained on the plenary agenda for this week .
This situation in Chad requires urgent attention , not only from the European Union , but also from the international community .
A summit is due to take place later this week between Chad and Sudan in Dakar , where the Senegalese President will try his utmost to reach common ground on a peace deal between President Déby and President al-Bashir .
UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon also plans to attend these talks in Dakar , the humanitarian crisis in this region being one of his main priorities .
Such current events underline the importance of Parliament 's timely debate this afternoon and I call on all leaders in question to make supreme efforts to resume an all-inclusive political reconciliation process .
The European Union must also make extensive diplomatic moves to support these latest developments .
Just before this debate , several of my MEP colleagues and I met with Chadian leader and opposition Member of Parliament , Mr Yorongar , who went missing after the rebel offensive in early February .
He was seized by state security forces on 3 February in Chad , but managed to escape to Cameroon before being offered asylum in France .
His colleague and fellow opposition politician Mahamat Saleh remains missing .
The current crackdown on political opponents , as well as human rights defenders , in Chad must end .
The EU peace-keeping mission has unfortunately suffered its first fatality , after a French peace-keeper mistakenly strayed into Sudanese territory .
His funeral takes place today .
It will be attended by Mr von Wogau from our group as Chair of the Committee on Security and Defence of the European Parliament .
I offer condolences from the PPE-DE Group to this man 's family and friends .
In my view , and due to the current humanitarian and security situation , the deployment of the European peace-keeping mission has become indispensable .
The United Nations and European Union have a responsibility to protect vulnerable civilians and a duty to provide humanitarian assistance , as well as security for humanitarian personnel .
As they continue their respective deployment , I am proud that Irish troops are forming part of this mission .
Finally , I welcome the commitment by Russia to provide helicopters to this mission .
Such equipment will offer essential reinforcement in this important EU undertaking .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Representative of the President-in-Office , Commissioner , for many months now we have been asking about and following extremely closely the EU initiatives to urgently deploy EUFOR in Chad and the Central African Republic , insofar as it is of course essential that this European transition force be operational .
Why is it essential ?
I feel that it is a good idea to repeat this : it is essential so that it is in a position to protect civilian refugees and displaced persons , to allow humanitarian aid to get through , and to guarantee a humanitarian space that has been systematically flouted by the warring parties .
The European Socialists wish to make it clear , however , that the solution to lasting peace in Chad will not be a purely military solution , but also political .
On the political terrain , civil society in Chad has offered up a number of specific options to solve the crisis , based on comprehensive dialogue with all players , including the leaders of armed groups , without whose cooperation nothing can be achieved .
We may now wonder whether the EU has taken account of the proposals , and the speech by the Commissioner encourages us in this .
We occasionally get the impression , however , as does the civil society I mentioned , that the EU continues to place blind trust in President Déby 's supposed ability to solve the crisis .
It becomes clearer every day , however , that President Déby alone will never be in a position to bring the peace we expect to Chad .
We thus welcome the statements that have been made on behalf of the European Commission .
We hope that it will continue to demonstrate its political courage and daring on this issue .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , today , as Mr Burke has just said , Staff Sergeant Polin was given military honours today after he was killed in Sudan during the laudable and extremely difficult EUFOR mission in Chad and the Central African Republic .
Please allow me to join the homage to him by his comrades-in-arms in the presence of the most senior national and European authorities , especially our High Representative , Javier Solana , and our colleague Karl von Wogau .
For years this House has relentlessly asked the EU to take up its responsibility to protect the victims of the bloody confrontations in Darfur and surrounding regions .
It had thus deplored the constant political obstacles preventing deployment of an international force to this end .
It also welcomed the adoption , as you pointed out , Commissioner , of UN Security Council Resolution 1778 for the deployment of a military operation in Chad and the Central African Republic as back-up to the UN mission , MINURCAT and a Chad police force .
There is no point saying anything now about the host of difficulties encountered to implement the international force , which was scheduled for deployment in November 2007 , finally commenced only at the end of January , and will not be completed until May this year as per the current schedule .
Mr President-in-Office , you mentioned the extent to which action by rebel forces in N 'Djamena had delayed the mission , but some mention must also be made of the lack of means at the disposal of the European Union to deal with this kind of mission , particularly concerning logistics and helicopters .
Here I welcome the announcement yesterday that Russia intends to provide the EU with essential means to assist troops on the ground on this kind of terrain .
Perhaps , Mr President-in-Office , you could shed some additional light on this news ?
on behalf of the UEN Group . - Mr President , I should like to thank the President-in-Office , as well as the Commissioner , for their update with regard to the present situation in Chad , and like my colleagues , Mr Burke and Mr Morillon , I want to pay my tribute and extend my sympathy to the family of the French peacekeeper who died in action recently .


One of the horrors that we all have to face in discussing and looking at the situation in Chad , and indeed in that part of Africa in general , is the continuing instability , not just in Chad itself but also in Sudan and the Darfur region and in the Central African Republic , and in other aspects - and , in particular , the outside influences that occur across the different borders that are there .
That is why it makes it so difficult to try to find common ground to get solutions .
It is all very well to say that we are going to include civil society , but civil society is not given the opportunity to rise and show what it truly wants to see happening , because different rebel forces or opposition forces are there .
That is why the issue that we are now focusing on through the Eurofor mechanism is not only the stability and protection of the refugees from Sudan who have come into Chad - over a quarter of million , of whom nearly 10 000 came in the last month - and also refugees coming from the Central African Republic , but to try and ensure that democracy and the democratisation of the issue are brought to the forefront as well .
That is why I congratulate Commissioner Michel on the work he has been undertaking with the - and I use the word guardedly - ' legitimate ' Government in Chad and other areas to encourage them to operate properly .
Unfortunately , I do not have the same confidence in the independence of the inquiry into the missing , which will take place under the Chadian authorities , but , hopefully , with European Union involvement , that might be encouraged .
My last point is that our troops are now being deployed , thanks to the help from Russia and other countries .
Last week I spoke with Lieutenant General Pat Nash , the Operational Commander , who informed me that at the moment there are 700 troops there - 56 of whom are Irish - and the full complement will be there before the rainy season , hopefully by the start of May .
What is incumbent on us now in this Parliament is to give our support to that continuing peacekeeping force by our political actions , by our words but , most importantly of all , by ensuring that they have the proper resources to carry out their task as well .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , the human rights situation and situation of the civilian population is still critical in Chad , and no initiative towards political dialogue has any chance of succeeding if we do not first have a clear response concerning the fate of the members of the opposition arrested on 3 February , and if there is no end to the violence that always occurs , even as we speak , against those whom Idriss Déby brutally sees as adversaries to be eliminated .
That is why , Commissioner , it is vital you keep up the pressure as you have in the past in order to force Idriss Déby to say where Ibni Mahamat Saleh in particular is , and what has become of him , and to release him if he is still alive .
I wish to take this opportunity to welcome and express my solidarity with his son , present today in the galleries , and the parliamentary representative , Mr Yorongar , who has come to talk to us on his country 's situation and future .
Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , the Chadian diaspora , very much present in Strasbourg today , is listening carefully to you and is relying on you to produce inclusive dialogue that does not exclude any political players in Chad .
It is under these conditions that the prospects for peace and a democratic process are possible , in association with all parties , and under these conditions that EUFOR may finally deploy in the best conditions , thus emerging from the ambiguity and uncertainty brought about by recent events .
The EU 's role must be fully clarified I relation to France 's role in this region , which has clearly allowed Idriss Déby to remain in power , even if the discourse employed by the French President has now become more open and calls for changes to previous policies .
Commissioner , Mr President , you must use your considerable potential for pressure to obtain genuine assurances and protection for all democrats in Chad , and thus take a more demanding attitude with President Déby , who at the present time is merely attempting to gain some time and save face .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , the EU has deployed a EUFOR mission in Chad and one EUFOR peacekeeper has already been killed .
That was exactly what we feared would happen .
It is alleged that the French elite troops accidentally crossed the border into Sudan .
Is there any point at all to this EUFOR mission ?
We say no !
These troops cannot possibly be neutral .
The majority of the EUFOR troops come from France , and France has a military agreement with Déby - who seized power in a military coup - and has aided him by supplying him with weapons and securing the airport against the rebel attack .
This rebel attack was launched shortly before the start of the EUFOR deployment .
In other words , the mission escalated the conflict and has thus been counterproductive .
Idriss Déby exploited the situation after the rebel attack to quell the democratic opposition .
The EU has become embroiled in this mess .
We urge you to pull out the EUFOR troops !
France - and therefore , indirectly , the EU - is working hand in glove with Chad 's military ruler , Déby .
The democratic opposition in Chad is calling for more civil society pressure on the government , and that should really be our position here , not the further militarisation of the conflict .
( NL ) I would like to thank the Commission and the Council for these statements .
I think that they are very useful .
Central Africa is dominated by the greatest human rights disaster in the world , and it is continuing to grow .
As has already been said , thousands of refugees have fled from Darfur to Chad , but with continuing violence in Chad people are now also escaping to Cameroon , Nigeria and the Central African Republic .
Sudanese military and peace-keeping agents largely support the well-armed Chadian rebels in the border area between Darfur and Chad , and in addition to the Sudanese Government they also get support from the Arab militias in Darfur .
This triggers the massive flow of refugees .
Mr President , we cannot remain aloof .
We must do all we can to break the impasse in Sudan and Chad and to stabilise this area of conflict , both through political dialogue and by providing support and protection for citizens and aid organisations .
It is good that the European Union has decided on a common peace mission to Chad with the aim of protecting its citizens and guaranteeing humanitarian aid .
Mr President , General Henri Bentegeat , Chairman of the EU Military Committee , has reported that equipment is a problem .
Can the Council indicate with which countries they are still negotiating regarding possible contributions ?
Millions of people have lived for years in this dangerous situation without there being any substantial change .
We cannot not succeed .
My question to the Commission and the Council is whether there is anything more to say about making this a state-of-the-art , operational mission .
( NL ) The rapid availability of neutral EUFOR troops and equipment in Chad is necessary for the security of refugees and inhabitants and for the stability of the region .
If the EU wishes to contribute effectively to this , then the Member States , including the Netherlands , must fulfil their promises so that EUFOR can be fully deployed as quickly as possible .
The Member States must not , by their slow reaction , cause the supply of troops and equipment and the commitment of EUFOR to be unnecessarily delayed .
Helicopters are also necessary from Russia , so that at least they cannot continue wreaking havoc in Chechnya .
However , it is not only the humanitarian situation that at risk , but the stability of the whole region .
The border conflict between Chad and Sudan is making the situation worse .
The peace negotiations between the Presidents of Chad and Sudan , through Senegal 's President , Abdoelaye Wade , are perhaps a step in the right direction . The EU must support this , in the same way that the EU remains in Kenya in the background , but strongly supported by Kofi Annan .
Louis Michel has rightly noted that political dialogue between all players cannot fail to take place .
The EU must fight much more strongly , however , for the release of the opposition leaders and human rights activists who have disappeared .
Otherwise ; dialogue is impossible .
Just as in Kenya in January , ' business as usual does not apply here .
Freedom and dialogue must become the conditions for the continuation of aid to Chad .
( SV ) Mr President , the conflict in Chad cannot be seen in isolation from that in Darfur , in Sudan .
It is fairly clear that the Government of Chad is supporting rebels in Darfur .
The Chadian opposition reports that Darfur rebels are fighting side by side with the Chadian Government army against Chadian rebels .
My country , Sweden , is contributing a few hundred soldiers to the EUFOR mission .
The purpose of the mission is to guarantee the security of the civilian population , but unfortunately there is evidence that the force is being used as a pawn in the internal game in Chad .
The President of Chad , Idriss Déby , has made a statement calling on EUFOR to take eastern Chad as soon as possible .
Déby clearly wants to use EUFOR to secure the survival of his own regime .
Let me put a question to the Commission and the Council : how can you guarantee that EUFOR will act entirely independently of such pressures ?
What do you think about the cooperation of the Déby Government with the rebels in Darfur ?
Am I wrong ?
In that case , convince me !
As regards the prisoners from the civilian opposition in Chad , it is good that there have been some releases , but much more needs to be done .
What is the EU doing to ensure that all political prisoners are released immediately ?
Mr President , I have expressed my serious reservations about the Chad operation from the start .
The EU should not be meddling in military matters .
In any case , the situation in Darfur and the neighbouring areas of Chad and the Central African Republic require a well thought-out , coherent policy , politically driven , that would include the imposition of a no-fly zone - a task that only an organisation such as NATO is competent to undertake .
What we now see is a half-baked , politically contrived operation , pursuing largely French objectives , with the EU playing catch-up .
It is appalling that such a precarious operation was set in motion without a proper assessment of the threat and without provision of key equipment capabilities prior to deployment .
I am thinking in particular of the lack of helicopters .
No European ally was willing to offer them .
Now , as an afterthought , we are told that the Russians will provide the helicopters - not only that , but Russia wishes to participate in the mission .
What does this say about EU motives ?
So desperate to create any patchwork , hazardous alliance as long as it does not involve the Americans .
This exposes the reality of such activities .
I can think of no greater condemnation of European security and defence policy .
( PL ) Mr President , an important element of our mission to Chad should be wide-ranging political action aimed at effective mediation between both feuding sides .
Unless an understanding is reached between the governments in Khartoum and N 'djamena the mission may prove futile and any results quickly reversed .
It is therefore important for us to participate in wide-ranging mediation involving international institutions so as to encourage the leaders of both countries to resolve contentious issues .
The European Union 's mission is tasked with improving security for the humanitarian missions in Eastern Chad .
Experts in international politics have pointed out that this could lead to an increased flow of refugees from the area of Darfur , seeking a safe haven where they will be safe from armed rebel groups .
If this comes about , we may well find ourselves in a difficult situation if we recall the statements made by the Prime Minister of Chad , who recently called upon the international community to remove the refugees .
The Prime Minister also threatened that if no action was taken , the Chadian authorities would remove the refugees from Chad themselves .
I am sure that such statements will remind all of us of the conflicts in the Balkans , where the various sides dealt with national minorities and refugees in a similar manner .
Mr President , the very name Darfur has become synonymous with human misery and suffering .
The fall-out from the war in Sudan has spilled over the border into Chad , with nearly 300 000 refugees from Sudan putting an enormous strain on Chad 's economy and political stability .
Without a political solution to problems in this region , there will be no prospect of peace .
At this time , however , we must also deal with the immediate situation , and with this aim in mind the EU is sending 3 700 military personnel to protect the refugees .
Poland is sending a 400-strong contingent , including engineers and medics .
Our military personnel face dangerous and harsh conditions and will witness harrowing scenes .
They deserve our gratitude and respect for the task they are undertaking .
They did not deserve the criticism from the extreme Left and Euro-sceptics in this Chamber .
( FI ) Mr President , everyone we hear speak today says that there is a pressing need for humanitarian aid .
Many aid workers , however , have had to withdraw from the region because it is not safe .
The UN 's refugee agency has reported that the situation with regard to security and assistance in refugee camps is particularly poor and that sexual violence is widespread .
The Chadian government 's declaration of a state of emergency on 15 February has accelerated that country 's decline into chaos .
The declaration is an especially worrying way of addressing the crisis and confusion .
In practice it gives the government the right to silence and to detain both the actual and suspected representatives of the opposition .
The state of emergency also gives the government the right to place restrictions on citizens ' freedom of movement and assembly and the right to control private and state media .
The EU should appeal to the Chadian Government to lift the state of emergency and should encourage Chad to participate in closer cooperation in order to guarantee access on the part of organisations delivering humanitarian aid to the crisis areas and to make it possible for them to work there .
This should happen as soon as possible .
( SK ) In Chad at present more than 250 000 Sudanese refugees live in 12 refugee camps in the eastern part of the country .
At the same time ( although this is mentioned less often ) , Chad is right now also a place of refuge for 57 000 refugees from the Central African Republic , who live in four camps in the south of the country .
Let us not forget that women account for more than 56 % of refugees .
More than 60 % of refugees are under 18 years of age and that is why I want more attention to be paid to education and health care , in addition to the basic conditions of human survival .
Apart from that , there is a large group in Chad , totalling 180 000 people , who have become internally displaced due to the internal security conditions .
Most of them are in the eastern part of the country and lack the basic conditions for survival including food , everyday objects , clothing , drinking water , supply of medicines and vaccines .
I call on the Commission to find effective mechanisms so that our mission to Chad has far greater authority and much better technical equipment , including medical equipment .
Mr President , my colleague has given the figures and I will not repeat them , except to say that , of the 57 000 figure he spoke of , 12 000 of those have gone to the Central African Republic since the beginning of 2008 .
We now have in Chad a large contingent of Irish troops .
I wish them well .
They are part of a large EU contingent - 14 EU states in total , while there are 21 Member States participating in the operational headquarters .
The situation is this : we have a very serious humanitarian problem on our hands .
I do not agree with those who say that this can only be sorted out by NATO .
This can be sorted out by Eurofor if they are organised - and they are now organising to do it .
I welcome the fact that they are at last getting the tools with which to do the job , but let us give them the time to bed in and to actually go about making the place safe for humanitarian aid and support them while they are there , rather than sniping at them with the sort of nasty , political comments we heard from the extreme Left here today .
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) I would like to answer some more important questions from this debate , firstly regarding some technical resources and equipment , that is to say helicopters .
This is not a problem specific to the European Union .
The same issues are facing others , too : NATO , the United Nations and so on , but of course that is not an excuse .
I would like to reassure Mr Morillon and Mr Van Orden that European bodies are active on this issue .
At the moment the European Defence Agency is working on this problem , that is to say on a long-term solution to the helicopter issue .
As has already been mentioned , negotiations with the Russian Federation are taking place to secure helicopters .
At the moment I have no information about the phase reached so far or whether the negotiations have finished .
However , I know they are taking place .
As regards the deployment of this mission , and in response to the question from several Members of Parliament , among them Mrs Martens , I would like to reiterate that there was a 12-day interruption in the deployment of the mission , which has now ended .
The deployment is continuing and , as I said in my introduction , we do not expect the overall time frame of the operation to be affected .
Despite this 12-day delay , the overall framework will not be affected .
As planned , the initial operating capability will be reached in a few days , in the middle of this month .
As regards the first victim of this operation , a member of the French contingent , I have to say that an inquiry is still taking place .
The funeral was attended today by the High Representative , Mr Solana , and the Commander of the operation , General Nash , who expressed sympathy on behalf of the European Union .
I would like to end with the following thoughts .
The European Union is aware of the seriousness of the crisis in Chad and its regional dimension , which I have mentioned before .
This is why it will continue to encourage dialogue between the government and the opposition in Chad itself , as well as between the governments of Chad and Sudan .
We see EUFOR as a significant contribution to these efforts and we are aware of the importance of good equipment .
I would like to comment on the statement by Mr Holm and stress that the EUFOR mission in Chad is part of MINURCAT , the United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad .
That is why impartiality and independence are among the fundamental principles of this operation , that is to say of the United Nations ' Mission and the EUFOR operation .
These fundamental principles of neutrality and impartiality are those of the EUFOR operation in Chad and the Central African Republic .
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I also wish to begin by paying homage to the French soldier who died on active service during a dangerous peace-keeping mission .
We wish to express our condolences to the family of this soldier , the victim of a difficult mission .
I was not aware that Mr Yorongar and Mr Saleh 's son were in the galleries .
I also wish , therefore , to welcome them and tell them - though this has not been officially requested of me - that I am naturally willing to meet them if they wish to apprise me of any information I may lack .
I am very happy to meet with them .
Several of you spoke along the lines of my initial comments , in other words , to the effect that we are increasingly calling for inclusive dialogue to bring together all the parties involved : the government , of course , the government majority , the representatives of the opposition , including - and I have made this quite clear to President Déby - the representative of the armed rebels , but also - and here I would perhaps like to have everyone 's support - the representatives of civil society , since they are very much absent from the process , and I do not detect any great desire in any of the other camps to include them .
At my meeting with the representatives of the Monitoring Committee led by Mr Lol , I was able to tell them it is equally important that civil society be involved in the process .
Secondly , I believe that there will be no lasting solution without dialogue , but there cannot be any lasting solution in Chad if there is no solution or no restoration of relations between Sudan and Chad .
It has been clearly established that there are various influences at play here , and thus it seems to me that this is another parameter of the solution .
Mrs Aubert , I obviously agree with your concerns and the need to exert maximum pressure on President Déby , and in fact on everyone concerned , to ensure that human rights are respected .
I have spoken out very clearly and firmly against the arbitrary extrajudicial arrests .
A demand has also been made for the state of emergency to be lifted , with no ambiguities .
As I said , we also asked for the committee of inquiry to be open to the representatives of the international community in order to guarantee objectivity and tangible results .
I wish , however , to make a small clarification in relation to your request for the EU to have a policy that differs from that of France , since otherwise this would not be intellectually honest on my part .
I was party to President Sarkozy 's extremely clear message to Mr Déby .
I did not get the impression there was any kind of alliance of interests between the French President , in other words , France 's most senior representative , and President Déby .
The tone , content and substance of the message were entirely unambiguous .
I must say that his words left a very favourable impression .
In my presence he clearly spoke out to Mr Déby against the arbitrary extrajudicial arrests and the fact that nobody knew where the missing people were , and he strongly emphasised the need for inclusive dialogue involving every single party .
Concerning the deployment of EUFOR MINURCAT , we are pleased to report the redeployment of EUFOR Chad / Central African Republic on Tuesday , 12 February .
EUFOR , of course , is an essential contribution by the EU to the protection of the civil population in eastern Chad and to regional stabilisation .
I do not agree with those who oppose this as I feel that they are wrong to underestimate the importance of this mission or even to say we have no business going there ; that is not my position at all .
The European Commission has drawn up an action plan to accompany the stabilisation process , to support the voluntary return of displaced populations to their original villages and to relaunch development in the areas of eastern Chad affected by the conflict .
The EUFOR mission - which now consists of 600 men , 380 of whom are posted in Abéché - was deployed on 12 February 2008 and is due to achieve its initial operating capacity by mid-March and its full operating capacity by June , i.e. 3 700 men , which should ensure deployment of MINURCAT .

Deployment of MINURCAT is crucial in terms of providing security and protection for civilians in eastern Chad , and obviously also contributes to monitoring and the promotion and defence of human rights .
It is an extremely important committed observer .
Deployment of MINURCAT is all the more important because the Commission made arrangements for a programme to monitor the legal and prisons system in 2007 and reform the security system by 2008-2011 .
We would remind the House that the Chadian authorities must approve the MINURCAT operating procedures as soon as possible because any additional delays could obviously affect the deployment schedule for the Chad humanitarian protection police force , more than half of the budget for which is financed by the Commission .
I would like to say a few words on Community support in eastern Chad .
The Commission has been providing humanitarian aid to eastern Chad since 2004 , and aid in 2007 totalled EUR 30 million .
The European Commission also allocated EUR 10 million to deployment of the MINURCAT police force .
Through the 9th European Development Fund it has allocated over EUR 13 million to implement a rehabilitation support programme for Chad and the Central African Republic .
It has also agreed to support , within its means , a process of reconciliation between the ethnic groups that clashed in 2006 and have had no further relations since a wave of massive population displacements .
Implementation of these programmes , however , requires lasting stabilisation of the sub-region .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I felt that it was important to make these points .
I would like you to know in any case - and I wish to say this publicly - that I fully undertake to monitor this issue on a daily basis .
I am willing to go there when I feel that that would be necessary and useful , and I can do this at very short notice .
I have arranged to meet President Beshir quite soon , and President Déby again , particularly on the issue of relations between Sudan and Chad .
In addition , I will obviously continue to maintain the necessary contacts with the various political actors and civil society in a bid to make progress on this inclusive dialogue , without which there cannot be any lasting solution in the region .
The debate is closed .
Written Statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( GA ) Irish soldiers are famed for their involvement in peace-keeping operations with the United Nations in places where there is crisis or conflict .
It should be the United Nations who leads the way in terms of peace-keeping operations , but this cannot be achieved by participation in European battle groups of this kind .
There is a particular problem with participation in the EUFOR group in Chad .
France has a central role in this force .
Yet , other French soldiers are giving support to Idriss Déby , the President of Chad , who has been heavily criticised by Amnesty International .
In addition , Chad is a former colony of France .
There is a danger that Irish forces will be perceived as a supporting force for a government whose human rights record has come under suspicion .
There is a danger that Ireland will no longer be perceived as neutral .
An international force is needed to support those who are in difficulty in Chad , but it should really be a United Nation 's force .
Announcement by the President
Dear colleagues , today I would like to inform you about the action I have taken following the serious disruption of the formal sitting held here in Strasbourg on Wednesday , 12 December 2007 to mark the signing of the Charter of Fundamental Rights , incidents which I am sure you all remember .
After the Conference of Presidents had considered the incidents in question , on the basis of Rule 147 of the Rules of Procedure I invited a number of Members for discussions with a view to hearing their version of events before taking any decision on possible disciplinary action .
I informed each of the Members concerned of the reason for the invitation .
The basis of parliamentarianism is freedom of speech .
In a democratic parliament , no speaker may be prevented from expressing his or her views by means of systematic heckling by colleagues who hold differing views .
Naturally enough , this applies all the more to speakers who address the plenary as guests and representatives of other institutions .
I made clear that I had invited the Members concerned for discussions because , despite my calls for order in plenary , they continued , by means of their heckling , their attempts to prevent speakers from addressing Parliament .
Disciplinary action is not being taken because they held up posters and banners .
The issue at stake here is the attempt to restrict freedom of speech .
Following the discussions I referred to above , I decided , pursuant to Rule 147 ( 3 ) of the Rules of Procedure , to take the following measures :
In nine cases forfeiture of the entitlement to the subsistence allowance for periods of between two and five days , in one case five days , in six cases three days and in two cases two days , and in a further case the issuing of a reprimand .
With a view to explaining why I imposed these penalties , I should like to read to you what I wrote to the Members concerned when I informed them about the disciplinary action taken against them .
I quote : ' I fully accept your right , and the right of any Member , to be opposed to the Charter of Fundamental Rights or the Treaty of Lisbon and to express that view in accordance with the provisions of the Rules of Procedure .
I also have a degree of understanding for the very emotional responses which such matters sometimes elicit .
However , I consider that a distinction has to be made between conduct which is legitimate in the light of the Rules of Procedure and disruption of the kind which occurred on 12 December .
We cannot permit any actions which have the result of preventing other Members or official guests - in this case the Presidents of other European Union Institutions - from speaking in a dignified manner and without deliberate interruption , after they have been given the floor pursuant to Rule 9 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure , and moreover in accordance with the agenda adopted by Parliament itself .
It is a core principle of parliamentarianism and democracy that , in exercising freedom of opinion , the freedom of others must also be respected - in this case the freedom of those who have been given the floor to speak in plenary . '
Pursuant to Rule 147 of the Rules of Procedure , the ten Members concerned were informed of the decision relating to them .
The following have forfeited their entitlement to the subsistence allowance : Jim Allister for 3 days , Godfrey Blum for 2 days , Sylwester Chruszcz for 2 days , Paul Marie Coûteaux for 5 days , Maciej Marian Giertych for 3 days , Roger Helmer for 3 days , Roger Knapman for 3 days , Hans-Peter Martin for 3 days and Philippe de Villiers for 3 days .
Vladimír Železný is reprimanded .
In addition , the chairmen of the bodies , delegations and committees to which the Members belong have been informed .
In three cases I have refrained from applying Rule 147 , because , after having discussed the matter with the Members concerned , I arrived at the conclusion that these colleagues did not take part in the action .
Colleagues , this is my decision .
I felt obliged to announce it to you officially and publicly here , so that Parliament would be informed about what I had to do .
I hope that we shall not witness any further incidents similar to that which occurred here in the European Parliament on 12 December 2007 .
( Applause )
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is questions to the Council ( B6-0013 / 2008 ) .
The following questions have been put to the Council .
As they deal with the same subject , the following questions will be taken together :
Subject : Lisbon Treaty
Are there any issues that still need to be clarified in the current text of the Lisbon Treaty , and have all the concerns of the Slovenian Presidency regarding substance , procedure and time-frame for implementation of the Treaty been met ?
If this is not the case , could the Council outline what the outstanding issues are ?
Subject : Council President
Have there been any preliminary discussions in the Council on who is going to be the President of the EU Council once the Treaty of Lisbon is ratified ?
Mr President , on a point of order , it most certainly is not the same .
Could we please have some respect for the rights of Members of Parliament ?
To be adding questions together in this way is a disgrace .
One Question Time is getting worse than the next !
There is no relationship whatsoever between the two questions .
I protest strongly at the way Members of this House are treated .
I understand , Mr Mitchell , but the more time we spend on these matters , the less time we will have to get answers to other questions also legitimately put by Members .
It was a Council decision to answer these questions together .
The honourable Member will not suffer as he will of course have the opportunity to speak on his particular question .
I therefore feel that he will not suffer any loss .
We will therefore continue with our work ; otherwise we will waste more time that we cannot afford to lose .
It is becoming increasingly difficult to achieve a minimum level of productivity in these Question Times , which are so important for our parliamentary work .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , you have the floor .
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) I should stress that , as far as the Council is concerned , it makes no difference whether we answer these questions together or separately .
It is not up to us to decide .
In this matter we comply with the wishes of this Parliament .
I will first answer Mrs Harkin 's question .
Let me stress that the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon depends on ratification by all 27 Member States .
However , it is clear that , as with all significant amendments to the Treaty , a few preparatory acts are necessary for the Lisbon Treaty to enter into force .
In accordance with the authority given by the European Council decisions of December 2007 , the Slovenian Presidency has started those preparations .
I emphasise that the work relating to implementation has reached that level and it is only of a technical and precursory nature .
While the ratification process is still underway and has not been finalised , this work will still be only of a temporary and preliminary nature .
It will only be possible to debate many aspects of the implementation of the Lisbon Treaty after it has entered into force .
There are also many examples where some aspects of implementation will only be debatable if proposed by the Commission .
The Council intends to keep Parliament informed of progress , and it will cooperate closely with Parliament on all those aspects of the preparations for implementation of the Lisbon Treaty which are of interest to both institutions .
Secondly , I will answer Mr Mitchell 's question .
The answer is ' no ' , the Council has not yet debated who should become President of the European Union Council , that is to say more precisely , who should become President of the European Council .
The Council has not debated that .
I will add the Presidency 's opinion that it has not been debated because it is not yet time to do so .
I would like to thank the President-in-Office of the Council for the answer .
I think what you said to me is that this is an ongoing process and there may be areas of clarification that need to be sorted out .
In the context of clarification , I would like to know what your view is on the production of an official consolidated text from the Council because I have written to a number of Heads of State and quite a number have replied to me - the Spanish Prime Minister , the Ministers for Europe in Germany and Bulgaria - with regard to the need for a consolidated text .
In fact Parliament voted for it just three weeks ago and Commissioner Margot Wallström , in this very House , said that we need a consolidated text as soon as possible .
I just wonder what your views on that are .
First of all can I say that , if the Council has difficulty in getting the consolidated text , the Institute of European Affairs in Dublin will gladly give them a copy in English .
Secondly , from the reply given by the President-in-Office to my question , I would like to ask him whether it is clear that there are no candidates , that there is no short list and no long list for the job of President of the European Council , that this is something that will be decided some time after the Lisbon Treaty is approved - if it is approved - and that this is in the distant future .
Is that the situation ?
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) Firstly , the supplementary question from Mrs Harkin .
In any case , in the opinion of the Council , that is to say the Presidency , a consolidated text is needed for the Treaty of Lisbon .
At another point in today 's debate I said that we were expecting it in the middle of April and that it should be published in the Official Journal of the European Union by the second half of May .
Some may find that late .
However , we have to be aware that it is very demanding , legal editing work .
It is a complex text and , in addition , the official consolidated text has to be prepared in all 23 official languages of the European Union .
If one takes all that into account , it will not be too long before we have an official , consolidated version of the text .
There are unofficial versions and I am grateful to Mr Mitchell for pointing this out .
The unofficial versions remain unofficial and cannot be regarded as the official text .
There are many of them , including one from the Dublin Institute .
It is useful reading matter , but it cannot replace the official version , which will take a certain time to prepare .
In response to the second part of Mr Mitchell 's supplementary question , I can assert on behalf of the Presidency and the Council that at the moment there is no short or long list of possible or actual candidates .
It does not exist .
The Council has not debated it .
We will probably have to debate it closer to the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty .
The first possible date would be 1 January 2009 .
I expect the debate on this question to start later in 2008 .
It will have to start at some point because it was foreseen that when the Lisbon Treaty was implemented , the European Union would also acquire a President of the European Council .
I repeat that , in the opinion of the Presidency at the moment , the time for such debates has not yet come , but we have to appreciate the fact that , out of a possible 27 ratifications , only five have so far been secured .
It concerns the future President of the European Council .
Does the Presidency agree that this is not , in fact , a presidency of the Union , it is a chairmanship of one of the institutions , each institution having its own president ?
And , has the presidency had any discussions as to the nature of the job in detail , to make sure that the role does indeed not expand to be some sort of ' President of the Union ' but remains confined to chairing and running the European Council meetings ?
( DE ) Mr President , my question relates to the compiled text , in other words , the consolidated version .
I am grateful to the President-in-Office of the Council for elucidating the important difference between private and official texts .
I would also welcome it if , in parallel to the publication in the Official Journal , a concerted campaign could perhaps be initiated via the Member States in order to give interested citizens access to the full text . We do not have to turn out vast quantities , but if citizens wish to see a copy of the text , they should be able to request it from the national governments .
( FI ) Mr President , Mr Minister , last week in Ljubljana it came to my attention that the Slovenian parliament had ratified the Treaty without a consolidated version , which astonished me .
The Members of Parliament could not have access to the text in the form in which it has now been distributed to them .
I would like to ask if , as far as you know , it was agreed by the Council of Ministers or at the summit that the consolidated text would be delayed for as long as possible .
Was it by chance agreed there that no referendums would be held on the Constitution - the Treaty of Lisbon ?
President-in-Office , I might suggest that there could be a wish list among potential candidates - an unofficial one which we have not yet seen .
However , on the substantive issue , I am glad you are preparing ; you are not predicting the outcome , but you are hoping , as I am , that it will be positive and that the Lisbon Treaty will be ratified .
There is a notion among the ' no ' campaign in Ireland that this is a self-amending Treaty , which it is not , and I would like you to perhaps state very clearly to those of us in Ireland who are out there on the campaign trail that this Treaty and future changes to it will respect the ratification process of all Member States .
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) I understood the first three questions , but the translation of the fourth was lost .
I would like to ask Mrs McGuinness to repeat the question and I will listen to it in her language .
Perhaps I was too speedy .
In Ireland , the ' no ' campaign are propagating the mistruth that if we support this Treaty there will be no future referendums in Ireland on further treaties , should we need them .
And , in the next 50 years , who knows what we will need to vote on ?
I am very clearly of the view - as many in this House are - that voting ' yes ' to Lisbon will do no such thing and that there will always be respect for the ratification process of Member States .
I would like you , perhaps in your position , to confirm that .
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) Thank you very much for kindly repeating your question , Mrs McGuinness .
I understand it fully now , but first a response to Mr Corbett .
When we say the President of the European Council , absolutely nothing else is meant but the President of the European Council .
As a lawyer , I cannot agree that the President of the European Council could be a President of something else at the same time .
The European Council is becoming an institution .
With the implementation of the Treaty of Lisbon , it will become a new institution for the first time .
It will have a President who will preside over this institution and no other institution mentioned in the Lisbon Treaty .
I agree with Mr Rack 's opinion that the consolidated text is in any case a useful aid in parliamentary decision-making and for informing citizens .
However , as I said before , it does not change the fact that the only relevant text is the one prepared by a competent service of the general secretariat of the Council as an official consolidated text .
That brings me to Mr Seppänen 's question .
It is true that the Slovenian Parliament has ratified the Lisbon Treaty without the official consolidated text , because it is not yet available .
Those who were interested in the matter had access to an unofficial consolidated text in several languages .
I must say that the Government was very active in explaining the innovations brought by the Lisbon Treaty and , as shown by the result in the Slovenian Parliament , it was quite successful .
However , this is our national problem and does not concern the Presidency so much ; nevertheless , I felt I owed you an explanation .
Back to referendums .
First let me ask you , Mr Seppänen , whether you asked how the Council , that is to say we , could prevent referendums ?
( FI ) I asked if a decision had been taken by the Council or at the summit that no referendums should be held - that it should be recommended to Member States that they do not hold a referendum .
That was my question .
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) Thank you for this additional explanation .
There is no such decision and it is not possible to make one .
The Council respects the rights of each Member State to make an independent and sovereign decision on the ratification process in accordance with its internal regulations , and neither the Council nor the Presidency interferes in the matter .
In response to Mrs McGuinness , as I have just said , the choice of the method of ratification of the new treaty is a sovereign right of each Member State , which should independently decide , in accordance with its legislation , whether it will have a referendum or ratify the new treaty in parliament .
This fact will not be changed in any way by the new treaty .
Implementation of the Lisbon Treaty will leave this question in the exclusive sovereign competency of each Member State , including Ireland , and this will also apply to future treaties .
Subject : Youth Pact
The Council has taken decisions in the context of the Youth Pact to enhance the employability of young Europeans and the scope for combining work and family life .
Does the new Presidency intend to assess the results achieved so far and promote these objectives further ?
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) I would like to draw Mrs Panayotopoulos ' attention to the Council 's latest initiative relating to her question .
On 14 February this year , the Council adopted a series of key reports on further implementation of the European Youth Pact and forwarded them to the spring session of the European Council , which will start tomorrow .
The key reports are based on the Commission 's latest analysis of the national reform programmes and contain a progress assessment of the implementation of the European Youth Pact for 2007 .
On the basis of this analysis , the Council established that , since the adoption of the European Youth Pact in 2005 , unemployment has fallen in some Member States .
At European Union level , however , unemployment is still high , at over 17 % .
That is why the following recommendations were formulated for further implementation of the pact , and the Council will receive them in the form of key reports this week .
Youth employment , cooperation in education and training and social integration of young people should continue to be the central tasks of economic and social strategies .
Special attention should continue to be paid to young people with fewer opportunities , especially by means of more decisive guidance , multidisciplinary support and adapted measures .
In the future implementation of the Lisbon Strategy we should endeavour to develop the youth dimension .
It is based on an intersectoral approach and a strengthened role for young people .
The first recommendation calls on Member States to focus particularly on youth employment tasks .
In that connection , the Commission is emphasising issues such as : transition from the education system to employment , uncertain labour relations , flexicurity and youth employability .
The Slovenian Presidency has devoted special attention to the problems and challenges of youth employment .
I would like to mention the international conference entitled ' Jobs for Youth - Prosperity for All ' , which will take place next month in Slovenia during this Presidency .
( EL ) Mr President , the text of the European Youth Pact also provides for measures for combining professional and family life .
The Council has also decided on the establishment of the European Alliance for Families .
Young people must have the opportunity to start a family .
What measures does the Presidency intend to take in order to provide this opportunity ?
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) The practical realisation will rest with each Member State .
We are anticipating that the European Council will adopt certain decisions on this matter at political level this week , including the European Alliance for Families .
In short , we are expecting an additional impetus to the efforts in this area .
How they will be applied is primarily a matter for each individual Member State .
Subject : Cooperation on homelessness at EU level
The Council may be aware of the Written Declaration 0111 / 2007 on ending street homelessness recently launched in the European Parliament .
One aim of the Declaration will be to develop a European approach to end street homelessness , and for that purpose gather and share reliable statistical data which will be necessary to facilitate action .
What is the Council 's position with regard to Europe-wide cooperation concerning homelessness ?
In particular , would it consider the sharing of statistics at European level to be a positive move ?
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) The Council is aware of the European Parliament initiative calling for a pan-European alliance for the elimination of homelessness by 2015 .
The Council welcomes the initiative and is eagerly awaiting to see its achievements .
I would like to remind you that the issues of homelessness as part of a social security and social inclusion policy are dealt with under the Open Method of Coordination .
The Social Protection Committee is responsible for this area .
The Open Method of Coordination has reinforced awareness of the fact that homelessness presents a problem in all Member States .
In preparing national action plans for social inclusion for 2006-2008 , Member States designated homelessness as one of the primary strategic priority areas .
The 2007 joint report on social security and social inclusion dealt with the challenge posed by homelessness in relation to measures for active inclusion .
To these measures we should add a number of other services including housing , health care and social services .
The report also established that some Member States are developing a more structural approach to exclusion in housing and homelessness .
As regards the question on statistical data for homelessness in Europe , I should say that , despite all efforts by the European Observatory on Homelessness , the indicators in this area are still underdeveloped .
Many Member States have not defined homelessness at all .
Also , most Member States have no reliable data on the number of homeless people .
Even where data exist , it is difficult to compare them because the methodology of counting and trend monitoring differs among individual Member States .
Due to a lack of comparable data on homelessness , the Social Protection Committee 's Indicators Sub-Group included in its working programme for 2008 , among other plans , an analysis of the proportion of material poverty represented by housing , an analysis of the cost of housing as shown in the European study of income and living conditions , and further measures based on the study of the extent of homelessness in the European Union , which the Commission 's services published in January 2007 .
In addition to that , the Social Protection Committee concluded that homelessness in 2009 will be one of the possible priority tasks within the framework of the targeted efforts to achieve social inclusion .
I was happy to see recently released UK Government figures that show that in my constituency , the East Midlands , new cases of homelessness recorded by local authorities have fallen by 25 % over the past year .
This is thanks to the Labour Government 's top priority of eliminating homelessness and a strong focus on equipping people with the skills and training needed to move away from the streets permanently .
This is in stark contrast with the results achieved by the previous Conservative Government , under which the numbers of those homeless and sleeping rough actually increased .
Therefore , does the Council agree that this is an example of best practice , that it should be shared and consequently that it is necessary that a suitable EU-level platform is put in place to do this ?
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) Thank you for this information , but please understand that as a representative of the Council I am not at liberty to comment on the data or the situation for an individual Member State .
What you said could be an example of good practice , but I cannot state that here as a representative of the Council .
Subject : Action to combat international crime and the EU Court of Justice
Will the Council report on the progress achieved and announce the immediate proposals for the establishment of a common asylum policy in the EU ?
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) In June 2007 the Commission published a green paper on a future common European asylum system .
The Council is now awaiting the Commission 's proposals for the second phase of instruments , laws and measures aimed at establishing a common European asylum system .
These instruments and laws will be adopted by Parliament and the Council under the codecision procedure .
For the timing of these proposals we should consult the Commission , which also has the exclusive legislative initiative in this area .
( ES ) Mr President , Mr Mehdi Kazemi , aged 19 , has just lost the possibility of obtaining asylum in the Netherlands after his application was rejected in the United Kingdom .
Mr Kazemi could be sent to Iran and executed for the crime of being a homosexual .
At present in the EU we do not have any rules on this and my question is whether the Council believes that it can speed up the processes or that we can wait , for example , until the European Court of Justice forces the Member States to recognise asylum as a fundamental human right in accordance with existing human rights case-law .
( DE ) Mr President-in-Office of the Council , in relation to the development of a common asylum procedure , one objective is to expedite the decision-making process that determines whether people are granted refugee status or not .
One thing that I have been calling for repeatedly is the compilation of a list of safe third countries in order to speed up decisions .
Could you tell us what progress you have made in your discussions on compiling such a list ?
My second point is this : we have often asked for information campaigns so that people know how asylum procedures work , what legal immigration means and what the consequences are of a rejected asylum application or illegal immigration .
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) The answer to the supplementary question raised by Mr Medina Ortega is very clear .
The Council is incapable of doing anything to force a Member State to behave in a particular way when deciding on the granting of asylum .
These are the obligations of the Member States under international law .
However , there are going to be additional obligations when we take a new step towards a common European Union asylum policy , which I described earlier , that is to say towards establishing a common asylum system .
Mr Pirker , I cannot add to what I said earlier in the introduction .
The intended schedule will have to be presented by the European Commission .
I suggest that this question be addressed to the Commission as well .
Ladies and gentlemen , let us continue .
The following questions will not be answered because they were not deemed admissible :
the first because it is similar to a question that was put in February ;
Nos 7 and 8 because they deal with issues relating to the political situation in Chad on which we had a debate just before this Question Time .
Subject : Transport of liquids
Could the Council make a statement on the ongoing EU negotiations with Canada and the US regarding the transport of liquids through airports ? Is the Council confident that any outstanding problems can be resolved within a short timeframe ?

President-in-Office . - ( SL ) The only response I can make to Mr Higgins is that I cannot answer his question because the answer lies within the competence of the European Commission .
This subject comes under its competence and , sadly , I cannot give a meaningful answer .
( GA ) Mr President , I understand that the President-in-Office of the Council is not able to give me a response .
Clearly , this is becoming much too drawn out .
Do the authorities and the governments of Canada and the United States not understand that we have a solution in the European Union ? A solution that is practical , simple and effective .
I would like ask the Commission or the President-in-Office of the Council why Canada and the United States do not accept this solution ?
The root of this is in the 9 / 11 attacks on the United States .
It is a security measure .
And it is very difficult to understand why we cannot accept this solution everywhere in the world .
( DE ) Mr President , we are always calling for appropriate measures to be taken in respect of our response to , and especially prevention of , terrorism , which is why this particular measure was initiated .
However , is this instrument really still effective , or have the terrorists already found ways of sidestepping these controls ?
What could be done to harmonise the controls ?
Although we have a single set of provisions , their practical implementation varies widely from one airport to another , and this creates problems and annoyance .
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) I am going to attempt to answer some points raised in the supplementary questions .
The limits on liquids , sprays , gels and similar articles for air passengers were introduced for a reason .
They were in response to a threat which was seriously and clearly expressed , a threat to security in civil aviation .
We have been informed that experts in various fields are intensively searching for solutions and technologies that will make it easier to detect a real threat , and in that way ease the transport of liquids , sprays , gels and similar articles in civilian air passengers ' hand luggage .
Many debates on this topic are being conducted in many places , especially in the International Civil Aviation Authority .
We are following those debates , but as yet there are no conclusions .
If and when something happens , we expect the Commission to act appropriately .
Ladies and gentlemen , we do not have much time , in fact only six minutes , as the Council has informed me that it will have to leave at 7.30 p.m.
However , we have enough time to answer the next two questions .
President . - As they deal with the same subject , the following questions will be taken together :
Subject : The EU perspective of the Western Balkans
Inevitably , the fate of the Western Balkans will be of particular interest to the current holder of the Council Presidency . Given recent developments in relation to the status of Kosovo , will the Council Presidency assume an active role in attempting to integrate further the countries of the Western Balkans into EU structures ?
Subject : Development of relations between the EU and the Western Balkan countries
The Slovenian Presidency has indicated that one of its priorities is the development of relations between the EU and the Western Balkan countries .
Can the Council set out the principal objectives regarding the development of future agreements between the EU and the Western Balkans ?
Subject : Role of the EU mission to Kosovo
The Prime Minister of Kosovo has recently stated that the declaration of independence is a matter of days away .
The Russian Foreign Minister has linked the EU mission to Kosovo with a new UN Security Council resolution on the presence of the international community in Kosovo .
What is the mandate and the timetable for the EU 's mission to Kosovo ?
Is the Council expecting a new UN Security Council resolution to make any changes in relation to the presence of the international community in Kosovo ?
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) I would like to answer all three questions together , so the answer will be somewhat longer , but it is a particularly topical subject at this moment .
The Council is determined to continue supporting the European perspective of the Western Balkans , bringing it more within the grasp of the citizens of the region .
Among other things it will speed up the start of dialogue with the countries of the region on the liberalisation of visa regulations .
At the session on Monday 10 March , the Council welcomed the inaugural session of the Regional Co-operation Council , which marked the official handing-over of the Stability Pact to this new Council .
The establishment of this Council is evidence of great progress in regional cooperation in the fields of democracy , economics and security .
The Council has stressed the great importance of regional cooperation and good neighbourly relations and the need for renewed efforts on all sides to find , through a constructive approach to negotiations , acceptable bilateral solutions to unresolved questions on relations with neighbouring countries .
In its decisions of 18 February the Council confirmed its resolve to give total and effective support to the European perspective in the Western Balkans .
It requested that the Commission use the instruments of the Community to stimulate economic and political development and offer the wider region concrete measures for progress in this direction .
Here I would like to mention a very important event : on 5 March the European Commission published a special communication about the Western Balkans .
In it the Commission proposed a string of tangible measures for further deepening relations between the European Union and the countries of this region .
This communication and the consolidation of the European perspective for the Western Balkan countries will be the main topic at the informal session of the European Union Foreign Ministers which is planned for the end of this month in Slovenia .
The Slovenian Presidency has given the Western Balkans special attention .
The stability of this region is of crucial importance for the security and prosperity of the entire European Union .
Among others , the following activities are possible in 2008 : revision of the 2003 Thessaloniki agenda , conclusion of many stabilisation and association agreements , and strengthening of cooperation within the region in various fields .
In view of the lack of time , I will try and briefly present the main aims of the European Union Council concerning individual countries .
Because Kosovo was mentioned in one of the questions , I will say a few words about it .
The Presidency still believes that what is needed is a long-term solution to the status of Kosovo within the general agenda of a European future for the Western Balkans .
The stabilisation and association process is a strategic framework developed by the European Union for its policies towards the Western Balkans .
The instruments of this framework also apply to Kosovo .
I would like to remind you again of the Council 's decisions of 18 February , when it confirmed its commitment to total and effective support for a European future for the Western Balkans .
The Council called on the Commission to use the instruments of the Community to stimulate economic and political development and offer the wider region concrete measures for moving closer to this target .
Mr President , I know time is short , but I think it is interesting that the landscape has changed since I tabled this question , and I welcome the fact that the President-in-Office has updated us with great detail about his particular and obvious concerns about the region .
Could I just ask him , specifically in relation to the EU mission to Kosovo , which is unique and quite untested at this stage : can you assure us that we learn lessons from this intervention and will be ready to offer similar support to other countries in the region if and when we are invited to do so ?
( RO ) Thank you for the specifications , but I would have liked to have had some additional information .
We know that , as far back as July 2006 , the treaty on energy was signed to attract investments in energy and I know that in 2007 a list of priority projects was adopted for energy infrastructure in the region and a memorandum on social issues was even signed .
We also know that the signing of a community treaty on transport with the countries in the region is contemplated in order to create a domestic market in the field of road , railway and inland waterway transport .
A list of priority projects on transport was also established and I would have liked to have more details from the Council ...
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) Regarding Mrs McGuinness ' first question : the European Union mission in Kosovo is part of the European Union 's common foreign and security policy , that is to say it is a CFSP ' ISDP mission ' .
However , it is not the only mission to the Western Balkans .
The ISDP mission to Bosnia and Herzegovina is one of the missions and it has a similar status , that is to say it is a European Union police mission .
Similarly , there was the PROXIMA mission to the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , which has finished .
I would like to emphasise the importance of the Kosovo mission for which the decision was adopted .
It is often stressed that the European Union is divided on the status of Kosovo .
This division is indeed apparent , but people forget about the unity of the European Union in important issues such as , for example , the question of the European mission , for which agreement was reached and which we hope will be operational as scheduled .
Now to Mrs Ţicău 's question . We have already established regional cooperation within the framework of the energy declaration for south-east Europe .
We are also contemplating other fields where , with concrete measures , we may be able to strengthen the real integration of the countries of the Western Balkans and re-enforce their connections with the European Union .
You mentioned transport .
Yes , it is one of the areas we are studying , but there are others , such as cooperation in research , science and education .
I would like especially to stress the importance of liberalising the visa requirements for these countries , which remains one of our targets .
We hope it will soon be reached .
Negotiations with most of the Western Balkan countries on a gradual liberalisation of the visa requirements have already started under the Slovenian Presidency .
( SK ) The way Europe sees the Balkan countries has a significant impact on , and great importance for , stability both in the Balkans and on a European and global scale .
Kosovo 's declaration of independence has planted the seeds of hatred between Serbs and Kosovo Albanians , endangering their fragile relations .
Considering that Slovenia is a part of the Balkans too , what does the presidency believe is a sustainable solution that can guarantee peace and stability in this region ?
Will it be possible without Serbia 's approval ?
( EL ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , in your reply on Kosovo , you did not once mention ' the UN ' , or ' international legality ' !
I ask you : can the European perspective on the western Balkans to be endorsed , in circumvention of the UN and in breach of international legality ?
Furthermore , since the Council welcomes , in its communication , the international presence in Kosovo invoked by UN Resolution 1244 , may I ask whether we can pick and choose from an à la carte menu ?
Is it valid or not , or do you select only those points that suit you ?
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) Thank you for these supplementary questions .
Regarding Mrs Pleštinská 's question , I cannot and dare not predict , either personally or as a representative of the Council , a possible long-term solution for the status of Kosovo .
It is a fact that the desirable solution would be an agreement between the parties involved .
As we know , there were long negotiations on the subject , but they did not end in an agreement .
It would be equally desirable for the United Nations Security Council to take a position on this question but , as we know , this did not happen .
That is why the European Union responded to Kosovo 's declaration of independence in the way it did , on 18 February , with decisions and resolutions by the General Affairs and External Relations Council .
That is the context in which an agreement was reached within the European Union .
As we know , this context allows Member States to make their own decisions on the development of relations with Kosovo .
In response to Mr Papadimoulis ' question , that is to say opinion , I would like to stress that there is no doubt that the European perspective for the Western Balkans also includes Kosovo .
Kosovo is part of the region which had already been given a European perspective in Thessaloniki in 2003 , and that has not changed .
This is also obvious from the European Commission 's previously mentioned communication published on 5 March this year , which contains a special section devoted to Kosovo .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will be answered in writing ( see Annex ) .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.40 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Enhancing the quality of life of older people ( debate )
The next item is the report by Neena Gill , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council on the participation by the Community in a research and development programme aimed at enhancing the quality of life of older people through the use of new Information and Communication Technologies ( ICT ) , undertaken by several Member States - C6-0178 / 2007 - .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I am very pleased and happy to replace my fellow Commissioner , Ms Viviane Reding , in introducing such a very important and very good subject .
The ageing of the population throughout Europe obviously poses significant challenges to our society and economy .
Today , for every retired person there are still five people who pay taxes .
By 2025 this will drop to three-to-one , and by 2050 to only two-to-one .
The cost of care , especially care for the growing group of people over the age of 80 , is rising rapidly .
We are rightly concerned about ensuring a good quality of life as well as the financial sustainability of health and social care for the elderly .
At the same time , I stress that an ageing population is also a great opportunity and a promising market for new products and new services for healthy ageing and independent living .
We are all convinced that we can and should mobilise information and communication technologies for ageing well in Europe .
The ' Ambient assisted living ' joint programme will help to tackle these challenges and exploit the opportunities .
It is also an innovative cooperation of Member States in market-oriented research and development that merits European support .
The compromise amendments that you suggested have certainly helped to strengthen the European dimension of the initiative by clarifying the scope as well as the roles and commitments of the Member States .
This will be helpful in ensuring the success of this important European endeavour for the benefit of us all .
rapporteur . - Mr President , improving the quality of life of Europe 's growing elderly population , as we have heard , is one of the biggest challenges facing us in Europe .
The make-up of our society is changing , and we need to adapt , to ensure quality of life and independent living for the elderly , who are otherwise at risk of exclusion .
What we need to ensure is that this new society is an inclusive one .
We need to guarantee that the growing number of elderly people are fully able to participate in society because , between 2010 and 2030 , the number of EU citizens aged between 65 and 80 will rise by 40 % .
This ageing population will have severe implications for a number of policy areas : social , employment , housing , education , training , health care and social support .
Therefore we need a comprehensive , not a fragmented approach to ageing .
This report results from initiatives by Member States under Article 169 , which is co-funded by the Commission to the tune of EUR 150 million over five years .
This will assist the European industry and research institutes in the development of new , cutting-edge ICT services , products and solutions to enhance the quality of life for the older persons .
Today , technologies have been developed that can help solve loss of memory , vision , hearing and mobility .
Substantive work has already begun , but often there is neither awareness nor widespread use .
So this initiative , I hope , will be of real use and help solve societal problems .
I am really pleased to say that I have seen , first-hand , in many places , especially in my region , the West Midlands , how a traditional house can be adapted with the use of assistive technologies which will enable a safer and accessible home environment .
I am also proud that my region has been at the cutting edge of assistive technologies - not just with a view to the elderly , but also technologies have been developed to help people with disabilities .
So , AAL should prove to be a real boost to this sort of activity in three domains .
Firstly , EU research will be centrally coordinated , will enable the development of feasible products , and will introduce these into the marketplace .
Our aim should be to become the pole of excellence in this field , and there should be exchange of knowledge and best practice across Europe .
This is only achievable if we have real commitment from the participating countries .
Therefore , I am pleased that the Council has agreed to EUR 0.2 million as a minimum contribution for each participating country , along with a single common evaluation mechanism and eligibility criteria , in the hope that this will increase coordination , transparency and credibility of the programme .
Secondly , it will benefit EU industry , which has a tremendous potential in this area .
So I call upon the AAL Association to develop effective business models for these ICT products and services , which are the key to lower prices and getting these products onto the market .
They also need to ensure that SMEs can participate and have fair access to research and funding opportunities .
However , to be successful it is essential that the programme looks at developing EU-wide standards and interoperability in order to become a world leader in this field of assistive technologies .
There is an urgent need to remove technical and regulatory barriers which hamper the development of this area .
Let us not forget that the rest of the world , like the US , Japan and even China , are facing similar demographic challenges .
Therefore , it is up to us to develop a global competitive edge .
AAL is not just about improving independent living but can also contribute to achieving the goals of the Lisbon Strategy .
But , to do this , we need joined-up thinking and joined-up action with other programmes - on job creation and on economic growth - in this sector .
Thirdly , whilst the technology can improve the quality of life for the elderly , this only holds if a few major issues are addressed : making prices affordable so they are accessible to all , user-friendliness of the new technology ( and making sure the elderly and their carers have the training to understand it ) , and , because we may be living in an information society , but it is not yet an inclusive society - a large proportion of the elderly do face exclusion .
Therefore we need to make the internet more accessible and make training available , and allow elderly people both to stay socially connected and to perform their daily activities which can be facilitated , such as shopping , paying bills , making appointments .
But the availability of this should not be due to a geographical divide in Europe .
I do not want to see a two-speed Europe in relation to Europe 's demographic challenge .
This is only a start .
We have a lot more to do , and I hope this programme will set a precedent for further activities and initiatives from the Commission and the Council .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality . - ( PL ) Mr President , the ageing of Europe 's population represents a challenge for the whole of European society .
Average life expectancy is currently 80 years , and a 40 % increase in people of retirement age is expected by 2030 .
The European Union should adopt a wide-ranging approach to this challenge , because demographic tendencies affect many areas of politics , including employment , housing , education , social assistance and health care .
The overall aim of the research and development programme in question is to improve the quality of life of older people and to strengthen Europe 's industrial base . It is intended to achieve this by implementing ICT , which will help older persons to improve their quality of life , continue to enjoy good health and remain active at work and in society .
The skills and experience acquired by older persons represent a major asset , especially in a knowledge-based society .
It is also important to emphasise that an ageing society contains a higher percentage of women than men due to the longer life expectancy of the former .
The gender element must therefore be taken into account when devising and evaluating the programme .
Finally , I should like to thank Mrs Gill , the rapporteur , for a very well prepared report .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( NL ) It is good that for once today we are talking about the demographic change in Europe in a different way , not as something that only costs money and that produces people who then need to be cared for ; it so happens that it also presents a very important opportunity .
I myself will happily talk about the silver economy : if you look closely at the programme , you will see there a matter concerning the quality of life , so what is Europe 's dilemma ?

On the one hand , we have very good fundamental knowledge , but innovations in the market take too long .
We have had Internet and broadband for a long time , and now people with limited mobility have proper access to services by means of the Internet too .
That can change things and there is an opportunity here .
On the one hand , I am pleased that in the Seventh Framework Programme half a billion euro has been set aside for basic research , and indeed the European Community will recover that half billion on the part of the Member States and businesses .
It is good that this knowledge is being rolled out as it provides a bridge to the market .
As Mrs Gill has already said , it is very important that we here in Europe turn the distorted , fragmented market around and introduce better standards to increase inclusion .
In America or China , for example , this problem does not exist .
We have very different financial systems .
Therefore , it is necessary to introduce both the technology and consultation with partners at national level .
For this reason it would be good to unite the Member States and always involve three countries in each project .
This is sometimes difficult but I think that it is necessary in order to use the knowledge quickly .
Some points in the programme need to be assessed and I am very curious about the technologies that exist , and whether the ICT applications can be used effectively .
I believe and I hope that the users will play a large role in this programme ; I thank the rapporteur for the enormous effort she has put into this issue and in particular for the content of her report .
on behalf of the PSE group . - ( RO ) Thanks to a lack of policies to promote an increase in the birth rate and certain facilities for child raising and care , that part of the population aged over 65 years will increase from 20 % to 28 % by 2025 .
Senior citizens have special needs and society must undergo a change in order to satisfy such needs .
We are in need of adapted housing , development of healthcare and attendance services for the elderly .
In this context , the ICT 's role is increasingly important .
Digital television , mobile phones , computers and even internet are already used by some of the elderly .
Many senior citizens communicate with their children in foreign countries by means of the internet and webcams , irrespective of whether they are in rural or in urban areas .
However , the number of European citizens aged over 65 that use the internet is only 10 % .
Please note that more than 21 % of European citizens aged over 50 have serious hearing , visual or dexterity disabilities which make it difficult for them to use standard ICT equipment .
In June 2007 the Commission appealed to the Member States and to the field-related industry to support the implementation of the action plan " Integration of the elderly into the Information Society ” .
In this context , the programme on assistance for autonomy at home , to be developed within the 7th Framework Research Programme , will have a budget of 150 million Euro from the community budget and the Member States will spend at least 150 million Euro in the period 2008-2013 , meaning the participating Member States , obviously .
The goals of this programme are : promotion of the development of innovating products , services and systems based on ICT for the elderly , creation of a critical mass of research , specific development and innovation at European level in the field of technologies and services for the elderly in the Information Society , improvement of the conditions on research result utilisation by undertakings .
Any Member State can take part in this programme .
Within two years from the start of the programme , the Commission will draft an intermediary report and in 2013 it will draft a final assessment thereof .
I believe that the elderly deserve a chance , we have this duty !
Congratulations to the rapporteur .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , I had a visitors ' group here again today .
It will be a familiar situation to many of my colleagues .
We have visitors ' groups , some large , some small , and the largest groups are from the silver generation .
That was the case with the group today .
There were 60 people , extremely interested , really engaged , very active , and this is increasingly the case .
This is surely the challenge for Europe .
Demographic change is often depicted as a threat .
The figures speak for themselves .
Between 2010 and 2030 the number of EU citizens aged between 65 and 80 is expected to rise by 40 % .
However , like Mr van Nistelrooij , I do not see this as a threat .
I think it is a major opportunity for Europeans to show that we are the region of the world that is most committed to a high quality of life at every stage in people 's lives and for every age group .
We need to show more concern for the elderly , and we must ensure that we do so as the people of Europe , the region of the world that protects life .
I would like to congratulate the Commission on this proposal . This Ambient Assisted Living ( AAL ) programme links this major trend , namely demographic change - which is more pronounced in Europe than in other regions - with our strengths in research and innovation .
We are strongly committed to ICT technologies and AAL brings these two trends together .
It is quite clear , ladies and gentlemen , that we have no direct competence , as the European Union , for standards relating to older people , building of houses , etc .
However , using these pilot programmes , we can promote best practice and we can bring together what is already being done best by some Member States and give it a European seal of quality so that it genuinely serves as a model for others .
Ladies and gentlemen , with this programme the Commission is helping to close the so-called digital divide between generations within our society .
I would like to thank Neena Gill , the rapporteur , for having conveyed this message extremely clearly , much more than other rapporteurs , I must say .
I would like to express my sincere thanks to her .
She also defended Parliament 's position very courageously in the trialogue and ensured that our arguments were conveyed effectively .
There is no need for us to hide ourselves away .
As a representative of this House , let me say that we wish the AAL programme the greatest success .
Our very good wishes go with it .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( LV ) Thank you , Mr President .
Demographic , economic and social factors in Europe demand solutions that will turn the professional and cultural experience of older people to good account , ensuring that their living conditions are of as high a quality as possible and minimising the expenditure arising from this demographic trend .
The programme put forward by the Commission is a response to the need and , in parts , also to the quest for ways to advance technological progress in this sector .
In fact , the digital divide - namely , barriers to the use of information and communication technologies , at times even very trivial ones - excludes a significant section of the older population from an active socio-economic life and restricts their opportunities to use the new technology services and assistance provided .
While I support the Commission proposal in every respect , it has to be acknowledged that new development of information and communication technologies in segments where there is commercial demand is taking place at intoxicating speeds .
Similarly , while also agreeing with the Commission 's argument that the purchasing power of older people is increasing , we must , however , acknowledge that significant differences remain in income levels between Member States .
Significant regional differences also remain in the opportunities available to those in the older age group to use information and communication technologies within different countries .
I would like to stress that the achievements of the Commission 's proposals will consist not only in the existence of the technologies themselves , but also in opportunities to access them and opportunities and incentives for older people to learn , in those parts of Europe where this is of particular importance in reducing disparities in income levels and regional disparities .
The most difficult task , however , will be to overcome the digital divide in information content .
On this point , where the digital divide between small and large nations and between small and large economies remains , overcoming it between generations is the most economically difficult task .
Mr President , although the Ministerial Declaration on e-inclusion , which served as a basis for the document under discussion today , was adopted in 2006 in Latvia 's capital , Riga , Latvia has not joined the programme .
In this connection I have a question , which the rapporteur also referred to , concerning the extent to which it is in the interests of the states involved in the programme for other Member States to be covered by the funding of the Seventh Framework Programme , when this funding remains unchanged .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , it is a funny old world .
On the one hand , in a health report we are trying to figure out how to prise our children from the computers and make them go outside and run around to play and , on the other hand , we are trying to coax our elderly to sit at the computer and use it .
But , seriously , computers have a great deal to offer elderly people , especially for rural dwellers or those whose health tends to isolate them .
But , for old people to be able to join the IT community , technology must be first of all easy to use , affordable , accessible to all and low maintenance .
With an increasing number of old people in Europe , developing elderly-friendly technologies can improve their quality of life and help them to live independently for longer .
Developing computers for the elderly is certainly a great business idea .
While they may lack some technical skills , they have plenty of time to use computers and a desire to keep in touch with others .
They are a market waiting to happen .
( BG ) Dear colleagues , My country Bulgaria is regrettably among the leading nations in terms of the ageing of the population in Europe .
After the end of the cold war , young people from my country , enticed by the promises of good life in the West , rushed in crowds to do dish-washing and only their old parents stayed back home .
Your idea to increase the lifespan of senior citizens is great .
Who would be against it ?
But before you think of using new information and communication technologies , I implore you to grasp the fact that Bulgarian pensioners live on pensions equal to EUR 50 a month .
This is what the social government of the Bulgarian Socialist Party allocates for them .
This is a fact of life .
I address the representatives of PES in this hall : ladies and gentlemen internationalists , are you aware of what EUR 50 a month mean to a pensioner who has worked honestly all his or her life ?
Are you aware of the fact that these EUR 50 are meant to make you survive and buy food at prices commensurate to the European ones ?
Are you aware of the fact that Bulgarian pensioners switch off their telephones because they cannot afford to pay the predatory prices of the Bulgarian Telecommunications Company that has been privatized criminally ?
It is a mockery to suggest ways to improve information services to these people .
Think of how to enhance their financial independence first .
For most pensioners in Bulgaria are not of gypsy origin and therefore they do not rely on free lunch .
( NL ) It is a good programme but I nevertheless have a few objections .
The first relates to the budget , of course : 150 million euro is nowhere near enough - and this has already been stated here - for a sector that you yourself said is going to become one of the booming sectors of the future .
The speedy implementation of these tools is crucial for the wellbeing of the elderly , but is also crucial for the national economy , for the national budget , and it has great economic prospects .
Mr van Nistelrooij has already said the same : hence the call for this investment and incentives on Europe 's part to expand it considerably over the coming years , possibly even by the mid-year budget evaluation .
My second comment - and I completely agree with the rapporteur 's observations - is that there must be no dichotomy , no divide , as Mr Chatzimarkakis has already said , between elderly people who have been trained and are able to use these new technologies , and others for whom this has not been possible and who simply do not have the resources to install them at home .
This would very much contradict the main goal of the programme , which is to enable as many old people as possible to continue living at home for as long as possible .
That is much cheaper than sending them to hospital or to nursing homes , and of course it is also best for their wellbeing .
At the end of the day , that is what this is all about .
Finally , it is crucial that all these innovative tools continue to be affordable for all old people , regardless of their financial situation .
- ( LT ) I welcome the Commission 's initiative and appreciate Mrs Gill 's report , which will undoubtedly be very beneficial considering the issues affecting older people .
Europe 's growing elderly population poses problems and significant challenges .
Today , new assisting technologies have been developed that can ensure good quality of life for the elderly and enable them , depending on their wishes and abilities , to take an active part in life .
EU Member States should therefore prepare themselves for the imminent revolution in providing societal and assistive services .
Producers of modern information and communication technologies have noticed an increased demand for their products .
New assistive technologies can help solve vision , hearing , mobility and other problems , enabling older people to continue to feel - and indeed be - useful to society .
The fact that EU Member States plan by 2013 to invest more than EUR 1 billion in the development of new technologies addressing the needs of the elderly is laudable .
ICT can and will no doubt enhance quality of life and self-respect among the elderly .
However , a question arises : will this benefit everyone , or just a handful of ' chosen ' ones ?
I do appreciate the rapporteur 's concern regarding the possibility that only a small number of older people , who already happen to be enjoying a high quality of life , will benefit from ICT innovations .
Some EU countries boast of six-star , hotel-style residences for the elderly .
Not far from these , however , one can see poverty-ridden old people 's homes , the inhabitants of which struggle to survive .
No innovations , assistive technologies or any modern equipment have ever been accessible to people in the latter institutions .
This situation must change without delay .
I welcome the view expressed in the report that ICT products for the elderly should be affordable and user-friendly .
The EU is a leader in many areas .
To lead in the area discussed is both necessary and honourable .
- ( LT ) Today , every fifth EU citizen is over 60 , with a life expectancy of more than 80 years .
However , the quality of life of Europe 's growing elderly population is not sufficiently high .
For example , every fourth older person in my country , Lithuania , describes their state of health as poor , with the rate of participation in society being just 57 % .
Enhancing the quality of life of the aging population should be one of the European Union 's priorities .
The Commission 's initiative to mobilise information and communication technologies is a very important step towards helping to solve the problems of loss of memory , vision , hearing and mobility in the elderly .
Nevertheless , the Commission has failed to fully address the issue of fair access to information and communication technologies .
One of the major issues connected with fair access to information and communication technologies is making them affordable .
Older people 's main income is their pension , which is low , especially in the new accession states .
It is of great importance that products based on new information and communication technologies are affordable to all EU citizens .
Another major element of accessibility is the user-friendliness of new technologies .
Just 18 % of the EU population aged 65-74 use the Internet , compared with 60 % overall .
We must therefore ensure that products based on new information and communication technologies are user-friendly .
( PL ) Mr President , the phenomenon of an ageing society in European countries is a fact and represents a fundamental challenge for society .
We should bear demographic tendencies in mind in relation to actions at European level , and consider the social and economic implications of the former .
The number of persons aged between 65 and 80 will rise by 40 % during the years 2010-2030 .
Priority should be given to providing a dignified life and all possible comforts to those persons , together with access to all essential services .
Ageing of the population does of course put pressure on the provision of health services and social care within the scope of financial possibilities , and also on the availability of health service and social care staff .
In the context of the situation under discussion , I would draw attention to the dangerous phenomenon of marginalisation and isolation of the elderly .
The attempts to do away with sick and elderly people by way of legal euthanasia represent a very serious danger to contemporary Europe .
I am distressed by the fact that despite being involved in protecting fundamental human rights , the European Union and its Parliament have remained silent on the matter .
( SL ) There is nothing more destructive and humiliating than a feeling of exclusion , insignificance and impotence .
That is why I support the European Commission 's proposal for the Community to take part in the joint programme to help and include older people and improve their quality of life using information and communication technologies .
That is an additional piece in the mosaic of the Lisbon Strategy for building an information-based , digitally literate and economically more competitive Europe .
In order really to improve the inclusion and literacy of older people , activities must be appropriately adapted and really accessible to them .
These activities must be understandable , simple to use and learn , and affordable .
They must capture the ageing population and people with disabilities in towns and in the country ; otherwise there is a danger that the final result will be exclusion instead of inclusion .
With the widespread use of information and communication technologies , the older generation will also ultimately benefit from the innovations of modern times .
Their quality life will improve because they will be more independent , mobile , active and included in society and economic life .
Adapted equipment , aids and numerous modern electronic systems make it possible to manage living space .
At the same time they allow it to be controlled , ensuring that users have greater security and feel better about their lives .
Such equipment allows people with disabilities and older people to communicate with the outside world and to enjoy remote care , work and entertainment .
We all want to reach a ripe old age , but not to be lonely and at the margins of society .
That is why we are thinking of our future now and are taking new steps towards it .
( RO ) According to statistical data , the number of senior citizens in Europe will increase by 40 % between 2010 and 2030 .
This phenomenon raises challenges , but also opportunities for public policies and the European future .
A truly prosperous and competitive Europe should find the correct response to such challenges and to full use of the potential of the new demographic trends .
Elderly European citizens must benefit from quality services and conditions , and the experience accumulated by them should be used in the ongoing development of society .
As the European Union intends to become an information-based economy and society , information technologies represent an innovative answer to this situation and the involvement of the European community in the relevant programmes is more than necessary .
I would like to point out two important aspects related to the use of new technologies to improve the standard of living of the elderly .
First of all , European citizens should be trained and informed about the new technological possibilities offered .
The elderly , especially in the new Member States , are not at all or partially familiar with this field and the losses resulting for society as a whole are plain to see .
Consequently , the success of the decision discussed today largely depends on the European potential to mobilise in terms of the education of and provision of information to these persons .
Secondly , special attention should be paid to women , as they account for a higher age bracket than men due to the increased life expectation .
This aspect must be taken into account in the scientific research on the ageing process , as well as in the concrete implementation of public policies .
Finally , I want to reiterate the importance of focusing on the situation in the new Member States , in which the elderly are in a less favourable situation .
The lower standard of living , but also lack of knowledge in using the new technologies , transforms this category in a priority target for future efforts at European level .
( SK ) The ' Forum to Help the Aged ' , the ' Senior Citizens ' Parliament ' and the magazine ' Forum for Senior Citizens ' published in Slovakia with the support of the Commission are activities with which I had the opportunity to acquaint myself at meetings with senior citizens since this is how my calendar year traditionally begins .
These activities have convinced me that old people want to be active and are very quick to learn .
Mobile phones for example are not the great unknown for them any more .
They have become their important companions instead .
Unfortunately very few resources are dedicated to the computer literacy of senior citizens and that is why I welcome the report by Mrs Neena Gill , which sets out an important message of the European Parliament as regards enhancing the quality of life of elderly or disabled people .
The use of new Information and Communication Technologies can be an effective instrument in ensuring that this category of European citizens , who are a source of wisdom , experience , traditions and skills will not be banished from society .
It is important , however , to provide equal access to Information and Communication Technologies for all old people in the European Union .
( CS ) Mr President , I welcome the initiative of the 13 Member States that have developed a assisted living joint research programme for older citizens so that their generation can also make full use of information technologies .
There is no doubt that this will make communication easier for them and will allow them to stay in work for longer .
Therefore , I give my full support to the efforts to make the Ambient Assisted Living programme part of our decision tomorrow , to make it a joint programme of the European Union .
I believe that by doing so we will be able to double the funds , to a total of EUR 600 million .
In my opinion , our request for 20 % cofinancing from domestic sources gives the Member States enough motivation to address these tasks .
We should give the green light to this programme , which will allow for the effective development of innovative products and specific services , using Information and Communication Technologies as a tool to ensure that one 's old age is dignified .
The programme also presents an opportunity for small and medium-sized enterprises and fully complies with the Lisbon Strategy objectives and our values .
( PL ) Mr President , we should welcome the proposed participation by the Union in a joint research and development programme aimed at enhancing the quality of life of older persons .
New types of ICT can make life easier for persons of an advanced age , and help them to remain active at work and in their private lives .
We should bear in mind that the number of elderly persons is increasing as a consequence of better living conditions .
In developing the detailed operating principles for this programme , we should bear in mind , however , that the assets and living conditions of older persons vary across the Member States .
There are significant differences in the standard of living .
Consequently , there are different needs in terms of services and different levels of preparation for active life , especially in the case of people in rural areas .
New technologies , new opportunities for Internet working , and using new technology to one 's advantage can help older people to stay in the labour market . All this can also enable people to grow old comfortably .
The problem is particularly significant in relation to the ageing of the population of Europe .
( RO ) The exclusion of senior citizens from the advantages of information technologies is problematic , especially as the number of those members of the European population between 65 and 80 years of age will soon reach 40 % .
Thus , the joint research and development programme that the European Union will join , is welcomed in the context of improving the life of these people .
However , I would like to point out the fact that Community financial involvement in this project is limited .
The Community contribution amounts to a maximum of 150 million euro , given that it comes from the budget for the research and development framework programme with a total of more than 50 billion euro .
Furthermore , the Community contribution cannot exceed 50 % of the public funds used in the project , an atypically low percentage for such an important project .
Apart from the concrete advantages offered to the elderly by the IT solutions identified by this programme , the participation of the Union in the project is a good opportunity to contribute to the Europeans ' quality of life and , for this reason , the Community financial contribution should go beyond the national amounts of money allotted to this type of research .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , speaking on behalf of Ms Viviane Reding , I would like to express appreciation for the very constructive approach taken by the European Parliament and in particular the rapporteur Ms Gill during the negotiation process on the ' Ambient assisted living ' ( AAL ) proposal .
I am not responsible for this portfolio and for me the debate was certainly not only interesting but very educational .
I assure you that I will convey not only the congratulations but also the concerns and the proposals to my colleague Viviane Reding .
I understood that one of the key issues is the use of ICT by the silver generation and I do agree with that .
It certainly requires both knowledge and financial resources .
Training for the elderly , particularly those who live in rural areas , is certainly important but it is properly addressed by the ' Ageing well ' action programme .
Affordability is another important issue and AAL will address that .
As far as other countries who would like to join are concerned , it is certainly possible and it was for that reason that you proposed a relatively low threshold .
In conclusion , I would like to emphasise that the Commission welcomes and supports the compromise amendments proposed by the rapporteur , which will allow an agreement to be reached at first reading .
Thanks to your commitment , it will be possible to launch this important initiative during the spring .
Your continued support will also be essential during the implementation of the initiative .
I would like to stress that taking up this challenge is not only a moral obligation but also an economic opportunity , a view expressed by many of the speakers .
It is for the future well-being of our elderly citizens and also for our future competitiveness .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I should like to thank all the colleagues for their comments and contributions .
I was asked by Mr Krasts whether I was happy for other countries also to participate in the initiative .
The intention is that this programme is open to as many members as possible and it can even go beyond the EU Member States - as it does already .
The issue is about funding and many have raised this .
The problem is that the funding appears to be capped at EUR 150 million .
What we need to look at is either how that could be reviewed in future , if there is a lot of interest in this programme , or whether it could be addressed through other initiatives under the Framework 7 programmes .
I have heard it said today that , along with climate change , ageing is one of the biggest challenges of the 21st century .
It is important that the Commission continue to address this , not just through individual programmes such as this , which are very important , but across other areas and - as I would like to reiterate - that it should have joined-up thinking in this .
I think the Commission also needs to be vigilant because some Member States , it is quite clear , are very far ahead while others are not .
There is an urgency to ensure that there is no huge disparity between Member States after this programme is completed .
I would like to take a couple of key points that colleagues have mentioned , especially my two shadow rapporteurs .
Mr van Nistelrooij made the point that it takes too long for products to reach the market and , if we are really going to make a difference with this programme , it is essential that this particular issue is addressed .
And , as Mr Chatzimarkakis said : we come across as the part of the world that is most committed to quality of life , whatever a person 's age .
I think it is important that our words are actually backed by action .
I would also like to thank Ms Geringer de Oedenberg , the draftswoman of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , and all the other people from the secretariat , the PSE Group secretariat and my office for their contributions , and the Commission and Council , both the Portuguese and Slovenian Presidencies .
( Applause )
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 13 March 2008 .
Taxation of unleaded petrol and gas oil ( debate )
The next item is the report by Olle Schmidt , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the proposal for a Council Directive amending Directive 2003 / 96 / EC as regards the adjustment of special tax arrangements for gas oil used as motor fuel for commercial purposes and the coordination of taxation of unleaded petrol and gas oil used as motor fuel - C6-0109 / 2007 - .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I very much appreciate the support of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs to the Commission proposal and in particular the efforts of the rapporteur , Mr Schmidt , to find a compromise .
As you know , the Commission proposal was presented in March 2007 .
Our objective was to raise and approximate the minimum levels of excise duty on diesel and unleaded petrol in order to maintain the real value of the minima , and to approximate the national rates in order to significantly reduce what is known as ' fuel tourism ' .
The reduction of fuel tourism would not only ensure the proper functioning of the internal market for the hauliers , but would reduce the extra kilometres and consequently the extra greenhouse gas emissions , which are detrimental to the environment .
I should stress that , during the Council discussions , a large number of Member States have underlined the positive effect of the Commission proposal on the environment , particularly on climate change and global warming and the proper functioning of the internal market .
As regards Mr Schmidt 's report , I appreciate very much the positive attitude to the Commission proposal taken in the report and the efforts made by the rapporteur to find a compromise position acceptable to all .
However , the Commission cannot accept most of the amendments suggested in the report .
Let me elaborate on it .
The Commission is opposed to any suggestion that would undermine finding a long-term solution to the problem of fuel tourism - which is detrimental to the environment - and to the distortions of competition in the internal market .
As regards the transitional periods suggested in our proposal , this approach is based on the principle of equal treatment of the old and new Member States and is , therefore , well-balanced in our view .
The Commission , however , recognises that this is a political issue which will have to be discussed further in Council .
I would also like to explain that the proposal takes into account the competitiveness aspect of the EU through the suggested modest rate increases .
They simply maintain the real value of the minimum levels of taxation by keeping up with expected inflation until 2017 .
The Commission considers that its own proposal takes all relevant factors into account .
It does not consider it appropriate to endorse a less ambitious plan or a more far-reaching one to increase minimum levels of taxation as suggested in Amendments 18 and 25 .
As regards Amendments 4 and 10 introducing a new definition of commercial diesel for motor vehicles not less than 3.5 t , I would like to clarify that the suggestion was not included in the original proposal .
However , it is one of the main points of discussions in the Council where the Commission will follow the debate , bearing in mind the opinion expressed by the Parliament .
The Commission can accept in principle Amendments 7 and 27 supporting the objective of reducing CO2 emissions .
However , it should be remembered that according to the principle of subsidiarity , it is a matter for each Member State to decide the way in which they wish to distribute their tax revenue .
In conclusion , I sincerely hope that Parliament can deliver a supportive opinion on the Commission proposal sending a positive signal to the Council to give a response to the concerns of Member States having problems with fuel tourism and , at the same time , achieving environmental objectives .
rapporteur . - ( SV ) Mr President , Commissioner , the fact that taxes at EU level are a sensitive subject is demonstrated by the work on this report .
I thought that the broad consensus on the need to do something radical in order to cope with the demands of climate change would make it easier to gain sympathy for some really tough proposals .
That was not how things turned out .
Of course I can understand Mrs Rühle 's criticism of the level of ambition , but at the same time the work in our Parliament focuses on reaching reasonable compromises - something the Commissioner also mentioned - which can be implemented throughout our Union .
Here I yielded to arguments regarding both the scale of the tax increases and the period of implementation .

Excellent cooperation from my colleagues , Mr Becsey and Mr Rosati , led me to realise that , if we were to get a report through at all , I had to adjust the level without the purpose of my original proposals being entirely frustrated .
The Commission 's proposal was rejected in its entirety .
I did not gain everything , but nor did I lose everything .
Navigating between the rocks of Luxembourg and the Greens was not an altogether simple matter .
Emissions from transport are increasing substantially .
We must do something about that .
The fact that the EU Member States are competing with different levels of tax on diesel is therefore neither reasonable nor right , as the Commissioner correctly indicates .
No one can think that it is good for the internal market that giant lorries should make long detours in order to fill up with cheap diesel in places such as Luxembourg .
This so-called fuel tourism is not only bad for the environment , it distorts competition as well .
Besides , it leads to losses of tax revenue .
Moreover , there is no reason to have separate taxes on unleaded petrol and diesel .
So a compromise was reached here , which got more or less unanimous support in the committee .
The minimum taxes on diesel are raised more slowly than proposed by the Commission , from 302 euros per 1 000 litres at present to the same level as the tax on unleaded petrol , 359 euros per 1 000 litres , by 2015 .
The Commission wanted to see an increase already in 2012 .
Latvia , Lithuania , Poland , Bulgaria and Romania would be given until 1 January 2016 to introduce the higher minimum tax .
The Commission wants to raise the minimum tax to 380 euros per 1 000 litres by 2014 .
In order to avoid further distortion of competition , the committee considers that those countries which have tax rates of over 400 euros per 1 000 litres on diesel and 500 euros per 1 000 litres on unleaded petrol should not raise their tax rates on these fuels before 2015 .
Mr President , Commissioner , clearly this is a very sensitive question , in particular having regard to subsidiarity .
Nevertheless it is a possible way forward towards increased convergence of tax levels .
At the same time , we know that inevitable environmental demands will exert an influence on future assessments of the use of financial controls .
To those who do not think I have been sufficiently tough in my demands and that I have chipped away at the level of ambition I will say : in substance , I am with you .
We should have agreed on higher levels and shorter implementation periods , as the Commission and the Commissioner have said , but the EU today is not the same EU as it was only five years ago - happily , I would add .
The economic preconditions for harmonising taxes are not the same as they were .
If we are to tackle cross-border emissions , we must find reasonable compromises with which everyone can live .
We must all realise that .
Besides , I would add that many of the old Member States merit criticism since they have not followed decisions on tax increases taken previously .
Purchasing power and inflation considerations have also been taken into account in the committee 's conclusions .
The price of oil is currently hitting new records .
I last heard on the news that it was close to 110 dollars a barrel .
Now there is broad agreement on gradual tax convergence which I also hope the Commissioner sees - at least in the committee - and I hope to get the support of my colleagues in the House tomorrow , broad support so that we can get a report that can serve as a basis for further work .
on behalf of the PPE-DE group . - ( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
I congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Schmidt , on his excellent work .
I believe today represents a breakthrough , as we have managed to hammer out a common parliamentary position on a broad consensual basis .
I think it is important to preserve here in plenary the common voice we found in our committee .
It is a success because we managed to set a minimum and maximum rate of excise duty to meet anti-inflationary objectives but ignored the idea of abolishing regulation in its entirety .
It is better to have an opinion than not to provide one at all , which would leave only the Commission proposal on the table .
It is a success because everyone is sacrificing something .
Countries with high rates of taxation are ready to freeze their current high rates in the interests of convergence , while low-rate countries are willing to accept some increase relative to the legislation currently in force in relation to diesel .
The biggest sacrifice in this regard is being made by the newly acceded Baltic and Balkan states , as prices and incomes in these countries are lower and they have taken on a huge challenge in terms of inflation and competitiveness , and also in the social sphere , particularly in the run-up to introducing the euro .
It is a success because it would halt Parliament 's request show , its ' cherry-picking ' .
By the end of 2015 everyone would fall within the proposed band , and there would no longer be a whole series of inexplicable individual exceptions .
This will enable us to reinforce the gravitas of European legislation .
I think discipline is important , and we therefore ask the Commission to provide an interim report on compliance in 2010 , to check whether the adjusters are actually adjusting or merely dissembling .
It is a success because the Council will see that there is a way to achieve the desired convergence , while the Commission will grasp Parliament 's philosophy , namely minimum and maximum rates , with the key point being to reduce rather than induce inflation .
It can reflect on this in future , too , when putting forward the scheduled Commission proposal on excise duties . Thank you for your attention , Mr President .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the Commission 's proposal on taxation of unleaded petrol and diesel oil is aimed at limiting the excessive use of fuel in transport and thus reducing environmental pollution .
The Commission also hopes that its proposal will assist in reducing the differences in the excise duty rates imposed by individual Member States , thus contributing to creating more equal conditions for competition on the single market .
In general , these aims are desirable and merit support .
At the same time , however , the Commission 's proposal contains solutions that may have negative implications for the economies of the Member States . The former include : additional increases in the cost of fuel and increased inflation , higher costs and a reduction in the competitiveness of European enterprises , and a reduction of the purchasing power of households .
These implications may be particularly noticeable when oil prices on the world markets are exceptionally high , as is the case at present .
In addition , the Commission 's proposals are such that the main burden of adjustment to the new rates would have to be borne by the least developed Member States of the Union , which is a matter of great concern : hence the amendments proposed in Mr Schmidt 's report , which are aimed at minimising such negative implications , whilst not undermining the main aims of the Commission 's proposals .
In the framework of the compromise reached between the main groups , we call for the introduction of three main changes to the Commission 's initial draft .
Firstly , we propose reducing the target minimum rate of excise duty on fuel from EUR 380 per 1 000 litres to EUR 359 per 1 000 litres .
Secondly , we propose a two-year extension of the transitional period for introduction of the new rates in the new Member States , taking it to 2016 .
Thirdly , we propose imposing a requirement whereby the Member States that currently impose the highest excise duty rates on fuel would undertake not to raise them before 2015 , thus facilitating the process of harmonising excise duty rates .
Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to emphasise that reaching a compromise was no easy task .
It called for concessions and a display of good will on the part of all those who participated in discussions within the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
I should like to take this opportunity to thank Mr Schmidt for his hard work on this compromise and congratulate him on the successful outcome .
Clearly this compromise does not fully satisfy everyone involved , but it does represent an attempt to reconcile a range of aims and points of view .
It also represents a step forward along the way to reducing differences in rates of excise duty within the Union .
I call on the Members of the House to support this compromise and adopt the Schmidt report .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the President-in-Office of the European Union and the Commissioners tend to begin their interventions with declarations on the protection and support of economic freedoms , freedom of competition and SMEs .
The transition from declarations to details generally involves reports similar to the one we are debating today , however .
The report proposes imposing a single rate of excise duty on all Member States and harmonisation of prices , on the pretext of making things more straightforward , easier and fairer .
This is taking place against the background of a premise considered a priori to be correct , namely that the best solution for the Member States of the European Union is a single tax system , a single monetary system , a single system for certification and marketing , a single regulatory production limits system and so on .
The proposal states that there are no differences in the cost of fuel supply within the Union , regardless of distance from sources of supply or labour costs .
All this is simply untrue .
I should like to pose the question as to what economic freedom and freedom of competition within the European Union actually mean .
Should we not be referring instead to economic compulsion and force ?
Is it not the case that a single fuel price eliminating all competition is the ideal solution for multinational fuel enterprises to the detriment of consumers and small enterprises ?
Is it not the case that a single fuel price favours highly developed countries over less developed ones ?
Finally , if the Union adopts the aforementioned report , harmonising fuel prices under the slogan of unshackling enterprises and countries , will this not amount in fact to shackling them anew by way of taxation ?
Worse , will it not simultaneously drive them barefoot into poverty ?
We shall be voting against the report .
( NL ) Mr President , this is the first time that I have spoken in plenary .
I hope to be able to represent the interests of the Dutch citizens of Europe here both now and in the future .
There was much negotiation before the drafting of this in-depth report by Mr Schmidt .
I am glad that the rapporteur and the other groups have finally reached this compromise .
The Commission proposal seeks to raise the excise tariffs in stages and so reduce the difference between the Member States .
The environmental argument has a role to play , but I believe that the increase in fuel prices is already a sufficiently motivating factor .
Moreover , the Commission uses distortion of competition as an argument for raising the minimum excise rate on diesel for professional use .
I am astonished that fuel tourism is used as an argument for raising the minimum excise on diesel for professional use , as this argument is excessively strong .
Fuel tourism is a marginal phenomenon in the transport industry , with little influence on mutual competitive positions and the functioning of the internal market .
The Commission proposes a sharp increase in the minimum rate , to 380 euro per 1 000 litres .
I believe that such an increase in conjunction with the already extremely high fuel prices will have too great an impact on the consumer 's purse and on inflation .
The EP 's committee eventually settled on an increase to 359 euro per 1 000 litres by 1 January 2015 .
The Netherlands is already over this target .
There is one more thing .
The transport sector is rightly complaining that the steadily increasing excise is driving fuel prices steeply upwards .
The Commission proposal on the harmonisation of diesel excise has no upper limit .
Differences would thus continue to exist .
Parliament believes that the Member States must freeze the excise tariff on diesel at 400 euro per 1 000 litres until 1 January 2015 .
Finally , I hope that when the finance ministers make their decision they will give priority to the interests of the consumer as regards purchasing power and limiting inflation .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , this report deals with a highly sensitive matter of European economic policy , namely taxation , as it covers special taxes on petrol and gas oil used in commercial transport .
These taxes are an important source of tax revenue for many Member States .
However , the lack of viable alternatives for fuelling the commercial goods transport fleet means that fuel prices are a strategic factor in the competitiveness of many countries .
The recognition of Member States ' freedom to impose special consumption taxes is not in doubt .
However , as these taxes directly affect the prices of goods sold , excessive differences have a direct impact on the functioning of the internal market .
As has already been mentioned , they also lead to cross-border movements and environmental impacts caused by these movements .
The compromise reached in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs is truly a compromise and I should like , in that regard , to praise the work of all the shadow rapporteurs , and in particular the main rapporteur , Mr Schmidt .
I cannot ignore the fact that some would like the minimum level to more clearly reflect our prevailing environmental concerns .
However , I personally doubt that , given the current level of oil prices , the reinforcement of this kind of message by means of taxation is necessary .
The choice has therefore been made to bring the minimum and maximum levels of taxation closer , which , by partly sacrificing these environmental concerns in the opinion of some people , will allow the distortions of competition due to taxation to be reduced .
A major effort has been made and we hope that this will receive due recognition from the Commission and the Council and that it will allow further progress to be made on taxation within the European Union .
( FR ) Mr President , if Mrs Kauppi does not arrive she is allowing me to use her two minutes , since she is hosting an important dinner-debate .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the report by our Liberal colleague Olle Schmidt relates to a new confrontation between the House and the European Commission , which has proposed an unjustifiable increase in indirect taxes .
This proposal was made by a Commissioner that I feel has completely lost touch with economic reality .
Mr Kovács suggests a considerable increase in the minimum rates for unleaded petrol and gas oil .
In view of the record inflation , a cause of great concern to the European Central Bank , and the economic downturn we are currently witnessing , it seems to me that this is a particularly bad time to increase the excise duty rate on gas oil and fuel oil .
Personally , I must say that I would simply have rejected this uninspiring proposal by the Commission , but majority situations being what they are in the House I was unable to do so .
I support the compromise reached by the EP 's main political groups as I feel it constitutes an exercise in damage limitation .
The gradual increase of minimum rates for diesel to 359 euro for 1 000 litres until 2015 and a freeze on minimum rates for the same amount of unleaded petrol , as stipulated in the compromise , are clearly below the levels proposed by the Commission .
The Commission was , in fact , suggesting 380 euro for both diesel and unleaded petrol by 2014 .
The rapporteur wanted to go even further in his report and was seeking minimum levels of 400 euro .
I welcome the willingness to compromise on the part of our rapporteur , who brought the rates down during the discussions on his report in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
The real meat of this report is to be found in Amendment 19 , in my opinion .
Here we require the Member States , now applying exorbitant excise duty of over 400 euro for 1 000 litres of diesel and 500 euro for 1 000 litres of unleaded petrol , not to increase these rates any further until 2015 .
Therefore , without going so far as to introduce maximum rates in the proposal , for the Commission has never had the courage to propose these , we are at the very least expressing the desire for price alignment .
Mr President , there is only one way to ensure harmonisation of excise duty rates in Europe : introducing maximum and minimum rates at the same time .
It serves no purpose to continue to increase minimum rates and make no effort to curtail the enthusiasm of the Member States that insist on applying extremely high rates .
Finally , if you will allow me , Mr President , I would like to make a point of order .
I want to ask the Commissioner , who claimed we support his proposal , whether he lives on another planet , because we do not in fact support his proposal .
( EL ) Mr President , now that inflation in the euro area is at its highest historical point and the price of oil has reached USD 110 dollars a barrel , the European Parliament will tomorrow raise indirect tax on fuel .
If this is not a joke , it is certainly aimed at making the readers of Friday 's papers smile .
I think that we are sending the wrong message at the wrong time .
We are demonstrating that we do not understand how society operates .
Furthermore , my delegation will not support the compromise ; we are opposed to the bully-boy tactics of six Member States that already have high taxation , forcing all the others , through the Commissioner , Mr Kovács , to raise prices on the pretext of petrol tourism .
I cannot justify that to my voters .
Instead of carrying out such experiments , let us turn to other policies that benefit the environment .
We must avoid such tax-raising acrobatics .
( BG ) My country has made great efforts to increase the excise tax over the recent years and the taxes rates for lead-free gasolene have grown from EUR 254 in 2004 to EUR 350 , while those for diesel fuel from EUR 203 to EUR 307 respectively .
We have been guided by the willingness to rapidly increase tax rates so that to reduce the inflationary effect in the years to come .
The new proposal of the Commission puts our strategy to question .
Therefore the proposal put forward in the report of the Economic Committee sounds reasonable and penalizes countries like Bulgaria and Romania to a less extent .
I hope that the Commission will accept this compromise , although even this proposal generates a serious effort for the Bulgarian economy and it would be an inflationary factor , without producing any effect for the environment because gasolene and fuel oil are not elastic products and they depend on many other economic factors rather than excise taxes .
( NL ) Very briefly , Commissioner , it seems to me that it would be useful to point out that we need to be cautious in relation to this issue .
The public needs to be informed about what is at stake here , because the critics will of course be ready to paint this as a straightforward tax increase , whereas Parliament 's proposal is a very modest measure : a real tax increase would be disastrous at a time when prices are so high .
This proposal , which we will hopefully adopt tomorrow , is a good start towards finally putting an end to the distortion of competition that has existed for many years , particularly in the border regions ; it is also good for the environment .
Commissioner , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my second comment is that we are counting on ourselves , and the European Commission in particular , to continue playing a very proactive role in the development and promotion of environmentally-friendly fuels , in other words implementing policies that will help us to get rid of fossil fuels , petrol and diesel .
( PL ) Mr President , I should like to draw attention to three issues .
Firstly , it seems that the price of oil will not fall below USD 100 per barrel in the future , which will result in a continuous rise in the price of fuel .
It is only thanks to the weakness of the American dollar that drastic rises in fuel prices in Europe have been avoided .
We cannot , however , expect the United States to wish its currency to be weak forever .
In the light of this situation , the proposal to increase excise duty rates in the European Union over the coming years seems to take no account whatsoever of economic reality .
Secondly , per capita GDP in the new Member States is lower than in the older ones , as is the level of personal income . It will therefore only be possible for the new Member States to harmonise the tax burden once a comparable level of personal income has been attained .
Finally , pursuant to the principle of subsidiarity , the Member States should enjoy greater freedom as regards reducing the tax burden on fuels that are not derived from oil .
Such measures would stimulate interest in the use of renewable fuels .
They would also help us to reduce CO2 emissions and to fulfil our international obligations regarding environmental protection .
( FR ) Mr President , I only wish to take the floor briefly to point out that not all Members from Luxembourg are not all cheap petrol junkies .
I think that Mr Belet has set things out very well .
We must find a compromise with the policies on the problems concerning oil resources and climate change , and strike a balance between the countries and the regions too .
I would just like to inform you that on Tuesday the Luxembourg Parliament debated climate change , and it held a discussion on petrol pump tourism .
The vast majority of Members of the Luxembourg Parliament , including members of Mrs Lulling 's own party , agree that this phenomenon must stopped locally at least .
I thus merely wish to say that Luxembourg as a whole has a completely different stance to that of Mrs Lulling , who represents a minority on this issue , and a very small minority at that .
( PL ) Mr President , it would appear that a single market , along with free movement of goods and services equates to full competitiveness .
This is not quite the case , though , as the cost of the means of production , which includes the cost of fuel , has a significant impact on the profitability of production .
In fact , at present the taxes on fuel differ even between neighbouring countries , giving rise to so-called fuel tourism in border regions .
This activity is not very widespread , however .
It appears reasonable to approximate the rates of excise duty , but the process should be slow and be spread over many stages .
Harmonisation of the minimum excise duty rates for diesel fuel and unleaded petrol should also be staggered .
We should be guided by the general principle of striving to ensure that taxes and excise duties on fuel are kept as low as possible , to avoid driving up inflation and production costs and increasing household expenditure . This is particularly relevant in relation to the new Member States , where earnings are significantly lower .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all I would like to thank you for the comments and views expressed during the debate .
Obtaining a positive opinion from Parliament on the Commission 's proposal for special tax arrangements for commercial diesel is very important .
However , we have taken note that your report is less ambitious compared to the Commission proposal , in particular by not endorsing the revalorisation of the overall minimum tax levels applicable to diesel and unleaded petrol .
I have not lost sight of economic rationale .
On the contrary : economic rationale speaks against the extra millions of kilometres and also the extra tons of CO2 and other greenhouse gases which are the result of fuel tourism .
I have to take into consideration - and we all have to take into consideration - the growing threat of what climate change and global warming mean for mankind .
This threat is even much more alarming than inflation .
As far as the proposed increase of excise duty is concerned , it will not generate inflation .
It will just keep up with the expected inflation of 2.2 % a year until 2017 .
While the Commission can accept Amendment 1 in part and Amendments 7 and 27 in principle , we have to formally reject the other amendments .
The Commission will not formally amend this proposal .
We will , however , endeavour to take the amendments suggested by Parliament into consideration as much as possible during deliberations in the Council .
A positive opinion from Parliament will be an important signal of the increasing awareness of the growing negative impact on the environment of transport , which we have to address through fuel taxation .
rapporteur . - ( SV ) Mr President , thank you for your kind words .
I think that thanks are also due to the Commission and our committee secretariat .
I thought at first that the Commissioner did not seem really to accept the committee 's views .
I can understand that on formal grounds .
Now , when I heard the Commission again , I thought I detected an understanding of the notion that politics is politics .
I recognise that we could have been more ambitious .
The Commissioner uses the phrase ' less ambitious ' .
Yes , but listen to this debate from left to right and upwards and downwards .
All points of view were expressed , and then we had Mrs Lulling sitting in the middle .
Commissioner , it is on the basis of political reality , as you are indeed aware , that we had to formulate a report and a proposal which will land on your desk .
Now a report from the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs will arrive , let us hope tomorrow , which will not go entirely your way and which you cannot accept in all respects , but it will be a report .
Finally , I would like to say to the Commissioner that I nevertheless believe we have made progress - if we get a positive result tomorrow - in ending the confrontation which has taken place on these matters between the committee , Parliament and the Commission , and the Council too .
Just as you say , we need to take action on fuel tourism for the sake of the internal market .
That is quite correct , but we must also prepare drastic and forceful measures for the environment .
There must be an understanding of such measures throughout our Union , and I believe that we have succeeded in finding the right balance .
( FR ) Mr President , I wish to ask for the floor on a personal matter .
Mr Turmes called me a junkie .
I feel this is an insult to me and I call on him to withdraw his remark .
In relation to the matter in hand , I can firmly state that my party and my government fully support the compromise proposed by our rapporteur , to which I made a substantial contribution .
Mr Turmes , moreover , seems to forget that gas oil is currently less expensive in Belgium than in Luxembourg and that any petrol pump tourists there may be are not heading for Luxembourg , but for Belgium at this point in time .
Very well .
We note what Mrs Lulling has said , and I am sure that the statements made in this House will be clarified .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 13 March 2008 .
Global Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Fund ( debate )
The next item is the report by Claude Turmes , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on the Global Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Fund .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Martin Luther King had a dream .
He dreamt of a society where the colour of your skin did not lead to discrimination .
It was a dream that revolutionised America and the world .
Today Europe has a dream , or rather a vision : to develop the energies of the future , not only in Europe but also beyond Europe , the vision of renewable energies playing a major role by the middle of this century , helping to avoid conflicts over the remaining oil and gas resources , mitigating climate change and ensuring that billions of people across the world have access to the energy that is out of their reach today .
I think that the Commission , represented today by its environmental conscience , Mr Dimas , has every reason to be proud of this Global Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Fund ( GEEREF ) .
It is our assumption that within four or five years there will be EUR 500 million in this Fund , making it the world 's largest fund for investment in renewables and energy efficiency .
These EUR 500 million will come in part from the public purse , with around EUR 80 to 150 million from the European budget , but also from the national governments ' budgets .
We have specific commitments currently from Germany and also from Norway .
What will this Fund achieve ?
The financial analysts who look in detail at flows of investment into individual renewable energy and energy efficiency projects have observed that it is difficult to attract risk capital for investments of less than EUR 10 million . This Fund will be geared particularly to these medium-sized projects up to EUR 10 million .
It will therefore be a ' fund of funds ' , which means that this Fund will not invest directly in wind farms in Morocco or solar energy systems in China , but will acquire shares in investment funds in Southern Africa , in Central Africa , in China , in Russia or in South America .
The public purse will determine politically where the funding will go .
It will be attractive for private investors because the public purse will in effect cover all the investment risk , so that the returns on the investments - if these investments yield any returns , that is - will go first to private investors and only in the second phase will they go back into the public purse , and that of course provides a great deal of security for private investors .
We as parliamentarians have raised four or five points relating to this Fund .
The first is also a specific question to Commissioner Dimas .
At a time when biofuels are an extremely controversial issue , we as parliamentarians have taken the view that we must apply very strict criteria for any biomass or biofuel project investment from the Fund .
It is not just that the environmental balance could be problematical ; it would also pose an image problem for the Fund if its reputation were to be damaged by such investment .
Once again , then , Commissioner , can you guarantee that the Commission will do its best to apply the strict criteria that are required ?
The second issue of importance to us as parliamentarians - and I think this is especially true of those of us who are concerned with development - is that we want this Fund to make a significant contribution to overcoming energy poverty .
We therefore need to apply the know-how of microfinancing institutions such as the Grameen Bank and others that are already implementing projects for the poorest of the poor , such as solar collectors or PV systems .
We must involve these microfinancing institutions .
My second question to you , Commissioner , is this : is the Commission willing , as the major public donor , to ensure that 20-25 % of the funding will genuinely be utilised for this type of microproject through microfinancing arrangements ?
Thirdly , we were afraid that if investing in China is becoming so easy , all the funding from GEEREF would flow in that direction .
What we want , however , is a good geographical spread of investment and so we need the Commission 's political commitment that funds will be provided for investment in countries in Africa , the Caribbean and South America as well .
As Parliament , we need stringent monitoring and evaluation with regular reports to this House and its Committee on Budgets and Committee on Budgetary Control , because we want to increase this Fund if possible over the next few years : to do that , we of course need the confidence of this House in the workings of the Fund .
Those are my initial comments , and I look forward to the debate with my fellow Members .
( Applause )
Member of the Commission . - ( EL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , over a year has passed since the publication of the Communication from the Commission ' Mobilising public and private finance towards global access to climate-friendly , affordable and secure energy services : the Global Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Fund ' ( known as GEEREF ) .
Since then , there have been many developments , such as the Bali Agreement last December .
As a result , this initiative now appears more important and timely .
It is , then , the right moment to debate this report , and I note with satisfaction that the European Parliament is particularly positive about this new and innovative means of supporting energy efficiency and renewable energy projects .
Allow me , first of all , to explain why the Commission has proposed to use public subsidies in the global fund of business risk capital , even though Mr Turmes has already indicated the main points leading us to this decision and has also asked some questions .
In fact , despite the continual progress observed in the utilisation of renewable energy sources , the total worldwide share of energy sources that they represent remains low .
It is also well known that improving energy efficiency can offer greater gains than setting up a new energy infrastructure .
Nevertheless , with the investments being made worldwide in the energy efficiency sector , existing opportunities for improvement are not being fully utilised .
The significant difficulties in finding private funding for energy efficiency and renewable energy projects are thus a major problem .
The reasons are complex and relate mainly to the lack of business risk capital .
Business risk capital is required in developing countries , and in transitional economies it is estimated to amount to more than EUR 9 billion a year .
This is much higher than the amount currently available .
Although public subsidies have been increased in recent years , the total amount available is insufficient .
Additional capital must be found ; it is required in the energy sector until 2030 .
As a result , the search for private sector funding is vital .
However , the many years required for the repayment of investments in clean technologies hinder investors , especially in geographical regions deemed to be high-risk .
For example , private investments in sub-Saharan Africa are very low ; this is precisely why one of the objectives of GEEREF is to encourage investments in these regions .
The amount to which Mr Turmes has referred is indicative , as it is a minimum to be invested in these regions .
A second problem that Mr Turmes has referred to is the scale of projects .
For small-scale projects in remote countries , administrative and execution costs may be higher . As a result , international funding bodies are not prepared to fund such projects , particularly if their value is below EUR 10 million , as you have said .
This is precisely the aim of GEEREF : to overcome such obstacles in the way of small-scale investments .
We will focus our efforts on projects such as these .
The fund will attract private investors by using public resources to protect them from the risks I referred to earlier .
To enable GEEREF to get up and running , the European Commission will commit approximately EUR 80 million from the current year until 2010 .
As you said earlier , with the additional commitments by the governments of Germany and Norway , we have exceeded EUR 100 million .
We expect that additional business risk capital will be drawn from the private sector , amounting to at least EUR 300-500 million , or perhaps as much as EUR 1 billion , in the slightly longer term .
Mr President , I am pleased that in this report the European Parliament is supporting the creation of the Global Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Fund .
I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Turmes , for his efforts , as well as Mr Wijkman and Mrs Korhola from the Committee on Development and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety respectively , for their contributions .
I think that this is an important and timely initiative that demonstrates that the EU is taking action and is determined to help developing countries to gain access to energy efficiency and renewable energy sources .
The fundamental prerequisite for the funding of projects - and not only those connected with biomass or biofuels - will undoubtedly be respect for sustainability criteria , which will not be any less stringent than those laid down in various EU legislation .
This will strengthen the relationship of trust that we need to establish with these countries , especially with a view to the global climate change agreement , which should be concluded by the end of 2009 .
( Applause )
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety . - ( FI ) Mr President , climate and energy issues have rapidly become crucially important in almost every area of European Union policy .
The call for the increased use of renewable energy is a topical one right now , not least on account of the qualitative targets which have now been decided for renewable energy .
This fund is a shining example and one that inspires hope .
The issue is not always self-evident , however .
Something which is politically trendy can become a litmus test for political correctness , and the situation can result in a race to see who is keenest to be on the side of everything that is good .
That is how things seem to have gone recently with the target announced for renewable energy .
The proposal also has elements of overkill , and the timetable set has obvious risks .
When the genuine technological potential is still lacking , there is a danger that a binding target will be realised in a way that irrevocably destroys natural values .
Not all biofuels are a benefit to the environment and not all renewable forms of energy reduce emissions , as Mr Turmes quite rightly stated just now .
There is a need for renewable energy , but the issue should be approached wisely .
The Global Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Fund now under discussion is a splendid example of how something good can be encouraged in a way which produces a diverse range of benefits .
There is an old saying about not just giving fish to the hungry but also teaching them how to fish .
This applies to the funding of local projects , so that know-how and skills are improved and retained in third countries .
This is the way to make projects sustainable and able to continue .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( SL ) Climate change mitigation and energy are two important components of the European Union 's development policy .
And so they should be . I am pleased with any initiative that may help a secure and sustainable energy supply , not only in Europe but also in third countries .
Allow me to express some doubts , which we have to dispel before we set up this fund .
Firstly , the number of initiatives in the area of energy and development policies is growing steadily .
Sadly , the desired results are relatively rarely achieved .
The initiatives in the shape of various funds are not mutually harmonised and , above all , they rarely finance individual projects directly .
The latter also applies to the fund under discussion , which should operate via the setting-up and financing of regional sub-funds in developing countries .
We should consider how it will affect the transparency of the use of resources , and to what extent the institutional conditions in developing countries will facilitate their intended use .
Secondly , only timely actions can be effective .
In the case of the proposed world fund , appropriate timing is not in evidence .
The proposal was made in 2006 and we are debating it only this year .
Thirdly , I would like to stress the fact cited in the document itself : the resources intended for the fund are not sufficient .
Not even the minimum sum envisaged for successful operation of the fund has been secured .
That will hardly help to stimulate investment by the private sector .
Fourthly , I find it difficult to imagine that the fund can be operated effectively merely by cooperation between the Union and international financial institutions .
Our proposal lacks a clear ambition and plan for cooperation with other industrialised countries in the world and internationalisation of the world fund .
As was said before , the idea is welcome , but its added value and actual realisation have yet to be thought through .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Turmes , on his good work and his commitment .
The Global Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Fund is an active contribution from Europe to combating climate change .
As shadow rapporteur in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , I would like to address two points .
Firstly , it is important to ensure that sustainability has absolute priority in the context of the projects to be supported by the Fund .
Greenhouse gas emissions must be analysed across the entire lifecycle and no funding should be provided to projects with an unsatisfactory record on CO2 emissions .
This analysis is particularly important for projects that have a biomass component .
Secondly , I am an optimist , so I assume that the United Nations Climate Change Conference in Copenhagen next year will be successful and we will be able to take the next step towards a successor agreement to the Kyoto Protocol .
The use of renewable energies will then play an important role for the developing countries .
The Commission must take account of that factor today and adapt the Fund accordingly .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , the Commission proposal for a Global Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Fund ( GEEREF ) is , of course , welcome .
It is vital that energy efficiency and renewable energy play an increasing role in developing and emerging countries for a wide range of reasons - lowering carbon dioxide emissions , cutting energy supply dependence , tackling energy poverty and creating jobs and development opportunities - indeed , for all the same reasons that it is vital that energy efficiency and renewable energy play an increasing role here in the EU .
But I have a number of concerns about the Commission proposal .
Firstly , the funding proposed is extremely modest for the scale of the project .
EUR 15 million a year of public funding is peanuts - even as a seed capital intended to attract and underwrite private investment .
It could easily be swallowed up by just a couple of projects in the larger , emerging countries such as China or India .
Although the Commission communication speaks about the possibility of attracting co-financing from the 9th European Development Fund ( EDF ) , it is not all clear how decisions will be made on allocating the budget between the ACP countries , on the one hand , and the more developed and advanced non-EU eastern European countries supported by co-financing from the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development ( EBRD ) .
As a result , it is not all clear how the fund will contribute to poverty reduction .
It seems to be rather a macro-fund than a micro-fund , designed to attract private finance in support of projects which , though they are relatively small by European standards , would be large in terms of many African countries .
It is not clear how GEEREF financing is going to filter down to Community-level projects such as PV panels for health centres and schools or solar cookers and water heaters .
It is grass-root development which generally does the most to improve the lives of the poorest people .
Finally , I am concerned that the relationship between the fund and the Clean Development Mechanism ( CDM ) has not been clearly explained .
It would be helpful if the Commission could indicate how the fund is going to improve developing country access to the CDM .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , the report by Mr Turmes concerns a very ambitious target for developing countries to use their energy resources efficiently .
These countries are frequently in geographical regions where it is possible to exploit cheap natural renewable energy resources .
There can also be progress in development without massive investment in the latest technology .
For example , the production of charcoal from the meagre reserves of wood in those areas of Sub-Saharan Africa which are becoming desert is a more cost-effective way of using wood resources than simply burning it .
They have to know how to char wood before burning it .
You do not need a lot of money to teach skills like this and others .
The principles upon which the GEEREF operates I interpret as such that it will not be possible to obtain money from the fund just to disseminate skills and knowledge , but of course other forms of development aid can be used for this purpose .
The funding of projects through equity investments is an interesting option .
What is good about this from the point of view of those in receipt of the cash and those who spend it is that it does not add to the indebtedness of countries already in debt .
The question arises , however , of how expensive it will be to manage this investment and monitor the ability of small companies to pay the money back .
This fund could , in the best-case scenario , prepare developing countries for slower growth in the use of fossil fuels .
Our group is fully unanimous in its approval of Mr Turmes 's report .
( DE ) Mr President , many thanks to you , Claude .
You held a great many meetings on this topic .
It is a very complex issue and I would like to thank you particularly for being so consistently transparent throughout these negotiations and for making it possible for us to look at the project from a holistic perspective .
The challenge worldwide nowadays is to think about efficiency , in energy consumption , but also in production .
However , this cannot only apply to the macro level ; we must always be guided by the maxim ' think small first ' : look at the micro level first , and if it works there , it will work at the macro level too .
We must focus on ensuring that we apply the best available technology that exists globally .
This can be simple , clearly structured technology ; it does not need to be electronics and nanotechnology .
We have to try and make this technology financially accessible , as far as possible , so that everyone can afford to use it .
On the other hand , of course , we also have to penalise those who squander our Earth 's resources .
This is a major challenge for our Commissioner as well , to look at the global structures : punishing those who waste energy and rewarding those who operate using the best and most efficient technologies .
This is a core principle in climate policy as well .
Studies in the European Union show that the costs of climate change will run into billions and billions of euro .
That is why it is essential not only to do something for countries outside Europe ; the Council should also be thinking about providing new funding for research and development in the field of energy efficiency , especially in the new European Institute of Technology .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , thank you for your contribution .
The European Parliament welcomes this Fund .
Commissioner Dimas , you have launched the right kind of initiative at the right time .
If , as Europeans , we are committed to cutting CO2 emissions , it does not matter where CO2 is emitted .
CO2 emissions must be reduced all over the world , and that is why we have to apply the new technologies everywhere .
However , I see this Fund as being not only a development instrument but also a strategic instrument .
It is not just about providing development aid . Rather , Europeans must not only be trailblazers when it comes to the issue of climate change ; we must also encourage others to join us on our journey .
They must be able to follow the route we have taken .
That is where I think this Fund can make a crucial contribution .
If we set overly ambitious targets and end up isolated and alone , this will spell the end for our industrial base as well .
That is why there is a need for global governance here .
Bali was a good approach and Copenhagen will be another .
However , in a global governance system , it is not only about power play ; we must creative incentive systems and I believe that this Fund creates the right kind of incentive .
Claude Turmes referred at the start of his speech to Martin Luther King 's dream .
As Europeans , we can only make our dream of saving the climate a reality if we pursue this path consistently .
Claude Turmes , you will secure a very substantial majority in favour of this report tomorrow and I would like to congratulate you here and now on that achievement .
I am very pleased for you .
( RO ) The European efficiency and renewable energy fund is an innovative solution to maximise the efficiency of public funds used in the field of energy efficiency and renewable energy sources by mobilising private investments .
This fund is a public-private partnership , dedicated to financing the specific projects proposed by SMEs , whose value does not exceed 10 million euro .
The initial costs for renewable energy projects are 37 times higher than those of conventional energy sources and that is why we regret the fact that for the time being the foreseen fund value is only 100 million euro .
In 2005 the Union relied 50 % on energy imports and among the Members States only Denmark is a net exporter .
Over the period 1995-2005 the use of renewable energy sources increased by 40 % in the Union .
Thus , in 2005 , unpolluted energy sources represented 42 % of the European primary energy production .
The effective use of this fund could supply energy to a number of citizens ranging from 1 to 3 million , at the same time reducing CO2 emissions by 1-2 million tons per year .
Congratulations to the rapporteur .

( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to begin by congratulating Mr Turmes on his report and the Commission on its initiative .
Many of us believe that the European Union must consider support for renewable energies and energy efficiency as not just an integral part of its energy and climate change strategy , but also an integral part of its development policy .
Therefore , the proposal to create a Global Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Fund to mobilise private investment for developing countries and economies in transition is very interesting .
What is needed for ideal modest financing is the establishment of priorities and synergies with other existing programmes and with the World Bank and regional development banks , which are increasingly investing in renewable energies and in energy efficiency .
However , after the first few years of implementation of the new instrument the results will have to be assessed and efforts made to encourage substantial increases in the contributions from the actors concerned .
I agree that everything suggests at present that the support should principally target Africa and Latin America .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioner and our rapporteur for a splendid draft , which I fully support . It amounts to a very good signal on the part of the European Union .
I refer to the willingness to support developing countries , and also to combat climate change . I do , however , have the following question for the Commissioner .
How does the Commission intend to prevent deforestation , which is often linked to the production of biomass and biofuels in developing countries ? Moreover , is the Commission keeping a suitable distance from the production of first generation biomass and biofuels , as it is well know that this is not the a particularly safe matter ?
I would like to offer my strong support for the statement by Mr Chatzimarkakis .
The European Union has to send out a signal of this type .
We are responsible for the conferences on climate change due to take place in Poznań and Copenhagen in the near future , and for the success of the post-Kyoto negotiations . We are also responsible for sending out the right signals to the rest of the world .
This programme represents just such a signal .
( PL ) Mr President , I should like to draw attention to three issues .
It is entirely appropriate for the author of the report to point out that the most serious consequences of climate change are felt in the poorest countries . This is because the latter only have very limited resources , especially financial ones , with which to respond to climate change .
Secondly , in the light of what I have just mentioned , it is right to support the Commission 's proposal to set up a Fund , even though the EUR 80 million suggested is a meagre amount . Nonetheless , as this Fund is intended to help leverage private sector investment to finance local projects , it may prove very effective indeed .
Thirdly , I should like to take this opportunity to point out that the burden of combating climate change is not being shared at all fairly within the European Union itself .
For example , the CO2 emission limits were allocated to the various countries without taking sufficient account of how far the latter might be lagging behind in terms of development .
As a result , countries such as Poland were allocated very low limits , and this led almost immediately to a rise of between 10 % and 20 % in the cost of electricity .
( PL ) Mr President , the main purpose of this Fund is to encourage private investment and the support of regional funds for the poorest and least developed countries in the world .
The Fund is intended to support energy efficiency , energy saving , the development of renewable energy and the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions . It is also intended to help improve access to basic energy services .
The Union 's action in this field should assist poorer regions to counter climate change and to diversify their sources of energy .
We should bear in mind that the effects of climate change are felt first of all by the poorest inhabitants of this planet .
It would be wrong for us to limit action to counter climate change and reduce energy consumption to our area only .
Making aid available for such action available to poorer countries will help to launch relevant activities on their territory . The aid will have a significant impact and will raise awareness of the importance of these problems .
This is the right initiative at the right time .
( PL ) Mr President , I just wanted to point out that , amongst renewable sources of energy , we have not paid much attention to geothermal sources , that is to say , to clean energy .
Making use of existing boreholes sunk for geological research purposes could reduce the cost involved .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , of course geothermal energy is covered .
We are very much interested in geothermal energy , as well as in other renewable sources of energy .
Concerning Poland and the allocation of allowances : for the first trading period , they had plenty , far more than were necessary for the needs of energy and industry , and this over-allocation caused the problem with the allowances price .
For the second trading period we consider that the allowances given to Poland are again quite enough to cover the needs of Polish industry .
For the third trading period there is a new system , which will be based on what industry or the energy plants require to cover their needs , involving auctioning to the extent that we shall agree .
Concerning deforestation , of course it is a great issue and linked both to biodiversity and climate change - equally important .
Tackling deforestation contributes both to halting of the loss of biodiversity and fighting climate change , so it is very important .
However , deforestation projects have a peculiarity : they are very difficult .
Nevertheless , it is one of the first priorities that we have to tackle , not only by means of this fund but by various other measures , especially by agreeing what incentives we should link with the various approaches to tackling deforestation , for example reducing the rate of deforestation and maintaining forests or any other approach that is being promoted by various countries .
We are working on this , especially with the World Bank , and there will be some pilot projects .
So , there are various sources of financing for various purposes .
I would like first of all to express my appreciation for the very good and positive contributions and I can assure you that your suggestions and comments will be taken into account in our work .
They are very useful and they touch on various important issues .
I am not going to answer now , for example , about the importance of CDM projects for sub-Saharan Africa .
I would just remind you that in 2006 in Nairobi we had the initiative by Kofi Annan , the then Secretary-General of the United Nations , for promoting CDM projects in sub-Saharan Africa .
We , like the United Nations , are committed to carrying out more projects there and not concentrating only on projects in China and India .
So your comment is very important , but of course the relation between this fund and CDMs could be seen and could be of importance .
I have three additional comments to make .
First , you call for a special emphasis on serving the needs of sub-Saharan and ACP countries .
Of course we are concerned that projects in major countries like China and Russia will absorb all or too high a percentage of the available resources .
This has happened with CDMs , by the way , and so your comment is right .
The GEEREF will engage in existing investment opportunities but we agree that special emphasis is needed on serving the needs of ACP countries .
We will also ensure that any subfund which only covers one country will not be allowed to absorb all or most of the available resources .
The GEEREF needs to be spread to different parts of the world , also with a view to spreading the investment risk , and Mr Turmes 's suggestion about the percentage is very correct .
Second , let me come back to the poverty dimension , which is obviously fundamental .
As you mentioned today , some 1.6 billion people in the poorer countries of the world still have no regular access to reliable energy services .
I believe that with the GEEREF we have an opportunity to contribute to access to clean and affordable energy , a necessary prerequisite for reducing global poverty and promoting sustainable development .
Third and finally , you welcome the Fund 's focus on leveraging private investments - although you mentioned that the funds are not enough ; I think that funds are never enough - and you call for more Member States to offer additional financial support .
Of course I fully support and agree with what you suggested , and the Commission is working and will continue to work to attract more investors to join .
On this aspect , I would also like to ask for your support in promoting the GEEREF to all relevant actors .
The more support we have , the more real actions on the ground we will be able to conduct .
rapporteur . - Mr President , this will be a fund potentially of EUR 500 million , because it has a leverage factor of 3 to 5 on the private capital .
The EUR 100 million , EUR 120 million or EUR 150 million of public money will be able to leverage - at least we hope - another EUR 300 million or EUR 400 million to make EUR 500 million .
And we still have governments which can jump on board .
If we have good monitoring , then Parliament will allow the Commission to go up .
Ms Jordan Cizelj raised a very important question : how prepared are certain regions of the world for investments ?
We in Parliament have voted an additional EUR 5 million from another budget line for institutional capacity building to frame this programme .
So we need to build up small and medium-sized enterprises in African countries and in India , which will then develop business models .
We have to learn from earlier errors in development policy where we just granted technology without considering that we also have to inform people about this technology .
I am saying this in front of the Development Commissioner and we know that the Development DG is helping to raise the institutional capacities of these countries .
So what we need to do now - and , Commissioner , you are right - is reach out to investors .
This Friday in Luxembourg , which is the second-biggest investment centre in the world , there will be a meeting of bankers .
We will present to them a SICAV , a vehicle which is based in Luxembourg .
I hope that the Commission will design a good communication strategy .
Go to the City of London , go to Frankfurt , go to Paris , go to Zurich , because the bankers have to be informed about this vehicle .
Why is this important at this time ?
At the moment we are still under pressure from the Liechtenstein scandal and the subprime crisis .
In several months we have destroyed hundreds of billions of capital .
Greening finances may be an even more important task for this planet and policymakers than greening industry .
This type of vehicle allows capital to go to the right investments .
It may not have as high a return as certain speculative investments but it is a mid- and long-term investment and that is probably exactly what certain pension funds and others are looking for .
So this fund also has huge opportunities to bring in institutional investors and that is what we should look for .
Thank you very much for your support for what I call the fan community of a renewable and better world .
Mr Turmes , may I congratulate you on your excellent English and on your commitment to this subject .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday 14 March .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - The reasons for setting up this fund deserve our praise .
The resources being funnelled into this fund are a joke .
The key objectives of the fund should be the promotion of energy efficiency , energy saving and renewable energies , reduction of emissions of greenhouse gases and the improvement of access to energy services in the poorest countries , not to mention diversification of energy sources in the developing world .
Statistics ( which are already outdated ) indicate that 1.6 billion people do not have access to basic energy services . 2.4 billion people rely on traditional biomass for cooking and heating .
The International Energy Agency estimates that by 2010 USD 241 billion will be needed to be invested into renewable energy generation . Regarding developing countries , the estimate is at least USD 10 billion or EUR 9 billion .
The proposed budget for this fund under discussion is EUR 80 million between 2007 and 2010 , with EUR 15 million in 2008 to kick-start the initiative .
The figures speak for themselves .
These resources are but a drop in the ocean of what is needed .
The intentions are good but intentions with meagre funding do not correspond to serious initiatives .
in writing . - ( HU ) European Union support for distance heating !
I welcome the European Commission 's initiative for a new Global Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Fund ( GEEREF ) .
Securing our energy supply - and doing so in a manner that does not jeopardise our environmental values , our strategic security or our competitiveness , is one of the biggest challenges of the twenty-first century .
The cheapest energy , of course , is energy that we do not use , in other words energy we save .
In these energy-lean times , energy conservation is in everyone 's vital interests , whether consumers or larger communities .
From a left-wing perspective it must also be emphasised that energy conservation and efficient energy use is a social issue too , given that it is often the poorest people , in particular , that waste the most energy .
This is especially true of the new Member States , for example in homes on Hungary 's housing estates , which use more than twice as much energy per square metre as in western Europe .
This is why it is important to provide Community resources for the modernisation of eastern Europe 's distance heating systems .
Distance heating , in theory , is an energy-saving system and has the advantage of being easy to adapt to renewable energies , while in the case of individual heating this would need to be carried out on a house-by-house basis .
Making European Union resources available for distance heating is therefore crucial .
In addition , consideration could be given to providing uniform tax concessions across the European Union to facilitate investment in energy conservation and create funds for this purpose .
in writing . - ( PL ) Renewable energy and energy efficiency contribute to reducing the rise in average temperatures across the world .
As research and reports indicate , it is precisely the poorer societies and the poorest members of the latter that are most seriously affected by the negative consequences of climate change .
It is therefore our duty to protect those sections of society in view of their heightened vulnerability in economic terms .
The use of renewable sources of energy contributes , inter alia , to raising environmental standards , for instance by reducing emissions of CO2 and other greenhouse gases . It also helps to increase employment and lower costs .
Another key argument in their favour is that they reduce dependence on particular sources of energy , whilst the number of people deprived of basic energy services is increasing .
This is particularly important in the context of shaping the economies of developing countries .
Most of the latter are experiencing a period of economic growth , and as a result the demand for energy in those areas is high .
The development of renewable sources of energy in developing countries is very relevant indeed to the efforts aimed at limiting greenhouse gas emissions and ensuring security of supply in countries that are only able to meet part of their own energy requirements .
Accordingly , the Union should support renewable sources of energy and energy efficiency , especially in developing countries , because these are particularly important features of the strategy on energy and climate change and also of development policy .
The particular situation of women in prison and the impact of the imprisonment of parents on social and family life ( debate )
The next item is the report by Marie Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , on the particular situation of women in prison and the impact of the imprisonment of parents on social and family life .

Mr President , the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , which is presenting this own-initiative report , has invested both effort and material expenditure in the issue : the members of our committee not only worked on this report , but also presented a voluminous report on the situation of women in prisons in Europe . At a hearing we listened to leading scientists and civil society representatives speak on the subject .
The offices of the European Parliament have so far given us some interesting presentations on the subject . These highlight Parliament 's work on the protection of human rights and the safeguarding of the particular rights of women having to live in the difficult circumstances of imprisonment .
Female prisoners belong to a special category ; they probably represent a minority of the total number of prisoners in Europe , on average only 5 % . Of course , the figure fluctuates between 7 % and 0 % .
The report seems to me to examine the situation of women prisoners quite thoroughly , since every possible case is covered .
It looks at special and general health care needs , including the specific problems of hygiene and the special demands of the female psyche ; handling problems arising from women prisoners ' past histories ; the special situation of mothers - indeed , statistics show that half of those detained in Europe have under-age children ; special conditions during pregnancy ; the birth of children in prison and the protection of children during their first years of life when they have to live with their mothers in prison .
This is why we feel empowered to ask Member States , with the help of the EU , to establish appropriate material conditions to ensure that institutes provide decent detention facilities , as laid down by international and European rules and treaties .
Legislation should be able to be modernised to make sentences appropriate to the special circumstances of mothers ; regular staff should be regularly monitored and specially trained so that they are sensitive to women 's issues .
Detention conditions for women should be included in the European Commission 's annual report on human rights in the EU .
Today 's report will give rise to a debate that I hope will be fruitful .

Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my colleague Commissioner Špidla is extremely happy that the European Parliament has decided to examine the situation of women in prison and its impact on social and family life , and therefore wishes to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Panayotopoulos , on her excellent report .
Even though women account for only a small percentage , around 5 % , of Europe 's prison population , it is clear that their stay in prison seriously affects the entire family .
Moreover , a relatively high percentage of women in prison are mothers .
The Commission promotes policies to combat the exclusion of vulnerable groups , and this therefore includes , in particular , people in custody .
It must be stressed , however , that social inclusion is mainly a matter for the Member States .
The Commission 's role in terms of social inclusion is basically to help the Member States in their fight against social exclusion , within the context of the open method of coordination and other more specific courses of action .
Nevertheless , the new Lisbon Treaty - and this is an interesting point - provides for new initiatives in connection with justice , freedom and security .
Within this specific area , of increasing importance , the codecision procedure will apply to many more fields and this will obviously broaden the EP 's power to examine some of the proposals set out in your report .
Mrs Panayotopoulos 's report adopts a balanced approach . It fully respects the principle of subsidiarity and acknowledges the Commission 's support role , and we completely agree with your methodological approach .
We are aware that in order to tackle the challenges faced by imprisoned women , the Member States and the Commission must focus on living conditions in prisons , the essential maintenance of family ties and social relations and , of course , the importance of social and professional reintegration .
This approach matches the Commission 's social inclusion strategy , which covers three broad areas : encouraging access to basic services and different possibilities and opportunities , monitoring respect for legislation in the fight against discrimination , and , if necessary , drawing up targeted approaches to meet the specific needs of the various groups .
In the spring of 2006 the Commission organised a public consultation on the need to take other measures at EU level to encourage active inclusion of those farthest removed from the job markets .
The results were presented in a communication in October 2007 , which also launched the second phase of the consultation .
The social partners were asked for their opinion on the possibility of enhancing the open method of coordination by adopting common principles - particularly in relation to income support , active job market policies and access to quality services - on the substance of the common principles and , finally , on to how to back up implementation of these common principles with control and evaluation at EU level .
The consultation was completed on 28 February 2008 and the Commission will now examine the proposals made by the social partners and other interested parties .
Please now allow me to make a few brief comments on the report .
It discusses the reintegration of imprisoned women into society and the job market .
We share the view that targeted implementing measures should be combined with safety nets adapted to prevent social exclusion .
Reintegration of imprisoned persons ought to begin in the prison environment in cooperation with the specialist social services .
We are well aware that providing acceptable and reasonable living conditions substantially increases the chances of reintegration in society .
The authorities , including the prison authorities , must be encouraged to provide quality vocational training for people in prison .
Cooperation between prisons and firms specialising in jobs for prisoners must evidently be encouraged as part of the reintegration process .
Here we wish to stress the role of the European Social Fund in encouraging the inclusion and integration of female and male prisoners in the job market and society in general .
The Fund , as I think you are aware , cofinances activities geared towards educational and vocational programmes for prisoners , while initiatives directly concerned with improving living conditions for prisoners , such as the construction of new buildings and installation of new facilities may be covered by other Structural Funds .
I have duly noted the EP 's request to the Commission and Council to adopt a framework decision on minimum standards for the protection of the rights of prisoners and to create a European prison charter .
I feel I must again remind the House that a number of elements in the report are the exclusive competence of the Member States although , as we have mentioned , the Lisbon Treaty will apply the codecision procedure to many areas in connection with justice , freedom and security , and here there is a real possibility of broadening the scope of the EP 's role and improving the situation and treatment of this extremely serious matter .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( SK ) The own-initiative report on women in prisons is highly symbolic .
On the one hand it confirms the very pragmatic position of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , and on the other hand it confirms the admirable commitment of our colleague Mrs Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou .
I must stress that Mrs Marie Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou is very active in my committee and I congratulate her on her working attitude that is always responsible .
When working on this report we paid a personal visit to the women 's prison in Bruges .
Because of this visit I can say that the report is not at all purely theoretical .
I am glad that the report deals with the situation of women in prison in all its complexity .
Personally , I would in particular like to emphasise the importance of protecting children from psychological harm while their parents are in prison .
The following is based on my personal experience .
Under the Communist regime , when I was five years old , my father was arrested and sentenced to a long term in prison for fabricated political reasons .
Teachers in school often asked me where he was and why he never came to parent teacher meetings , although everyone knew that he was in prison .
It was painful .
Children should not suffer the trauma inflicted on them by the insensitive behaviour of those around them , adding to the stigma of their parents ' imprisonment .
Staying in regular personal contact with imprisoned mothers is vital for their future lives and future interpersonal relations .
In conclusion , I want to draw your attention in particular to paragraph 22 of the report and stress the emphasis Mrs Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou places on maintaining family ties .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , I would first of all like to congratulate the rapporteur on her excellent work and her open disposition , which enabled important agreements to be reached on the amendments tabled by my Group .
This is a very comprehensive report , which does not leave out any of the issues involved in the difficult situation created in social and family life following the imprisonment of fathers or mothers .
It introduces many new aspects including the treatment of fathers or mothers in prison who are responsible for children .
The aim was to find a solution that would guarantee respect for children 's rights while maintaining the security measures that must apply to people deprived of their liberty .
What is proposed is the creation of independent units that are removed from the ordinary prison environment , with living conditions that are adapted to children 's needs and that take account of their integration into the community .
The same applies to people in prison who have dependents , a situation that also primarily affects women .
Here , it is recommended once again that for the most part alternative sentences should be chosen over imprisonment .
In this regard , the report makes it clear that in the case of men in prison with young children or other family responsibilities , the measures should be the same as those applied to women .
In addition , these measures must ensure complete respect for sexual orientation and any form of family set-up that complies with the law .
Women in prison must be granted access to prevention campaigns and access , under equal conditions , to family planning programmes .
The report also calls for programmes to reduce the vulnerability of inmates to violent situations , with psychological care for women who have been the victims of gender violence .
It also recommends that prison staff should be trained in , and made more aware of , this issue .
Our group collaborated closely with the rapporteur , tabling these and other amendments , and I believe that on the whole we have achieved a report of which this Parliament can feel proud .
Congratulations once again to the rapporteur !
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I will speak on this matter in a personal capacity .
Ms Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou , with her usual wisdom and hard work , has done a very good job and produced a report which deals with the problems of women prisoners in a most efficient way .
Most of what Ms Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou states in her report is , of course , correct .
But does it perhaps not relate , I wonder , to a world that is ideal rather than realistic , a world in which prisons should indeed function not just for punishing sentenced individuals but mainly for rehabilitating them ?
The hard reality of the matter is that most prisons in Europe and the world in general function inadequately both for women and for men .
That does not mean , of course , that we must not always press for changes to occur .
Nor does it mean that the special needs of women prisoners should not concern us .
On the contrary , it is our duty always to push for improvements , but we must never forget the following simple facts .
Firstly , changes are needed in our penal system in general .
Secondly , there should be no untoward discrimination between men and women , apart from what is necessitated by virtue of strictly biological differences , including maternity or special aspects of motherhood .
Thirdly , prisons are not hotels .
Neither are they maternity wards or nursery schools .
Fourthly , most prisoners - men and women - are convicted criminals , and many have committed atrocious acts against other human beings .
Fifthly , hard as it may sound , many convicted women are unfit to be mothers and alternative choices have to be found to deal with the upbringing of their children .
Sixthly , as to whether female prisoners should be allowed to have a pregnancy initiated in prison , this is by no means a non-controversial issue .
Having said all that , I nevertheless conclude by declaring my support for this report .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , I should like to draw attention to two issues referred to in the report .
The first relates to the conditions under which a custodial sentence is served .
Access to appropriate personal hygiene facilities and to the specific medical services women require is particularly important .
As a political prisoner in Communist Poland , I was given a quarter of a bar of grey soap that had to last six months .
It was impossible to exercise one 's statutory right to a bath for weeks at a time .
That is inadequate .
Access to running water , to hot water for bathing , the opportunity to consult a gynaecologist and to have mammograms should all be assured , regardless of the type and length of sentence .
The second issue relates to the impact of the imprisonment of mothers and pregnant women on the life and health of their children .
In particular , women are often deprived of the right to take part in court cases regarding parental rights .
People under arrest are deprived of the possibility of participating in hearings .
Children whose mothers are imprisoned have only limited rights to contact with them .
Newborn babies are often taken away from their mothers shortly after birth , which makes it impossible for them to be breast-fed .
It should be borne in mind that whenever a custodial sentence is imposed on a woman , it is also imposed indirectly on a child and an entire family .
Such a sentence should therefore only be imposed in exceptional circumstances .
I should like to conclude by congratulating the rapporteur .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , this own-initiative report is important because the situation of women in prison needs to be put under the spotlight at last and problems identified .
Women 's rights apply even , and especially , in prison .
Fortunately , in the European Union , we do not yet have a situation like the US , where prisons and locking people away have become a lucrative business , but the number of women in prison in Europe is growing and so we need to take account of their specific situation .

First , there is the issue of health care , which we have just been talking about .
Women in prison have experience of violence , sometimes of a sexual nature , either in prison or beforehand , and need adequate psychological support and therapy , often because they are addicts as well .
There is also a risk that women will be sexually exploited in prison .
The situation of mothers merits our particular concern .
We cannot have any repetition of the situation in Germany , for example , where babies only a few months old have been taken away from their mothers because there are no mother and child places available in prison , leading to months of separation .
We also need more money for the reintegration of women after they are released .
One issue of particular concern to me is highlighting the specific situation of girls and women with a migration background .
It is essential that we consider the situation of women who have entered Europe and are being held in detention centres .
Many of these women refugees , asylum-seekers or irregular migrants are being held in prison-like conditions in these detention centres , and there is currently no EU legislation stipulating the maximum length of time they may be detained there .
Finally - and the European Parliament has produced a study on this - we call as a matter of urgency for improvements in the protection of particularly at-risk groups , especially women who have been the victims of sexual violence .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , in his classic book ' Discipline and Punish ' the French philosopher Michel Foucault mentions , among others , three aspects of imprisonment .
These aspects have survived throughout the whole long history of punishment until today .
Firstly , there is the original aim of isolating an offender from the society ; secondly , the punishment offers a chance to come to terms with guilt ( catharsis ) ; and thirdly , there is the modern aspect of offering the possibility of rehabilitation and reintegration into society .
The last aspect is seen as the most important one in civilised countries .
Society does not take revenge against an offender and does not want to degrade his or her dignity .
On the contrary , it makes an effort , sometimes against serious odds , to change the sentenced prisoner 's behaviour pattern that had led to the person 's conflict with the law .
Imprisonment is not meant to cause harm to those sentenced , let alone to members of their families .
The rapporteur very clearly defined one problem of imprisonment : the focus is on the guilt and punishment of an individual while the fact that the punishment also has an impact on those who are dependent on the sentenced person is ignored .
These dependents are generally the children of female prisoners .
Mothers with one child account for more than half of all women imprisoned in Europe .
The exact numbers differ from country to country , as do prison conditions .
For example , in my country , the Czech Republic , prison overcrowding is the most serious problem .
On the other hand , the responsible authorities are making efforts to alleviate the negative impact of punishment on women and their family members , and make the return to normal life easier for these women .
That said , efforts to help prisoners integrate into society are hampered by the lack of funding needed , for example , for social workers .
I agree with the rapporteur that it is important to improve the conditions for maintaining family ties because separation from family , combined with guilt and punishment , results in estrangement , which makes returning from prison much more difficult .
Of course I am not referring to the cases where family ties had already been severed prior to imprisonment .
I will conclude with one more important point : psychological studies show that female prisoners find it difficult to adjust to living in close proximity to each other .
Men are better at putting up with forced proximity and solving conflicts .
( SK ) The report by the rapporteur , Mrs Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou , has come just at the time when changes to prison infrastructures , including the creation of female-only prisons , are under way in many Member States .
Geographic location is an important factor : it can , for example , make it easier for female prisoners to maintain family ties and friendships and take part in religious services .
The impact of isolation and distress on female prisoners , in particular on mothers and pregnant women , can have harmful consequences for the mother herself but also , mainly , for her child and his or her development .
That is why taking part in religious services can bring about positive changes in the lives of these prisoners .
Human dignity and respect for fundamental rights are values that must be rigorously applied in the Member States ' prison policies .
Maintaining order in prisons requires qualified staff capable of nipping violence against , and abuse of , women in the bud .
Nor should we forget that staff should also be capable of offering psychological support because many women have often been traumatised in the past .
Congratulations to the rapporteur on providing a current analysis containing several significant findings .
The report also introduces a series of proposals and suggestions for improving conditions for female prisoners , in particular single mothers and young prisoners .
I am pleased that the rapporteur pays particular attention to pregnant women .
Women in prison have often been the victim of violence .
This area must therefore be approached in a very sensitive way , with the courage to introduce new innovative measures concerning prison policy .
After their release from prison , women must be offered all possible assistance in order to facilitate problem-free reintegration into society .
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , equal opportunities must also be extended to people in prison .
Women in prison , too , must be provided with appropriate health and hygiene facilities , different to those of the men .
Being able to maintain family relationships is especially important for women in prison , as this will also facilitate their reintegration into society , as some of my fellow Members have already mentioned .
In instances of drug addiction and some other cases , psychological support is vital , and several Member States have devised multifaceted , gender-oriented programmes to deal with this .
The new Member States must follow their example .
Female ex-convicts have greater difficulty in obtaining work .
Running training programmes in prisons can alleviate this problem , thereby also reducing the risk of recidivism .
The report is excellent , and I recommend its adoption .
( GA ) Mr President , I welcome Mrs Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou 's own-initiative report on the examination of the situation of women in prison .
I think the report could be strengthened through a couple of amendments .
Emphasis should be placed on the concept of relocation as a more exact description of the preparation process as the women approach their release date .
In order to help with this , there should be ' halfway houses ' which have appropriate , supportive surroundings .
I urge support for the amendments which seek an end to the confinement of girls in adult prisons .
The staff in women 's prison should be women as far as possible , including medical staff .
A report was published in 2004 and another last year detailing the horrible conditions of the average female prisoner in my own constituency in Northern Ireland .
I would advise the Commission to read the recommendations made in that report as well as the recommendations made in this report .
Mr President , many women in prison have a background of violence and abuse , which can make it difficult for them to create stable relationships - which in the end is truly what they need .
Our goal should not only be the social integration of prisoners , but their personal development .
And here , of course , comes the issue of children .
Separation of a mother and her baby in prison often occurs just hours after birth .
This will immediately have an impact on any chance for a wholesome relationship between the two .
In order to ultimately create that special mother-child bond , it is necessary for both to grow together .
And the only way in which two will grow together in a healthy and normal way is by keeping them together wherever possible and creating a supported and secure environment for them to live in .
To separate a mother and baby is to set their relationship up for failure .
Why would we do this , when what most of these women need most is a stable , loving relationship in their life ?
( RO ) The report under discussion reveals a series of problems encountered in this field by the Member States .
Confronted with an increased rate of criminality in certain environments , especially in disadvantaged ones , marked by sheer poverty , illiteracy , family abandonment , against a background of deterioration of the social security system , the governments of the Member States have chosen , in my opinion , an inadequate response : harsher punishment .
Public opinion in Romania was recently drawn by the case of three women belonging to the same family , daughter , mother , grandmother , who were imprisoned simultaneously to serve a sentence for a minor offence .
It was not the only example of this kind .
That is why I believe that one of the most important recommendations of the report is the use of punishments other than imprisonment , all the more necessary when it involves the life of a child .
A special situation is the case of underage children both of whose parents are in prison .
I support the request included in the report addressed to the Commission to draft a common European prison charter to enable harmonisation of the detention conditions in Member States and more rapid integration into society of those who have served sentences depriving them of their freedom .
I congratulate the rapporteur on the effort .
( CS ) Mr President , as we have heard , women make up only 5 % of the European prison population .
Half of these are mothers with young children and most of them have suffered violence and abuse in the past .
I welcome this report wholeheartedly and I thank all those involved with it .
The report stresses that the Member States must encourage the development of specific conditions for women in detention centres .
Emphasis on human dignity is in my opinion a key issue for successful future social reintegration .
A friendly environment must be created for children 's visits and women must be educated to understand the meaning of human dignity .
I am therefore very surprised by the Liberals ' request for a separate vote on paragraph 19 , which proposes giving women the right to take part in religious services .
I find it upsetting that women inside prisons could , depending on the outcome of the vote tomorrow , have different rights to women who are outside prison walls .
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I naturally wish to thank all the speakers for an extremely enriching and interesting debate .
I am not the Commissioner responsible for this issue . I will not deny , however , that I was extremely encouraged and interested in this debate .
Many personal ideas have come to mind , and that is undeniable proof that you have captured my interest on a subject that is obviously extremely important .
In order to overcome the obstacles to the reintegration of female prisoners into society and the job market , we must obviously again stress the need to combine implementing measures and an adapted safety net .
This will require the involvement of all interested parties , including the social partners .
The Commission intends to continue examining social inclusion issues with the Member States in accordance with the open method of coordination . Indeed , many of the proposals tabled here - which , of course , I will pass on to Commissioner Špidla - have attracted my attention .
For instance , the idea that already exists in several countries of trying , where possible , to find alternative sentences - when the person in prison does not represent any danger to society - is certainly a very interesting approach .
I am also thinking , although here I am speaking freely , about the use of electronic tags that allow people to leave prison and live with their families .
There are many elements to be examined in relation to this issue , for what I have heard here is quite right too : imprisonment is above all an act of social reconciliation , of course , and so efforts must also be made to make this act of reintegration into society a positive element .
I was also very interested in the comments made by Mrs Záborská - which were echoed in different ways by a number of speakers - on the whole issue of family ties and ties to children , which , of course , require some extremely specific approaches .
Hygiene in prisons , health care , sexual preferences , sexual abuse and sexual violence are also subjects I am familiar with , of course , through my work as Commissioner for Development , even if I am not responsible for this particular issue .
Naturally I regularly visit prisons in developing countries . I can assure you , therefore , that I am certainly in a position to appreciate these matters .
In any case , I will not fail to report back to Commissioner Špidla on this excellent debate and the excellent ideas I have heard here ; I know that he is extremely interested in these matters .
Mr President , thank you for staying up so late .
I would also like to thank Commissioners Michel and Špidla for their highly positive participation in the report we are presenting ; and I would like to thank you , ladies and gentlemen , and Mr Matsakis , who is the only male fellow Member to be taking part in this debate .
I believe that maintaining family ties is a common denominator , and everyone has stressed how important it is .
It is also vital to protect children , above all , small children , and establish appropriate conditions tailored to the special needs of women .
The primary issue , however , should be that we stand up for human rights , especially the rights of women , regardless of whether or not they are in prison .
Therefore , what applies to women who are not in prison ought also to apply to those who are .
With regard to social exclusion , let me give particular thanks to Commissioner Špidla , who through you , Commissioner Michel , stressed the importance of support measures as early as the detention stage : measures for vocational training , for integration into the market and for cooperation with the private sector .
We can thus put into practice what you have said , Commissioner : we should see to it that prison becomes an opportunity and not a form of revenge .
With regard to of Mr Matsakis 's point of view that there are also dangerous tendencies , these exist both inside and outside prison , and we must provide the opportunity and the medical means to tackle them , so that we can prevent the marginalisation of individuals . Marginalisation is in conflict with our ideas about the dignity of individuals and the possibility of supporting them so that they can give of their best to society .
I hope , as the Commissioner has said , that the new Lisbon Treaty will give us the opportunity to take more action . Since the presentation of this report and the ratification of the Treaty are not far removed , many of the suggestions made in the report may become a reality .
I shall return , however , to a subject not mentioned , namely that the Commission 's annual report on human rights should also include the condition of women in EU prisons .

Although Mr Matsakis was the only male Member speaking , Mr Michel spoke for the Commission , and I have listened with great attention to this interesting debate .
As so often , the women out number the men in these late-night debates , but that does not diminish their contribution .
I thank the rapporteur and others who have spoken for their words , because , after all , in a debate like this , you are speaking for women who cannot speak for themselves .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday 13 March .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( HU ) I would like to draw attention to the fact that while women represent approximately 4-5 % of the prison population in Europe , and while the proportion of women in prisons in many European countries is growing at a faster rate than the male prison population , prisons themselves continue to be designed primarily for men and tend to ignore the particular problems of the growing female prison population .
The areas that give greatest cause for concern are healthcare , the situation of mothers with children , and professional and social reintegration .
Statistics on female prisoners suggest a generally low level of education and a lack of vocational skills .
If we want female prisoners to be able to reintegrate into society and have a more stable life following their time in prison , we need to provide all prisoners with opportunities to acquire basic educational skills .
In many European prisons , a difference can be observed between the vocational training offered to women and the demands of the labour market .
Most prisons offer feminised vocational training that is limited to developing the skills and abilities relating to the cultural and social roles traditionally attributed to women .
The labour market does not generally value these low-paid vocational skills highly , and this may favour the perpetuation of social inequalities and undermine social and professional reintegration .
Prison authorities should therefore be encouraged to offer , perhaps in cooperation with external providers , high-quality vocational training measures and varied employment opportunities that are in line with labour market requirements and free from gender stereotypes .
Agenda for the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting closed at 23.55 . )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 10.05 a.m. )
Mr President , yesterday afternoon , in an unscheduled announcement in this Chamber , the President made a show of imposing financial sanctions on a number of Members because of the protest in December .
What I want to know is : was it in order for the President to make that announcement without doing those Members the basic courtesy of telling them that such an announcement would be made and when it would be made ?
The President talked much about showing courtesy to Members in this House , so why , I ask , were those of us affected by his announcement not done the basic courtesy of being told that he would make such an announcement ?
Is it too much to expect an answer to that ?
Mr Allister , it is not the duty of the Presidency to judge on courtesy .
Our duty is to apply the rules , and you can be absolutely sure that the rules have been fully respected .
( DE ) Mr President , with reference among others to Rule 146 of the Rules of Procedure , you just said that it is your duty to apply the Rules .
I cannot understand why sittings keep starting late , sometimes by several minutes or even a quarter of an hour .
That wastes a lot of taxpayers ' money .
You are very strict about observing the Rules vis à vis political opponents , who simply want a referendum or fairness and democracy , but not when it comes to yourself !
If you treated everybody equally in this House , then you would long since have had to initiate proceedings against the Presidency for countless incidents of serious fraud , because that is precisely what I would call it when sittings keep starting late , with the resulting waste of taxpayers ' money .
Two different yardsticks are being applied here and you must accept the reproach that this is a Parliament that acts arbitrarily , that deliberately sidelines political opponents on the grounds of technicalities while constantly tolerating what happens on its own side and even covering up serious fraud !
Thank you very much , Mr Martin , for your interesting views .
The challenge of EU Development Cooperation Policy for the new Member States ( debate )
The first item is the report by DanutBudreikaitė , on behalf of the Committee on Development , on the Challenge of EU Development Cooperation Policy for the New Member States .
Since the enlargement rounds of 2004 and 2007 , the European Union has seen the accession of 12 countries , 10 of which have special experience .
They have moved from a planned economy to a market economy and from authoritarian control to democracy .
Prior to accession , these countries were recipients of aid , but now they have become donors of development cooperation aid .
Most of them had no previous experience of pursuing EU cooperation policy .
By signing the Treaty of Accession they have committed themselves to implementing this policy .
Moreover , in 2004 the Commission produced several documents emphasising the European Neighbourhood Policy that were directly connected with the new Member States ' official development assistance .
After three years of membership it is important to examine the progress of the new donor countries in meeting the challenges of development cooperation .
I would like to point out that the report covers only the 10 Member States that share land borders with Eastern neighbours and benefit from the Neighbourhood Policy .
These 10 countries have always had long-term trade , economic and cultural relations with their neighbours and shared a common history as well as the aspiration to achieve the objectives of development and consolidation of democracy and to increase security in Eastern and Central Europe .
The results of a special study show that most of the new Member States usually allocate official development aid to their neighbours - the countries of the Western Balkans and the Commonwealth of Independent States .
Moreover , relations between the EU and its Eastern neighbours remain the least developed , and the new Member States , having relative advantage over the old Member States , can have a beneficial influence on the geographical position and nature of development aid policy .
The new Member States can also share their recent experience of the transition to a market economy and implementation of good governance , democratic principles and human rights .
Meanwhile , the new EU Member States are devoting relatively little attention to the ACP countries .
Aid to these countries is mostly of a socio-economic nature : new projects are being developed in the education and health sector ; efforts are being made to encourage the development of the public sector and civil society and the principles of gender equality .
Documents defining development cooperation policy give no directions on which countries should receive the aid .
In view of the limited financial and human resources available to the new Member States , it would be best for them to concentrate their aid on a specific number of countries , offering assistance in the areas in which they have most experience , in both neighbouring and ACP countries .
With regard to the problems encountered by the new Member States in pursuing development aid policy , I would like to point out that :
1 ) The majority of the new Member States still have not defined their key priorities .
2 ) There is practically no strategic planning or control mechanism in the sphere of development cooperation policy .
3 ) The level of communication between the bodies implementing development aid policy and NGOs is insufficient .
4 ) The level of public initiative is too low , and there is a general lack of information on development cooperation available to the public throughout the EU .
In order to achieve greater success in the implementation of development cooperation policy , all countries involved should share their positive experience , taking account of the experience of the new Member States in the East .
The new Member States should take part in the preparation of plans for neighbourhood policy implementation activities , ensure a higher degree of participation by national parliaments and increase the activity of NGOs .
Nevertheless , I would like to emphasise that the last two EU enlargement rounds have created a new outlook towards development cooperation policy and its inextricable link to the European Neighbourhood Policy , the latter being the direct result of enlargement .
Both development cooperation policy and neighbourhood policy are integral components of political and economic relations with other countries .
The institutionalisation of development cooperation policy in the EU would be of great importance for the implementation of the objectives mentioned .
It would also enhance the efficiency of the European Neighbourhood Policy alongside that of official development aid and would favourably influence the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals .
To achieve this we should create an assembly of EU and neighbouring countries , which would cover the Eastern dimension and help to implement the development cooperation and neighbourhood policies .
I would like to call on Parliament for its support in this regard .
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by congratulating the rapporteur , Mrs Budreikaitė , for this excellent report detailing the challenge that development policy poses for the new Member States .
I was reminded by your report of all the discussion and concern expressed in the run-up to enlargement , both among the public generally and in the political world ; I recalled the suspicions and fears voiced in various quarters that enlargement would dilute our solidarity with the developing world , pushing Africa down the European Union 's order of priorities .
In the event the fears were groundless .
The predictions and anxieties were shown to have been unjustified .
European development policy has never been as ambitious in its aims or as cohesive in its methods as it is today , and Africa has never ranked higher on the Union 's foreign policy agenda .
Your report confirms that this has been achieved not in spite of engagement but by virtue of it , and by virtue of the new Member States ' willingness to shoulder the full weight of their responsibilities .
Let us look first at the question of financing .
Of course the new Member States still have some way to go to meet the targets for 2010 ; of course it is essential that more countries should produce multiannual plans for stepping up their aid - only four of the 12 countries concerned have so far carried out that exercise - but we simply cannot overlook the collective effort that these 12 Member States have made , for it is quite remarkable .
Since joining the Union , these countries have doubled and in some cases tripled the level of aid they provide .
In 2007 , aid from these 12 states totalled almost EUR 800 million .
Moreover , these countries have undertaken to channel 0.33 % of their GDP into development aid from the public purse by 2015 .
The next thing to consider is the effectiveness of the aid .
Last year the European Union adopted a code of conduct setting out a number of principles for a better division of labour within the Union .
I am pleased to report that the new Member States can hold their heads high with regard to implementation of these principles .
All the states concerned apply the principle of concentrating their aid in a limited number of countries - an approach long recognised in best practice as making for greater efficiency .
Several of the new Member States also deliver their aid in partnership with other Member States under cofinancing arrangements , thus reducing their own and their partner states ' administrative costs .
I am thinking here , for example , of support provided jointly by Slovakia and Austria for infrastructure in Kenya and of aid in the water sector delivered by the Czech Republic in partnership with Luxembourg .
These are telling examples and they are not isolated .
Another illustration of efficiency is the fact that the majority of the new Member States support developing countries on the basis of adding value in specific sectors - an approach informed by their own experience of political and economic transition .
I could point , for example , to the aid that is directed at good governance , at capacity-building in public administration and at economic reform .
As I see it , these types of action , which are approved in the Code of Conduct on Complementarity and the Division of Labour in Development Policy , are absolutely vital .
In April I am to present the first assessment of how the code is being implemented , a year after its adoption , with analyses and proposals for increasing aid and making it more consistent . I intend to use the assessment as a basis for serious discussions with all the Member States about how to proceed from here .
Just a few months away from the High-Level Forum on Aid Effectiveness , in Accra , the developing world is counting on Europe to point the way ahead , and rightly so because - let me remind you again - Europe is by far the world 's major source of development aid , so it is capable of leading by example and it has a duty to do so .
Your report highlights another fundamentally important point , namely the need for awareness-raising in the new Member States .
It is true that most of these countries do not have a long tradition of development aid , particularly to Africa .
It is therefore part of our responsibility to keep working on public opinion , getting the message across that this is not just a matter of charity , it is also a matter of mutual interest - and I am thinking here of issues like peace and security , migration , climate change and food security .
In mid-February , with all these things in mind , the European Commission launched the third capacity-building programme for the new Member States .
Under the programme , the Commission will supply the expertise needed to develop communication strategies that will enable administrative authorities to tell the public more effectively about what they are doing and to raise levels of awareness , particularly in the media and among students , about what is at stake in development policy .
Ladies and gentlemen , there is no longer an ' old Europe ' or a ' new Europe ' .
There is no first class and no second class , no old Member States and no new Member States .
There is just one Europe - a supportive , open and politically aware Europe - with values that are not only European but also universal .
The evolution of development policy over the years since the latest enlargement is proof in itself that the European Union can grow while at the same time becoming more meaningful .
In essence this is a remarkable history lesson , relevant both to the future of development policy and to the future of European integration .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , at a public hearing on the subject of new EU donors , held in the European Parliament in January last year , the participants expressed the hope that the discussion on the development policy of the new EU Member States would continue in the national parliaments and in the further work of the European Parliament itself .
I am therefore very pleased to welcome Mrs Budreikaitè 's report , which is the first report in the history of the European Parliament that attempts to analyse the commitment of the new Member States to EU development policy and the challenge it involves for them .
It is not easy to summarise all the challenges facing the new European donors in formulating national development policies and modernising development policy at Community level .
I shall therefore confine myself to a few key issues .
First , the role of national parliaments in shaping development aid in the new Member States needs to be strengthened .
Without the establishment of a firm legal basis by the national parliaments it will be impossible to pursue an effective development policy and arrive at proper coordination of the planning and management of aid to the developing countries .
In some countries work on the necessary legislation has been going on since 2004 and has still not been finalised .
As a result , among other things , those countries have no implementing agenda .
More work is need on raising public awareness - and here I agree with Commissioner Michel about public sensitivity in the new Member States with regard to the importance of development policy .
In a transition period of this kind , education for development , wide-ranging social consultation , mass communications and information campaigns have an important role to play .
Without them , it will be hard to secure taxpayers ' consent for increased public expenditure on development policy .
The greater the public awareness , the more readily will society accept the financial burden .
I also agree with the Commissioner on the need for European solidarity in development policy .
We must coordinate our cooperation and learn from each other .
On the one hand , the commitment and knowledge derived from history and the transition period in the new Member States can help the whole European Union to develop and strengthen democracy in countries in transition .
On the other , the knowledge derived from the experience of the old Member States , and in particular from their aid to the world 's poorest countries , can help to increase and steer development aid to those countries most in need of it - in sub-Saharan Africa , for example , which is not seen as the main destination for aid in the new Member States .
Such mutual education and mutual assistance can make the development policy of the whole European Union more effective .
on behalf of the PSE group . - ( RO ) The report that we are discussing today has , in my opinion , the merit of helping the new Member States of the European Union in defining new policies and new mechanisms designed to help countries which receive the attention of the European Union .
Based on the founding values of the Union and the obligations undertaken under the Treaties to which our countries are a party , the new states are now redefining their policies on the development cooperation granted to the counties that need it , diversifying their cooperation instruments and the areas covered .
What the rapporteur said in her foreword is perfectly true , in the sense that priorities are not defined clearly enough and good intentions are often limited by lack of financial resources .
It looks like the new Member States still need a period of adaptation to the decision-making systems in the Council and to its priorities in the field of development cooperation .
Romaniahas a national strategy on international development cooperation , providing that it supports the development of the states in the geographical areas identified as priority areas for external relations , namely Eastern Europe , the Western Balkans and the Southern Caucasus .
Another effort refers to the gradual extension of aid to African States , especially in the field of education .
I am glad that this year , on 1 October , the European Socialist Day for Development will be held in Bucharest and I want to thank -here and now- my socialist colleagues for unanimously voting in favour of my proposal to organise this event in a new Member State of the European Union , namely Romania .
I praise this report which represnents a useful framework of field-related conceptualisation for the new Member States of the European Union .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , on Tuesday the President of the Republic of Estonia , Mr Toomas Hendrik Ilves , said that we should cast aside the term ' new Member States ' .
That is also part of the title of Ms Budreikaitė 's report .
Although I agree in principle with my President , the term has a positive connotation as well , involving innovation and readiness for reforms .
Today 's report gives a comprehensive overview of the progress that the new donor countries in the European Union - that were the recipients of similar help a decade ago - have made in the field of development cooperation , pointing out both the shortcomings and the potential for further increase in the contribution to the EU development cooperation policy .
In 1970 the United Nations agreed upon the target of 0.7 % of GDP for development assistance to eradicate extreme poverty - the most humiliating state for human beings .
Dear colleagues , do not forget that this concerns approximately one third of the world 's population .
Unfortunately , the efforts made so far are clearly not enough .
No new Member State has reached the target .
The same applies to the old Member States , with the exception of Denmark , Luxembourg , the Netherlands and Sweden .
Norway , although not a member of the EU , has also achieved the same goal .
I would like to thank Ms Budreikaitfor the extensive work that she has done in compiling the draft report and accommodating the amendments made by me and my colleagues on the Committee on Development .
The rapporteur has been elected from a new donor country and her report will definitely be studied in great detail in those countries , including Estonia .
Finally , the European Consensus on Development is committed to a further increase of the designated funds and I encourage all the Member States to take it seriously .
This report is a praiseworthy document that once again reminds us of our commitments , and I urge all of my colleagues to support it .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , I too wish to congratulate Mrs Budreikaiton this excellent report .
The document makes reference to the Eastern dimension of EU external relations and the need for a new assembly on the lines of EUROLAT or EUROMED - an assembly that could build on the historical experience of the new Member States in particular , including my own country , Poland .
I fully agree with the rapporteur on this .
Europe needs a new vision of a broader sphere of influence extending through the Balkans and the Black Sea region to the southern Caucasus .
EU policy with regard to these regions is outdated .
The very name ' European Neighbourhood Policy ' is inappropriate and insulting for countries like Ukraine , which is undoubtedly part of Europe .
The name should be changed to ' European Union Neighbourhood Policy ' , as the former Ukrainian foreign minister , Borys Tarasiuk , rightly pointed out at the last meeting of the EU-Ukraine Cooperation Council .
The European Union must give more support to Ukraine and Georgia and draw them into its sphere of influence .
Those countries need our commitment even more than the countries of Central Europe did before the 2004 enlargement .
They need an individual approach on the part of the European Union , not a general neighbourhood policy that de facto treats Ukraine in the same way as countries that historically do not belong to Europe .
Ukraine , Georgia , and Belarus too , are poorer , economically weaker and in greater political difficulty than the countries that joined the Union after 2004 .
Recent years have seen a significant strengthening of Russia 's position in the region .
Russia 's readiness to use its energy reserves for political blackmail deters the European Union from opposing the Kremlin 's shameful practices , which have nothing in common with democracy .
In Georgia and Ukraine , Moscow is attempting to reverse the democratic transition .
The European Union Neighbourhood Policy , as we ought to call it , must offer immediate political and economic aid to our nearest neighbours .
Poland already has projects waiting and ready to go , such as the Bielsat independent television project for Belarus .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , coming back to the actual subject of the report , let me give Mrs Budreikaitvery warm thanks for her report , which I regard as very balanced and competent .
It is also a particularly important one at this point in time because we can now take provisional stock and also draw conclusions in regard to greater development cooperation on the part of the new Member States , with particular reference to the ACP states .
Accession to the EU clearly also means an obligation under the Treaty to accept the achievements of the acquis communautaire .
It is also clear , however , that the Treaty is one thing and public awareness of a major area of policy in the various countries is another .
The statistics we have been given make that very evident .
Development cooperation with the states of Africa , Asia and Latin America often does not look like a particularly urgent issue in countries that are themselves still lagging behind in their economic development .
That is why we must jointly push for recognition of the importance of this task and urge that we continue to pursue it , looking back also at the development cooperation that certainly existed in the past with some states , in particular African countries .
Many ties that existed prior to 1989 were dissolved very quickly yet almost without a murmur .
There were also some very regrettable episodes .
A number of projects that had been started up in those countries now lie in ruins .
I think we need to make a new start here .
I am also rather sad that by agreement with the Commission , nearly all the Central and Eastern European Member States are concentrating their development cooperation on cooperation with the former Soviet republics , which sidelines the real objective of development cooperation , namely to achieve the Millennium Development Goals .
Even if the new Member States were to succeed in raising their ODA to 0.17 % by 2010 as agreed , it is to be feared that only a fraction of that amount would go to development and support for the poorest countries in the world .
Once again , let me give warm thanks to Mrs Budreikaitfor her report .
( NL ) I think that this report has its good points .
It gives an interesting overview of the position regarding development cooperation in the new Member States .
That is a good thing .
Basically , however , I believe this report above all represents a missed opportunity .
Rather than encouraging the new Member States to pursue the traditional objectives of European development aid , Parliament would actually do better to debate those same objectives and think about whether it makes sense nowadays just to continue with the traditional form of development aid .
Time and time again this House elevates the financial objectives into a kind of dogma , without any proper debate , and time and time again we refuse to acknowledge the fundamental causes which are at the root of most developing countries ' problems .
In Africa it is certainly the case that the leading cause of poverty , hunger , insecurity and the enormous social and economic problems in developing countries is actually the fact that they are very badly governed by totally corrupt regimes .
The new Member States are being urged here to organise information and awareness-raising campaigns .
I am in favour of that , but should we not also inform people of the fact that African nations spend more on arms than they receive in development aid ?
Or that African rulers have billions stashed away in Swiss banks , to a total greater than many years ' -worth of development aid ?
If there is one signal that Europe ought to be giving out , it is that only democracies where the rule of law applies guarantee people a real chance of improving their lot , and that in those circumstances development aid will be effective and beneficial .
At the moment , sadly , it is not .
( RO ) I praise this report which will be of real help to the new Member States in the fulfilment of the obligations undertaken with respect development development cooperation policy .
I support the recommendations made in the report and I wish to point out two of them , first of all the necessity of a strategy for the education of citizens .
It does not mean making citizens of a Member State with a gross domestic income per inhabitant of only 38 % of the EU average , such as Romania , understand that they must allot part of the budget resources for the development of other countries , but it is a fundamental value of the European Union that we undertook ; and Romania , which is a Member State in this situation , will take action in this direction .
I also wish to point out the recommendation concerning the transfer of positive experience from the older Member States to the newer Member States to avoid such failures in development cooperation , such as failure in achieving its goal , inefficiency and opening opportunities for corruption in the beneficiary states .
I wish to underline the importance that should be attached to the development cooperation for education and training of human resources .
In this context Romania has an extremely positive experience as it awards scholarships to pupils and students from the Republic of Moldova and the South-Western Ukraine .
There is a direct relationship between the Romanian universities and schools and the pupils and students of the said countries .
- ( LT ) Congratulations to the rapporteur , Mrs Budreikaitė , for the report , which must have taken a lot of time and effort to prepare .
It is uplifting to know that in such a short period of time the new Member States have transformed themselves from being assistance recipients to assistance donors .
However , most - if not all - of these countries might struggle to achieve the objective of allocating 0.17 % of GDP to development assistance by 2010 .
What could be the reason ?
The countries that acceded to the EU in the 21st century are still being stifled by ethnocentrism .
They feel that they have suffered the most , are struggling and need the most assistance .
Nevertheless , being a part of the EU and participating in development cooperation helps to eliminate narrow-mindedness .
Today in Lithuania , where development assistance projects were met with scepticism until recently , the majority of the population believe that such assistance is welcome and necessary .
The new Member States are in the advantageous position of being able to share the experience of the transitional period with other regions of the world .
We are familiar with the difficulties that our close neighbours in Central Europe , the Caucasus and Central Asia are struggling with , as we have recently experienced similar hardships ourselves .
However , we need to focus our attention and assistance a little further still .
It is quite difficult to see poverty in African and Asian countries from the viewpoint of Vilnius , Warsaw , Budapest or Bucharest , but we have to realise that by assisting those in need today we are actually helping ourselves .
Every country on this planet is connected with others , as in the ' law of connected vessels ' .
The increasing gap between the richest and poorest countries , as well as the unstoppable flood of economic migrants , is eroding the world 's foundations .
Alongside state assistance , civil society organisations play a very important role .
The value of money and goods collected through non-governmental organisations , schools and the Church is not very great but is highly appreciated .
( PL ) Mr President , my own country received aid for many years because of the prevailing poverty .
Today , after four years ' membership of the European Union , Poland is joining more and more actively in aid to the developing countries .
Recently , for example , we wrote off Angola 's very large debt .
We are also putting money into support for the elite in the developing countries , by funding scholarships for study in Poland .
Our basic assumption is that investing in knowledge and the creation of an elite is no less important than distributing charity .
I must say - perhaps taking issue with some of you - that aid to developing countries should not be confined to support for African countries , and I would remind you that the European Consensus of 2005 does not oblige us to direct our development aid to Africa .
As a Pole , I am proud that my country , a new Member State , allocates the same percentage of its GNP to aid for developing countries as Greece , which has been in the European Union for 27 years , Portugal , a Member State for 22 years , and Italy , a founder-member of the Community .
( ET ) I would like to thank the rapporteur for a timely and balanced report .
I have a couple of remarks to make on matters arising both from earlier debate on the report and from today 's debate in this Chamber .
My first point is about the idea that people 's attitude in the new Member States towards development cooperation and humanitarian aid is lukewarm .
I think that awareness-raising has a very important role to play in that respect .
A study has been carried out in Estonia comparing attitudes today with those of three years ago and even the figures from three years ago show that awareness of development cooperation had improved to such an extent , not only in the institutions but among the general population , that it enabled considerable budgetary support , or an increase in that support , to be given to development cooperation .
It is important for the public to know that money is not going into a vast black hole but to specific countries for specific projects .
Estonia 's development cooperation is based on the principle that responsibility for development lies primarily with the developing countries themselves : nothing can be achieved by force .
For that reason close cooperation is especially important and a very good example of this is provided by the cooperation between Estonia and Georgia .
I therefore welcome paragraph 17 of the report , which states that the biggest challenges will be the increase in budgets and awareness-raising , especially among the general public .
For example , although the amount allocated to international development by Estonia in 2006 was 0.09 % of GDP , the position today is that the amount should rise and we aim to achieve a figure of 0.17 % of GDP by the year 2011 , in accordance with the development cooperation programme adopted in 2006 .
I welcome the fact that the proposals made by my colleagues , my Estonian colleagues , were incorporated into the report at the drafting stage and I believe that this marks a fundamental change whereby the new Member States have metamorphosed from recipients of aid into donors of aid ; I hope that this support continues to grow .
Mr President , it is amazing that 200 million children around the world can be described as child labourers .
This is totally unacceptable practice .
The international community must work in a more concerted manner to ensure that international codes of practice to combat child labour are rigorously enforced in all countries round the world .
This must be a key issue in the context of EU development aid policies at all times .
The EU must work more closely with the United Nations , UNICEF , the World Bank , the International Labour Organisation , donors and NGOs to introduce the correct strategies to ensure that uniform laws are in place to stop this inhumane practice of child labour .
A multidimensional approach is needed if child labour is to be effectively tackled around the world .
Enforced social protection measures and changes to the labour market rules are needed .
Child labour and education issues are inextricably linked .
Children denied access to education are more likely to be engaged in child labour .
The European Union , as the largest donor in the world of development aid , must continue to work aggressively to ensure that the Millennium Development Goals are met by 2015 , including the targets set by the international community relating to availability of education to all children in the world .
( PL ) Mr President , helping others when you yourself are still in need of help is indeed proof of solidarity .
It is demonstrated by the actions of the 12 states that recently joined the European Union , and it should be appreciated .
Last November I showed what Poland was doing in this respect through an exhibition entitled Polish aid to the world .
So I am very grateful to Mrs Budreikaitfor her complex presentation of the subject .
The point of the Millennium Goals , which we have been discussing for years , is to help people who live in poverty , including millions of undernourished children .
Such help , however , should consist in providing a fishing rod and angling skills rather than putting fish on the plate .
We must also strive to achieve a fairer system of trade with third-world countries .
There is a need for generosity on the part of donors in writing off debts and for widespread sharing of scientific achievements , especially in medicine .
Let us support schools and universities in these countries , so that their graduates can work to meet the needs of their fellow countrymen .
Let us help resolve the shortage of drinking water .
We inhabitants of the European Union make up barely 7.5 % of the world population but we take up 23 % of world GNI .
Of course , we in Europe have problems of our own , including economic problems .
But we must keep them in perspective .
Let us not be indifferent to the suffering of those who are hungry , sick or uneducated , who live in poverty , deprivation or mortal danger .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to come back to a remark the Commissioner made in his introductory statement , namely that we should not just give development aid but could and should also link it to general concerns - not in the sense of the kind of power politics and strings-attached policies once pursued by the USA and the former Soviet Union and pursued by Russia and China today , but in the sense of aiming at good governance , human rights and fighting corruption .
Those are concerns that we should all emblazon on our banners - and I am not referring only to the new Member States and their development aid policy but to all of us .
Perhaps we could take this as a practical opportunity to place even more emphasis on those concerns .
( CS ) Mr President , of course the report is very useful .
Development in this area is very dynamic and even ahead of the report .
For example , the report does not reflect the fact that some new Member States have already set up development organisations .
However , I would like to talk about something else .
I would like to dispel the widely held myth that the new Member States have no experience in this area .
We have this experience , although we gained it when Europe was divided , behind the Iron Curtain , in a different regime when everything was ideologically and politically motivated .
The fact remains that we used to build power stations and breweries , and provide agricultural aid to developing countries .
By the way , we are still due money since then and some debts are quite large , but that does not matter now .
We simply have the know-how .
I would like to see this know-how being used .
I would also like to use this opportunity to ask the Commission not to think of the new Member States as wet behind the ears but rather to make effective use of their existing knowledge .
( CS ) Mr President , I would like to pick up where my colleague Mr Zahradil left off .
He is perfectly right .
In the past Czechoslovakia , just like other countries of the Soviet bloc , was active in developing countries .
Our country successfully participated in helping the economies of these countries and now we can tap into this potential .
There are also some negatives though due to the fact that external growth resources can never replace internal resources : the economies that find themselves in this situation are often incapable of developing from the inside .
Some time ago , actually quite a long time ago , Gunnar Myrdal published his book ' Asian Drama ' .
In this book he contrasts the optimism felt after World War II for example in Africa with the pessimism prevailing in Asian countries .
Today the situation is quite different .
Many Asian countries show strong growth while Africa attracts only 2 % of world investment and the economies in many of its countries are in dire straits .
There is also the connection with the behaviour of the ruling elites in these two regions , which was in sharp contrast .
One French study compares the behaviour of these elites and shows that while the Asian elite invested in the economy , the African elite hoarded resources that had been created and removed them from their own territories .
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , clearly I need to begin by thanking all the speakers for the very high quality of their contributions and the relevance of the points made , which closely mirror my own concerns .
I should also like , at the outset , to thank the Slovenian Presidency , which has taken a remarkably refreshing approach : it is working to encourage and energise thinking about development policy in the new Member States and has already organised two extremely productive meetings to discuss these issues .
With regard to the comments made about levels of aid - that is , about the amounts of money needed - I fully understand the difficulty facing the new Member States .
I would remind you however - indeed , you yourselves have already made the point in a general way - that there are many alternative methods of getting involved and using transfers of expertise , which cost very little .
I heard one speaker , for example , referring to projects for cooperation in education .
Obviously , sending instructors or teachers to African countries costs relatively little but it nonetheless constitutes an extremely important contribution to those countries .
The underlying question suggested here , as to whether the new Member States would not do better to invest in their own neighbourhood - neighbourhood is not , perhaps , the best word and I may yet think of a better one - as opposed to investing in Africa , is , in my opinion , the wrong question .
I fully realise that investment in the neighbourhood is more obviously attractive and easier to justify and that it is more appealing both to public opinion in your countries and to potential development-policy partners .
The one approach does not , however , exclude the other and it sets a quite exceptional educational example to young people to see a nation deciding to extend its aid commitment to Africa , to open up to Africa , because it expresses values that are both European in the deepest sense and also universal .
Let me say , further , that the basis on which I have made my case for the new Member States having a presence in Africa is the fact that some of your countries have already had experience there , and that experience has generally left quite positive traces , notably in relation to the construction of certain states and certain state services and in the form of real expertise that has been retained .
My second point , ladies and gentlemen , is that Africa is not on target to achieve the Millennium Goals .
The goals will be realised in all the developing countries except in Africa .
So I would argue , on that basis , that it is part of our responsibility , or our co-responsibility , not to reduce investment in Africa , and I would stress again , echoing one of the speakers , that investment can be sustained through exchanges of expertise .
Giving our universities , colleges , municipalities and local authorities encouragement or incentives to get involved in exchanges with developing countries is obviously a relatively low-cost approach and it is an effective one .
I must say , too , that I am very willing to invite representatives of the so-called ' new ' Member States to come with me on some of my missions .
I believe it is extremely important that they should see for themselves not only the issues at stake but also the truly tragic situations confronting certain countries and certain peoples .
I should like to conclude with an aspect that offers great potential for added value - probably greater potential than we have in some of our own countries , as has been pointed out - namely the whole area of governance .
After all , what do we actually mean by governance ?
Governance is the ability of a state to assume its major sovereign functions and to provide its people with a basic level of social services .
I believe you have a tremendous amount to contribute in terms of governance : that is , everything entailed in building a state and - to underscore a point made , I think , by Mr Lambsdorff - everything concerning the journey from a period of transition towards the building of a state or of more definitive structures .
I am thinking here of tax collection , of the establishment of administration at local level , of the principle of subsidiarity and of decentralisation .
All these aspects are clearly of fundamental importance in building states that will be genuinely capable of serving their people , and it is obvious that you can play an important role here .
I believe it would be useful - and it is something I will propose - to invite the 12 so-called ' new ' Member States to work with the Commission on the basis of the tenth European Development Fund programme .
The current position is that we have more or less completed the programming of the tenth European Development Fund , and it would be a worthwhile exercise to involve the new Member States in determining , country by country , how they feel they could best be associated with it .
We could look to them , for example , to offer training in the areas of justice , administration or education , or they could be asked to make available certain experts .
For instance , some of the new Member States have expertise in the field of e-government and this type of expertise is much in demand in certain African countries .
That is why I am making my proposal .
I think it has been important to have this discussion and I recognise there are some very useful avenues to pursue .
That said , I would suggest that if we really want to be effective and to move matters forward we should plan to meet representatives from the 12 countries concerned very soon and actively address the issues so that we can actually produce joint programmes in the weeks ahead .
I believe this is a chance that we cannot afford to miss .
Finally , you have talked about conditionality and I can fully understand that point of view .
Everything concerning values , human rights , respect for human rights and combating corruption is obviously important , I agree , but in some cases it can be very difficult and even counterproductive to link development aid to - or make it contingent on - the strict observance of such values , dear to us though they undoubtedly are .
What has to be recognised is that imposing a value-related link or condition in countries where this type of requirement is not respected will hurt , in the first place , the ordinary people of those countries .
Our response to the problem , in countries where good governance is not respected , is to work in conjunction with specific operators , either indirect local operators or NGOs or agencies representing the United Nations .
We offer budget support only to countries that can guarantee a minimum level of good governance .
So I think there can be no doubt that we are on the same wavelength insofar as that approach is concerned .
As for the values that I referred to - they are the values that we consistently convey .
We constantly attempt to promote and push these values through political dialogue .
Implementing strict conditionality is difficult , however , if we genuinely want to help the people on the ground and that is , after all , the main aim .
My sincere thanks to everyone who has taken part in the discussion and supported my report .
I would also like to thank all the members of the Committee on Development for having voted unanimously in favour of it .
I would like to highlight several issues .
The ' new Member States ' - actually , the name continues to be sort of conditional , making it easier to distinguish between the ' old ' Member States and those that acceded to the EU after two enlargement rounds , owing to their particular historical background and perhaps the fact that they are poorer than the old ones .
I want to mention the experience of development cooperation policy .
This policy initially started to be applied in 1958 .
Central European countries - the Czech Republic , Slovakia and others - have had more experience of participating in development cooperation .
Participation by the Baltic States was much more limited .
Nevertheless , my country is currently involved in delivering oceanological assistance to Mauritius , an African country .
The progress is evident .
Why do I emphasise the ' Eastern ' dimension , ' Eastern countries ' ?
They happen to be very important neighbours of ours .
It is pointless to try to demarcate the neighbourhood and development cooperation policies or to have politicians debate their details .
These notions are interconnected .
In Belarus , our neighbour , some people survive on less than two dollars a day .
Which group of countries does this country belong to , then ?
These countries are backward too and are asking for help , insisting that they should receive assistance .
We all want our neighbours to have a decent quality of life .
We therefore appear to be pursuing the same global objectives .
We are involved in assisting African countries in fighting poverty , lowering the level of migration , increasing quality of life , boosting their economy , enabling them to battle diseases and become self-reliant .
While we are assisting neighbouring countries to fight poverty , giving a helping hand whenever we can and where we have the relevant experience , we are helping to bring about stabilisation all over Europe and in the Balkan Region .
Thank you to everyone for taking part in the discussion and for your support .
in writing . - ( RO ) Although the draft resolution being debated has ambitious goals , I believe it will be hard to achieve a common policy in the near future , even from as a matter of principle .
Although we all form a large family , each EU Member State has its own priorities with respect to the countries or geographical regions to which regional development cooperation is currently provided ; of , priorities which are motivated by economic , geopolitical , ethnic , historical interests etc . , and it is unlikely that this pattern can change significantly .
The recent incident related to the declaration of independence by Kosovo showed a lack of unity among the Member States in terms of opinion and , on the same grounds , it is likely that the same diversity of opinion will be shown when the matter under discussion is the situation of our extra-community neighbours .
It is true that a major step was taken with the appointment , under the Lisbon Treaty , of an EU High Representative for Foreign Affairs .
However , thanks to lack of clear rules on the determination of community priorities , each Member State will try to promote and focus on development policies , including financial ( allotments from the Union budget ) on such extra-community regions that coincide with their own priorities .
Gender Equality and Women 's Empowerment in Development Cooperation ( debate )
The next item is the report by Feleknas Uca , on behalf of the Committee on Development , on Gender Equality and Women 's Empowerment in Development Cooperation .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , five days ago we celebrated the 100th anniversary of International Women 's Day .
Much has been achieved , yet there is still no evidence of equal opportunities in the poorest countries of this world .
The human rights of women and of the girl-child are still far from being an unalienable , integral and indivisible part of universal human rights , called for in the United Nations Vienna Declaration of 1993 .
In my report I dealt in detail with the situation of women and girls in developing countries and I have also looked at ways in which European development cooperation can improve the lives of these women .
Let me briefly quote a few facts and figures .
Two thirds of all illiterates in the world are women .
More than 40 % of women in Africa have not attended primary school .
In Africa , women make up 52 % of the total population but perform 75 % of the agricultural work and produce and market 60-80 % of the food .
The Commission 's updated strategy for women 's equality and participation in development cooperation addresses important areas and proposes concrete measures to promote equality .
The dual approach of the strategy , making gender mainstreaming more efficient and also proposing separate measures to promote equality , is welcome .
I also applaud the 41 practical measures in the areas of responsible governance , employment , the economy , education , health and violence against women .
Nonetheless , in my report I have criticised several points .
Let me discuss the most important ones briefly .
I believe that combating traditional forms of violence should lie at the heart of the measures to combat violence against women .
Secondly , I must say I am rather taken aback that the strategy fails to mention the Economic Partnership Agreements .
At no point is reference made to the link between strengthening the role of women and the economic agreements between the EU and the ACP States .
As for the specific situation of women in conflicts , I regret the fact that the strategy fails to comment on the specific role that women play in what are called weak states and in the least developed countries .
Special attention should also be paid to the reproductive health and sexual rights of women in developing countries .
I very much regret that most of the draft amendments are once again concerned only with deleting passages from the report that call for the right of women freely and independently to decide about their body and their life .
I do not want to sound boastful , but my report should not be reduced to that issue .
In this connection I welcome the amendments proposed by Mrs Buitenweg on behalf of the Greens and thank her for her important contributions .
On reproductive health , I just want to say the following at this point : every woman has the right to decide freely and independently about her body and her life .
Women 's full access to sexual and reproductive health is a prerequisite for achieving gender equality .
So long as women are refused that access , it will be others who decide about women 's bodies and lives .
Surely nobody seriously concerned with Europe 's humanist tradition , with our shared values and with respect for human rights could want that !
( Applause )
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me begin by congratulating the rapporteur on this extremely thorough examination of a very important cross-cutting subject .
Greater participation by women in the economy and the fair sharing of power between men and women are actually prerequisites for development .
If we cannot ensure gender equality in development we will never achieve either the Millennium Goals or sustainable economic growth .
Why in sub-Saharan Africa do women constitute only 34 % of the workforce in regular employment ?
Why do these women 's earnings represent only 10 % of total income and why do women own only 1 % of the assets ?
Obviously these questions are extremely important .
And why , as your report points out , do women make up 70 % of the 1.3 billion people living in absolute poverty ?
What is illustrated here is a very particular kind of tragedy intrinsically associated with being female .
Sadly there are too many such questions that we need to answer .
Even in Europe , even in our Member States ' national parliaments with their reasonably high levels of female participation , there is no guarantee that women 's priorities will always be addressed .
With regard to our policy towards partner countries , we recognise the need to engage in really thoroughgoing political dialogue .
I can tell you that dialogue on the issue of gender equality is not always straightforward : it can involve , for example , helping to ensure the breakdown of statistics by gender ; or insistence that budgeting should take more account of the social sector , for in many cases education and health are not real priorities , although it is well known that women 's education and health are keys to development .
All these concerns are central to the Communication entitled Gender Equality and Women Empowerment in Development Cooperation , adopted by the Commission on 8 March 2007 .
The policy set out there constitutes a response to commitments made in the European Consensus on Development with regard to gender equality in all our cooperation policies and practices .
The aim of the communication is to develop a European vision and to offer consistent support for the promotion of gender equality in all developing regions and countries .
The communication is also a guide to new aid modalities , notably budget support .
I take issue here with the criticisms expressed in your report , for I believe that budget support offers new opportunities for effectively furthering gender equality .
Why so ?
I have already outlined on a number of occasions the reasons why , insofar as possible , I have favoured budget support .
The fact of engaging in budget support gives us incomparably greater leverage in political dialogue with the authorities of the partner country concerned .
It enables us , for example , to discuss policy options and , among other things , the need for better promotion of women 's potential in a country 's economic and social development .
Moreover , in such cases , we base our support on the verification of tangible results presented or revealed via indicators that are always gender-specific and therefore clearly highlight gender gaps where they exist .
The objectives that we use to measure a country 's results are in line with the Millennium Goals and , for the most part , are highly relevant to the improvement of women 's living conditions .
They include , to name but a few , increasing the proportion of girls attending school and increasing the number of ante-natal check-ups .
The progress that a country makes towards meeting such targets is the basis on which the European Commission disburses variable tranches of budget support .
One of the speakers in the debate mentioned a form of conditionality .
When you engage in budget support you are clearly able , to some extent , to oblige the partner to respect criteria and observe certain types of conditionality .
In terms of positive influence , there is a stronger effect than there would be without the mechanism of budget support .
Be that as it may , I am prepared to pursue this debate in other contexts .
I am deeply convinced , however , on the basis of my experience to date , that budget support - where it is possible - is obviously a much more efficient way to proceed .
For a number of years we have taken a twin-track approach .
Firstly , we integrate gender equality into all our policies and actions , including as part of budget-support arrangements and in political dialogue with our partners .
One of the consequences of this approach is a need to train our colleagues who take part in delegations on gender-related issues .
Since 2004 , more than a thousand of them have received specific ' gender ' training and we have now set up a gender helpdesk to pursue this training in the future .
Secondly , we finance specific actions to advance male-female equality .
Actions of this type are included in certain national indicative programmes but , more importantly , there are also thematic programmes that complement geographically-based cooperation .
For example , ' Investing in human resources ' and ' Human rights and democracy ' programmes incorporate specific elements for furthering gender equality .
The ' Investing in human resources ' programme has EUR 57 million for targeted ' gender ' activities between 2007 and 2013 : that is an annual average roughly three times higher than our spending up to 2006 .
Of course , gender equality is also incorporated into other thematic programmes whether for education , health or agriculture , or indeed for environment and culture .
It is true that we still have a long way to go but I am convinced that , with a shared commitment to promoting gender equality and , most importantly , in cooperation with women in the developing countries , we will be capable of fighting poverty and building fairer societies .
Draftswoman , Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality . - ( RO ) Dear colleagues , I see that the report has already provoked reactions .
We hope it is a proof of its political relevance .
The Commission 's Communication was a very good premise and the Parliament added useful specifications .
I would only like to explain the principle at the basis of this position .
The objective was clear , we support women 's role in development cooperation .
Apart from arguments related to equality , there is enough proof that women are a good investment as they are excellent multipliers of results .
But how do we get maximum efficiency in achieving the goal ?
We could have requested strict criteria from the beneficiary states on strengthening \ women 's position .
As a matter of fact such criteria already exist .
However , we can also expect poor reactions , lack of both expertise and administrative capacity , formal commitments in the strategic development plans and lack of implementation of such commitments .
Non-compliance with obligations may result in the diminishing or suspension of aid .
It would negatively affect the final beneficiaries , and women would end up paying for the incompetence of governments , and we do not want that .
Under these conditions , we chose to insist on compliance with those requirements that we control and for which we have the action means .
For this reason , we ask the Commission and the Member States to ensure consistency between other Community policies and development policy .
Otherwise , certain aspects of domestic commercial policy or of the common agricultural policy may negatively interfere with our goals .
Given the significant differences overgender issue in the policy of the Member States , we believe that the drafting of the European Commission roadmap on gender equality within the Union is a pre-condition for true and efficient use of women in developing development cooperation , which is a policy primarily managed by the Member States .
The new means for granting support seem to have weakened the attention given to women .
We request an assessment of their gender impact and adequate correction measures , subject to the responsibilities and transparency of funds use undertaken before the European citizens .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( SK ) Preparing the report on gender equality and women 's empowerment could not have been easy , as its size testifies .
Although I do not agree with everything in the report by our colleague Mrs Uca , I would like to congratulate her on the consistency and accuracy of her approach to this topic .
When debating this matter we should underscore our support for women 's dignity and their role in acting for the common good in society .
In developing countries ( but not just there ) many women suffer from discrimination and violence , often work in poor conditions and for low salaries , lack basic health care , work too many hours and face humiliation and physical abuse .
That is the reason for inadequate development .
All these factors also have an impact on the quality of their family life .
Boosting development and enhancing equality in order to promote peace in the 21st century : these are the concrete steps that can help to improve the situation if we take them .
We have to condemn repeatedly , uncompromisingly and at every opportunity the sexual violence often suffered by women and young girls .
We must encourage developing countries to adopt laws that will offer women effective protection .
In the name of respect for each individual we also have to condemn a very widespread quasi-culture , leading to systematic sexual exploitation and destroying the dignity of even very young girls by forcing them to offer their bodies and so contribute to the billions in profits raked in by the sex industry .
Unfortunately , their clients come mostly from the civilised parts of the world , including the European Union .
Women in areas of military conflicts are victims of systematic rape for political purposes .
I appreciate that there are women 's movements working to enhance the dignity of women .
When looking at the issue of helping women in developing countries we must not forget that apart from financial aid from development funds there is an effective net of religious and charity organisations .
This initiative has for many years enjoyed the support of local churches , through parallel schemes and informal micro-loans to the poor .
It is very uplifting to see the patient , honest and hard work of poor women being rewarded in this way .
This also has to be supported by reforming the structures that help to expand the success of new initiatives .
Women must be granted equal opportunities , fair pay , equality on the employment ladder , equal access to education at all levels , access to health care and equality in family affairs .
Women 's involvement in politics needs courage but progress made by women in developing countries is progress for us all .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) On behalf of my Group may I say that we emphatically support Mrs Uca 's report and we congratulate the Commissioner on this gender strategy .
Virtually all countries signed up to the Millennium Development Goals eight years ago .
Half the time has already passed and it looks as if most of the Goals are not going to be met in Africa .
Women play an essential part in combating poverty , but they still do not have equal access to education , healthcare , employment or property ownership .
Their social status is low and violence against women is widespread .
At the same time , most of our partner countries ' strategic programmes simply ignore women altogether .
So the gender dimension really must be placed centre-stage in the political dialogue with our partner countries and women 's organisations must be involved in the framing of policy .
I find it monstrous that colleagues from the EPP and UEN Groups want to remove the report 's plain speaking on sexual and reproductive health , because if women are able to make decisions about their own bodies and whether and when they have children , not only will this save millions of women 's lives ; children too will have more opportunities and communities will be made stronger .
Anyone who denies that undermines the consensus on population and development which the international community endorsed in 1994 , and we will not allow that to happen .
One final word : I am one hundred percent in favour of the Green Group 's call for a European Envoy for Women 's Rights .
A women 's envoy will give the world 's women a face and a voice in Europe and its governments and may also on occasion remind the Commissioners of the commitments they have given .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , gender equality and women 's empowerment are values and principles that we all praise in the European Union .
As such , they definitely need to be shared with the developing countries within the framework of existing cooperation .
We all have a huge responsibility when addressing them because promoting double standards would morally outlaw us , and we certainly lose credibility .
I am referring specifically now to the amendments tabled for voting today , the same amendments that were rejected by the Committee on Development .
I fear that we risk using different yardsticks when , on the one hand , we express these values to our development partners and when , on the other hand , we use them inside the European Union .
We cannot afford to exclude references to reproductive rights from this report because this is a core topic when we target the promotion of women 's rights and their empowerment .
As the report correctly emphasises , women 's full enjoyment of their sexual and reproductive health and rights is a prerequisite for achieving gender equality .
The protection of reproductive rights , such as planning their family in terms of birth timing and spacing , and decision-making regarding reproduction free of discrimination , coercion and violence , provides women with the freedom to participate more fully and equally in society .
We cannot go only halfway towards our partners and claim at the same time that our goal is to have healthier and stronger women who are able to participate actively and equally in society .
Please excuse my tough words but to me this is mere hypocrisy .
We will fail to achieve these goals if we start by excluding core issues or give a different impression of our principles , different to what we have back home .
In today 's world , promoting gender equality and women 's empowerment in the developing countries is not an easy task .
Reaching these targets implies a genuine commitment and action and , most of all , it implies our good faith in our relations with developing countries .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DA ) Mr President , 750 million women are living in poverty , and these women are fighting for their own survival as well as that of their families . As Europeans we must fight alongside them for their right to a better life .
The role of women is inestimable ; yet their abilities and potential are not appreciated .
Their access to education , work and property is severely restricted .
It should be one of the principal tasks of the EU to ensure that women are placed at the centre of development work involving the EU .
As things stand , our policies all too often end up lowering the already low status of women , and for this reason I am very pleased with Mrs Uca 's report .
It is important not to dilute this report , as many in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats and the Union for Europe of the Nations Group are attempting to do through their amendments , which would remove all talk of women having sexual and reproductive rights .
As has been said many times already , these rights are crucial to enable women to take responsibility for their own and thus their families ' lives .
This is often a matter of life or death for them .
Women must have the right and opportunity to say ' no ' , in order to avoid violence and to obtain an education and the opportunity to set up on their own .
This is crucial if development is to result from our development aid , and it is both immoral and foolish not to put women at the centre of this work .
Unfortunately , the political will is lacking , of course - as has also been said - and thus many of us support a proposal for the appointment of an EU High Representative for women .
He or she should ensure that women are involved in political and social work worldwide , bringing to bear the influence they ought to have as half of the world 's population .
Women must not become victims or poor wretches .
We all need them to be put on an equal footing with all of us .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , what can I say ?
All credit to the Commission for a well-structured communication which for the first time sets out a European strategy for gender equality in development cooperation , in keeping , moreover , with the demands put forward by vast groups of women who refuse to be victims .
On the contrary , we refuse to be victims and are protagonists of our lives and our sexuality and it is we who decide on the type of society in which we want to live : a society able to tackle and put an end to discrimination , injustice , violence and the militarisation of states and minds .
All credit as well to Mrs Uca 's report which looks in greater depth at and grasps the aspects that the Commission has not taken into account , which I think the Commission should accept .
Here , I do not need to reiterate the figures on women living in abject poverty , women who are illiterate and suffering from AIDS or malaria and the many women victims of physical and sexual violence , especially in their homes , even in Europe .
Practical measures are the ones that count : governance , education , health , violence against women , access to property and work and , as Mrs Uca says , EU economic and commercial policies which do not run counter to development policies .
What is needed is a much stronger mainstreaming policy and that requires a major commitment of financial and human resources to the Commission 's delegations and to those projects having a major impact , such as micro-credit .
These are practical measures likely to bring about a permanent relationship with women 's movements in local and national situations , with the networks of women from different countries set up to campaign against desertification , for urgent conflict resolution , and for the right to health , housing and water .
I should like to say something about the amendments aiming to remove the references to the various international strategies - from Cairo to Maputo - on women 's reproductive health and free reproductive rights .
Defending life is sacrosanct .
The right to life means , however , that there can be no hesitation in implementing development policies able ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the Report on Gender Equality and Women 's Empowerment in Development Cooperation deals with problems affecting women in African and Asian countries , for example .
It sets out a strategy involving measures in various categories : gender equality , the political system , employment , education , health , and violence against women .
As we know , equal rights for women and men are a major aspect of social development enshrined in our European civilisation in basic regulations on respect for human rights and all people .
But equal rights and non-discrimination against women are not the only condition for social development .
There are a whole series of factors that are important for social progress , starting with compliance with ethical and moral principles that guarantee a signification reduction in exploitation , violence , cheating and other forms of manipulation , including discrimination against and oppression of women .
The dramatic living conditions of women in the African countries are the result of a policy of pillaging natural resources and of speculation by international companies that enrich themselves at the cost of the life and health of the local population .
Budget support and other EU programmes will not compensate for the losses inflicted by a robber economy .
Ethical relativism , too , favours sexual exploitation and the spread of sexually-transmitted diseases .
Sexual freedom as propagated robs women of their dignity by reducing them to sex objects and encourages violence .
The situation of women will be improved not by more funding for contraception and abortion , but by financial support for families , especially those with many children , so as to make education and development possible and to improve health care and social protection , especially for pregnant women .
Educated women with a predisposition for leadership or a desire to engage in politics should of course be able to stand for election and use their psycho-physical difference to broaden the spectrum of views on matters of importance not only for women and children .
However , gender mainstreaming as a central idea - which has brought us paternity leave , among other things - has already had the results that might have been expected , since Swedish fathers are not alone in preferring elk hunting or reading the newspaper to looking after children .
The tyranny of sexual aggression spread by the mass media influences ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( PL ) Mr President , Mrs Uca 's report deals with the important issue of gender equality in development cooperation .
Unfortunately , the rapporteur 's undoubtedly positive intentions are undermined by an excessive and controversial presentation of the issue of health and sexual and reproductive rights .
This subject ought not to be treated controversially , but the report uses the paradoxical language so frequently employed in the European Union .
It is precisely this strange use of language that is distancing the EU from its citizens and turning it into a unintelligible , alienated bureaucratic machine .
That is also how we are creating and nourishing opponents of the EU .
I therefore hope the PPE-DE Group 's amendments will be accepted by this House .
Why ?
Because by " health and reproductive rights ” the author and promoters of this report mean the opposite of what those words actually say .
" Reproductive rights ” does not mean the restriction of reproduction .
What we are doing is giving a positive name to something that has negative consequences , namely the restriction of reproduction .
That is outright deception .
Those who advocate restricting the population in poor countries and promoting contraception or abortion should not hide behind terms like health and reproductive rights .
We should call a spade a spade .
It seems to me they don 't want to do so because they suspect the European Union should not really be concerning itself with such matters .
Is there not something dubious about Europeans promoting and funding contraception and abortion outside Europe ?
In Africa and Asia , just as in the EU , it is individual states that should decide what policy to pursue in this area .
The report says women should decide .
But it is we who are telling these women in Africa what to do .
I think there is some confusion here .
Another point : there is no relation of cause and effect between having a large number of children and equality .
The two things are unconnected , and I fail to understand why this report makes a connection between them .
. - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , just this once I do not intend to speak about the report itself - on which I congratulate the rapporteur - but rather on the amendments soon to be put to the vote , and I wish to say that I find the amendments proposed by our UEN colleagues literally scandalous .
( Applause )
By refusing to countenance in the report any consideration of , or reference to , the problems of contraception , the UEN is effectively refusing to recognise that women in the southern hemisphere are entitled to a decent life .
It is more than scandalous , it is irresponsible and hypocritical , when we know that the absence of proper family planning condemns millions of people across the world to unnecessary suffering , illness and death - the hardest hit being women and the children that they bring into the world , all too often against their own wishes .
The amendments proposed by the PPE-DE Group are no less regrettable .
They merely formulate the ideas differently , particularly by refusing to consider recognition of a woman 's right to control her own fertility .
In the great majority of developing countries , women and girls - even young girls - continue to suffer significant forms of discrimination and quite intolerable violence .
Anyone rejecting the view that each individual woman in those countries should be entitled to full control of her own destiny is obviously refusing to regard these women as the equals of men .
Yet reproductive health should not be such an alarming subject : it simply implies enabling people to experience responsible , satisfying and safe sexuality , and giving women the freedom to choose to have children if and when they want children .
This concept of health depends on women and men being able to choose , on a basis of equality , methods of regulating fertility that are safe , effective , affordable and acceptable .
( SV ) Mr President , it is important is that we be clear about what we want .
For too long a discussion which should be dealing with human rights has been poisoned by various political considerations .
It goes without saying that a woman has a right to her own body .
This is why I did not dodge the question , in the debate on genital mutilation , whether the application of Sharia law amounts to not recognising the equal value of human beings .
No one would think of refusing a man the right to decide on his own reproduction or say that it was a question of cultural values to refuse a man the possibility of earning his own money and maintaining his own independence .
When the EU , which is the world 's biggest aid provider , acts in the Third World , our values must always be clear .
Human rights - by which I understand equality not just in theory but also in practice - must be the watchword .
We must make it clearly understood that the market economy is good for poor women and men , not bad .
That is demonstrated not least by the successful campaign for micro-credit , which has created both prosperity and empowerment for millions of vulnerable women .
Of course , it is not for us in the rich world to force a particular way of life on other people , but we have , as I think it is important to point out , a responsibility to render possible choices where there are no choices today .
Like many of my colleagues here , therefore , I am truly disappointed to see some of the amendments tabled to an otherwise good and important report .
They really do point in the wrong direction .
To my colleague behind me , I would like to say that , when I was a Member of the Swedish Parliament , I stayed home with my son for six months on paternity leave .
I think that I actually became a better parent than I had been before .
Certainly , I read the papers , but my main responsibility was to look after my children and to do it together with my wife .
I can only say that it is a good thing .
I think more people should do it and see how important it is to keep a family together : man , woman , children .
( Applause )
( ES ) Mr President , I would like to begin by giving an enthusiastic welcome to this report because it is important on several grounds .
First , on grounds of justice : while women and girls perform approximately two thirds of work in the world , they only receive 5 % of the income and , moreover , poverty has a distinctly a female face .
Second , on grounds of dignity : I think it is imperative to replace the image often given of women as vulnerable victims with an image of women as a highly differentiated group of social actors , who possess valuable resources and capacities and who have their own agendas ; this involves among other things , recognising and fully taking on board a woman 's right to take decisions over her own sexuality and her own body .
Third , on grounds of genuine commitment and consistency : it is regrettable that gender mainstreaming is often perceived as an excuse for not outlining specific proposals and objectives in , for example , country strategy papers .
For all these reasons , I believe this report is to be welcomed and should receive the support of an absolute majority .
Mr President , this is a report on gender equality and women 's empowerment in developing cooperation .
Why , then , are the Socialists , Liberals and some others preparing this morning to vote against an amendment which seeks information on discrimination against females and which starts in the womb ?
An amendment in my name and that of Mr Deva and Ms Belohorská calls on the Commission to ask all of the Union 's partners around the world , both governments and NGOs , to undertake a permanent gender analysis of all abortions and to regularly report the findings to Parliament .
Perhaps Mr Hutchinson might tell us what is so terrible about getting that information ?
Parliament is , this morning , planning to look the other way by voting down this amendment , yet in some countries a strong preference for sons has led to the elimination of millions of girls through parental sex selection .
Baby girls also die through deliberate neglect and starvation .
According to the UNFPA , in Asia alone , at least 60 million girls are ' missing ' .
In some countries it is reported that sex selection is more common in cities , where technologies such as amniocentesis and ultrasound are readily available and open to misuse .
In others it occurs more commonly in rural areas where , according to UNFPA , the preference for sons is strong .
Daughters are in some countries seen as an economic liability and , according to UNFPAs , the sex ratio at birth , although it is slightly higher , becomes more accentuated because of this .
The shortage of women and girls in some Asian countries has potentially alarming social repercussions , including increased demand for trafficking in women , whether for marriage or for sex work , and the worsening of their status overall .
Those are the words of the UNFPA , not mine .
What is Parliament 's position ?
To look the other way .
Throughout history , majorities have got it wrong , for example in Austria and Germany in the 1930s .
How could a supposedly reflective body like the European Parliament do such an injustice as to vote down that amendment ?
We are simply seeking information ...
( The President cut off the speaker . )
Mr President , I congratulate my colleague Ms Uca on this excellent report and I welcome the two-track approach , endorsed by the Commission in its communication , focusing on both gender mainstreaming and specific actions to empower women .
I deplore , however , that many DCI country strategy papers merely refer to gender as a cross-cutting issue , failing to specify concrete activities , targets or financial allocations .
This means that , despite the strategic framework , gender efforts in development cooperation could be reduced to rhetoric in the years to come .
Gender-sensitive performance indicators should be assessed in mid-term and final reviews .
Parliament will monitor the implementation of the CPS , and we hope that the Commission will be able to indicate progress in terms of specific gender-related outcomes .
Finally , I am shocked by several medieval conceptions reflected in some amendments to this report put forward by some colleagues on sexual and reproductive health matters .
I will vote against them , evidently .
( DE ) Mr President , I too want to thank the rapporteur for this excellent report and also congratulate the Commission on its communication .
The challenge now is to be consistent .
Ten days ago I went to New York , together with several colleagues from national parliaments , to visit the Commission on the Status of Women , at the invitation of the European Parliamentary Forum .
It is interesting to find that countries that are our ACP partners say one thing when they are talking to Brussels and the various capitals and then say something quite different in New York , when it comes to discussing the matter at global level .
That is why I call on the Commissioner to be consistent , to advise his delegations that there is also talk in the respective capitals about the attitude taken in New York , because our goals in regard to women 's policy and development policy are often contradicted in New York .
In that connection , I am very glad that UNIFEM is now opening an office in Brussels ; that will certainly raise the level of the debate between the United Nations and the European Union in this area .
I am particularly glad that micro-credits are being named as one means of empowerment , of liberating women .
There are some relatively obscure arrangements ...
( The President cut off the speaker . )
( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my many thanks go to Mrs Uca for an excellent report , and at the same time I share the disapproval expressed my many of the Members here regarding the amendments tabled by the Right .
For women 's rights to be fully implemented in development cooperation as well , the European Union needs an envoy for women 's rights , whose role would be to ensure that women 's rights were taken into account .
That way it would also be possible to spend development cooperation money more effectively .
We know that the cheapest way of promoting development is to improve women 's rights , including their sexual rights , education , opportunities for employment and so on .
Although people know this from experience and numerous reports , it gets forgotten time after time , even when they are deciding on how to spend EU development cooperation cash .
That is why we need an envoy for women 's rights , and that is why I hope that everyone here will show their support for Amendment 20 on this issue .
Mr President , although there is much good in this report , there is something I totally disagree with , as my colleagues , Mr Kaczmarek and Mr Mitchell have already done .


I start by asking you , Mr President , who said this : ' Through the practice of prenatal sex selection , countless women are denied the right even to exist . '
It might surprise the rapporteur of this report to know that it was said by Ban Ki-moon in his opening address to the United Nations Commission on the Status of Women , in New York .
Furthermore , according to the UNFPA , in its state of the world population report last year , there is a global deficit of 60 million women in the world - that is the whole population of the United Kingdom !
These missing females have been prenatally sex-selected , aborted and ' infanticised ' out of existence , and this is happening on the continent on which I was born ; I know what I am talking about .
How is it that a report of the European Parliament on gender equality can be silent on the deliberate elimination on the basis of gender alone ?
Where is the equality in that ?
I tabled an amendment to this report demanding a gender analysis of all abortions performed in the world , and guess what happened ?
The Socialists voted against it !
Why ?
Do we not have the right to know how women are being aborted before they are born ?
We will see later today how they vote on Amendment 11 .
I do not know why the rapporteur has insisted on squandering this valuable opportunity to remove the most significant cause of injustice against women in the world today - their basic right to life - and , instead , insist on perpetuating through championing the so-called rights of sexual ...
( The President cut off the speaker . )
( PL ) Mr President , the statistics prove that equal rights policy hastens achievement of the Millennium Development Goals for eradicating poverty and correcting demographic , social and economic indicators .
Gender issues , however , are still considered of secondary importance .
In many countries women continue to lack access to basic health services , education and participation in decision-making processes .
Two thirds of all the world 's illiterates are women .
In the developing countries the likelihood of attending secondary school is 11 % less for girls than for boys .
The statistics also show a tragic health situation . In sub-Saharan Africa , for example , 60 % of those infected by the HIV virus are women , and girls account for 75 % of new cases of AIDS among young people .
The Commission 's Communication is an important step towards the EU 's introduction of gender issues into the programme of cooperation with partner countries as a major instrument in the eradication of poverty and support for human rights , which includes combating violence against women .
I congratulate the rapporteur on a very well prepared report , and in conclusion ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( RO ) Today we are discussing another report that analyses the situation of women , the second one this week , but this time from the perspective of equal opportunities concerning the development of the Community .
It is a report that provoked discussions and controversies , different approaches and contextualised analyses .
It is however important that we discuss this kind of matter ; it is even more important that contextualised proposals and tangible results should exist .
We talk much about education and its outstanding role in changing attitudes , contouring behaviours , integration of groups with high risk of marginalisation and development of communities .
However , I believe that it is high time we had a consistent policy at European level in the field of education , with clear steps that should be monitored .
It is obvious that gender issues must be part of educational programmes .
It is important that the European Union include this theme in the dialogues with third countries in the field of human rights protection .
2008 , the Year of Intercultural Dialogue , must be used to encourage inter-university exchanges and exchanges of experience between European women and women in developing countries with a view to stating women 's role all over the world .
From this perspective , the promotion of young generations , including young girls , must be a priority of development cooperation .
I thank you and I hope that the final version of this very important report will reflect all views existing within the European Parliament and we will have a balanced approach on this issue .
( NL ) Women 's freedom to make their own choices is a simple human right .
It helps the economy to grow and social protection to improve .
Mortality amongst women in developing countries is still tragically and unacceptably high .
Families are destroyed as a result .
There is a direct link here with child labour .
Investing in equal opportunities and freedom means investing in the future , in Europe and in the developing world .
Along with my Group I find it shocking that in this House a whole lot of ultraconservative amendments , aimed at curtailing women 's rights , have been tabled to Mrs Uca 's excellent and comprehensive report .
These are not really about choices in pregnancy , that is pure hypocrisy .
They are about scrapping all references to even the most moderate UN texts on women 's rights .
But sexual freedom and reproductive rights guarantee freedom of choice for every woman .
Even the Vatican will recognise that freedom one day .
But women cannot afford to wait ; the world cannot afford to wait .
- ( EL ) Mr President , I sincerely believe that having access to information and services relating to sexual and reproductive health protects women from AIDS , if anything .
I am therefore totally opposed to our refusal to allow it on the grounds that the hidden agenda here is abortion .
I am also opposed to the fact that for the same reason we are deleting the Kyoto Protocol from the well-known Maputo Protocol text on the rights of women in Africa .
Certainly , the issue of abortions is one of principle and each of us will adopt a position according to what we believe .
I respect the beliefs of others , but I also ask them to do the same for mine .
We ought , then , to respect both the rights of women and the right of each woman who chooses whether or not to have an abortion , be it for economic , social , family or even health reasons .
I personally will therefore vote in favour of the report .
( RO ) There are many good aspects in this report and I will support it , but I will vote against the absurd amendments from the right-wing on reproductive rights .
I want to say that it is quite obvious that sustainable development cannot be achieved without reconsidering the role of women in the economy , society , politics , environmental protection and family .
We determined and discussed today that education is a key field in development .
Given that equality is first of all an issue of stereotypes and education , I propose that the Commission support the Member States in including gender equality issues in school curricula .
We now need concrete and firm actions , such as an increase in budget resources to improvethe economic and social condition of the family and I am sure and we have the political will to achieve these goals .
( SK ) Since 70 % of the 1.3 billion people who live in absolute poverty are women , development aid must be targeted mainly at women .
I agree with all the points in Mrs Uca 's report , which states that education is the key to women 's empowerment .
I agree that financial and technical support should be provided to those women 's organisations that are active in the area of education and teach women how to become successful .
I support microcredit as a tool for meeting the Millennium Development Goals .
However , I do not agree with the rapporteur 's position on the issues of reproductive health in the report .
If we want to give women the right to make decisions concerning their bodies , why do we not give their unborn children the same opportunity to decide between life or death ?
I support the amendments tabled by my colleagues from the PPE-DE and UEN political groups in this regard and I thank my colleagues for their courage to include them .
I will not vote for the report if these amendments are not adopted .
( DE ) Mr President , I congratulate the Commission and the rapporteur .
I am sorry this debate has focused so strongly on sexual and reproductive rights , because there are many other important issues in this context .
It seems to me that the UN and a number of conservatives are acting as though sexual and reproductive rights relate only to abortion .
In that case I would advise them to check the facts and look at them closely : to be against contraception , against information , against giving women access to these services will only further increase the number of abortions .
I find it more than cynical that those same people stand up and pretend they have a monopoly on ethics and morals .
In view of the statistics we hear from the United Nations and the World Population Monitoring Report every year , it is unethical and immoral to come out against sexual and reproductive rights here .
( Applause )
Mr President , we are discussing gender equality and women 's empowerment and development cooperation .
I am increasingly saddened by the fact that every time we have a debate around these issues , it descends into a very intolerant debate around sexual health and reproductive rights for women .
It is a tragedy .
It is one of the ongoing tragedies in this Parliament that we cannot see the bigger picture about the importance of education and micro-credit .
I will not be supporting most of the amendments tabled by some of my colleagues .
It is not that I am not concerned .
It is not that I am not concerned about the rate of sex selection that disposes of female foetuses in China and everywhere else .
Of course we all have concerns about what is going on there .
It is because , truly , I am not convinced that the motives for putting down these amendments are in what the amendment actually says .
If our colleagues were against abortion I would respect them putting down a motion against abortion because I think sex selection of male foetuses to them is as much of a concern as female foetuses ...
( The President cut off the speaker . )
( BG ) I would like to commend the rapporteur for the comprehensive report on the gender issue and the Commission for its Communication .
However , a document is as powerful as its implementation .
Therefore we should make efforts to make this happen .
The Millennium Development Goals can be achieved through balancing all policies - family , school , university , healthcare , economy - in which women should be pivotal .
In our cooperation programmes we have to emphasize on the right of women to be healthy , including reproductive health .
We should also think of the women 's economic independence which is a prerequisite for the development of entrepreneurship and the fine-tuned use of their entire potential .
It is particularly important to speak of shared responsibilites at all levels , national and international alike , shared responsibilities between men and women .
This pertains to all walks of life and to all sectors of the economy .
( FI ) Mr President , this report was preceded by a very heated debate in the committee at the start of the year , and it seems this debate is continuing today here in plenary .
I consider women 's health services in general to be a very important component of human rights .
These definitely extend to services relating to sexual and reproductive health .
This is not only a problem in developing countries : according to what I heard yesterday about the United States of America , 40 % of young teenage girls have sexually transmitted diseases .
Mere education and responsibility are not enough even in the western world .
In the developing countries the situation is far worse .
HIV among women is on the increase , as is sexual violence against women .
The provision of sexual and reproductive services in the developing countries is not about abortion either ; it is about women knowing what options they have and knowing that they have a right to make their own choices .
Mr President , thank you for allowing me to speak on this because , in the heat of the debate , I think I want to bring matters down to a more practical level .
The reality is stated in the explanatory statement , for example in Africa , where women make up 52 % of the population but perform 75 % of the agricultural work and produce and market up to 80 % of food .
I think the role of women in development in terms of food production is often ignored .
But I do take exception to the paragraph in the explanatory statement , which is historic and not up to date , in relation to a comment it makes about the common agricultural policy , which I absolutely disagree with .
Europe is the largest importer of produce from the developing world .
We have the Everything But Arms agreement and we will soon , perhaps , have a world trade agreement .
But I think we need , as the World Bank says , to invest again in agriculture and food production , and we need to do that through women .
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , I will be very brief because I presume there is not time to speak at any length .
I should just like to pick up on Mrs Gomes ' question . Why do the country strategy papers contain so few specific actions on the issue of gender ?
The answer is simple : the country strategies are worked out and decided by the partner countries themselves because they have to choose two sectors on which to focus and we do not dictate what sectors they should select .
I would , however , emphasise that we insist on gender questions being taken into consideration throughout the entire course of projects .
Mr Lambsdorff , I understand why you find it hard to accept the lack of cohesion in the European Union 's position in New York , but I think you need to take that up with the Council rather than the Commission , for it is not something that the Commission can rectify .
That said , I would obviously echo your desire for a more cohesive position .
Very briefly - and there may be those among you who find my words provocative - I should like to share with you my own conviction : I fully agree with those who regard reproductive health as a precondition for women 's equality .
Personally , I do not see how we can address the subject and tackle this question without agreeing on that precondition , just as we agree on access to school , access to work and access to micro-credit .
All these things are clearly important in themselves but ultimately it comes down to creating conditions in which women can choose freely .
That is a basic principle of gender equality and it cannot be denied !
( Applause )
I would also invite anyone who might be in any doubt about the human tragedy of women 's circumstances in certain developing countries to come and see for themselves and to hear the stories that some women could tell them about the anguish of their own experience .
That is all I wanted to say : there is little to add .
Thank you again for the high quality of the debate .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am most grateful to all the speakers for their interesting contributions .
My special thanks go to Mrs Creţu who drafted the opinion on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality .
Her clear analysis and proposals for greater coherence have enriched the report in many important areas .
For reasons of time I cannot , unfortunately , discuss all her contributions and I hope she will not take that as a sign of disrespect .


Many thanks to Mrs van Lancker , Mr Berman , Mr Lambsdorff , Mr Hutchinson , Mrs Scheele , Mrs Doyle , Mrs Weber , Mr Varvitsiotis , Mrs Hassi and Mrs Gomes .
They are quite right to say that reproductive health in the developing countries has absolute priority and it is important to fight for it boldly and consistently .
I vehemently disagree with Mrs Krupa 's view that the sexual freedom of women provokes violence .
That is an appalling and discriminatory kind of logic !
( Applause )
I say to Mr Deva that I did not expect anything different from him .
Please forgive me for that remark .
My dear Luisa Morgantini and Mr Romeva i Rueda have , as ever , found strong words to make it clear that women do not want handouts but simply what is due to them as half of humankind .
Many thanks to all those who support my report .
I am also glad that NGOs in the field of development and women 's rights have given a most positive assessment of the report .
I am very grateful for all the cooperation and support I have received .
( Applause )
in writing . - ( PL ) Equal opportunities and equal access for women and men to resources and participation in public life are of decisive importance not only outside the EU , in the framework of sustainable development , they are also extremely important for many women in the European Union itself .
I will give you an example : in Poland , in my own region , Silesia , women working day-to-day in favour of equality between women and men are worried that gender mainstreaming , i.e. gender policy , is not properly incorporated in regional economic , political and cultural action .
Women meeting in Katowice on 8 March 2007 proclaimed that ' gender policy is not promoted by the local authorities or the media - either publicly or privately - despite the fact that Poland joined the EU almost 4 years ago . '
They added that the Silesian authorities were apparently not convinced by the slogan ' Democracy without women is only half democracy ' .
Following the recent elections there are one-third fewer women in Silesian politics .
So how can one speak of women 's equality ?
That is why Silesian women are demanding that the local authorities ensure them equal involvement in local government and the decision-making process , access to promotion and the pursuit of business activities , equal opportunities with regard to employment , working conditions and pay , and freedom from violence .
1 .
Global Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Fund (
2 .
The challenge of EU Development Cooperation Policy for the new Member States (
3 .
Enhancing the quality of life of older people (
4 .
Taxation of unleaded petrol and gas oil (
5 .
The European Union 's role in Iraq (
- After the vote on Amendment 10
( FR ) Madam President , I should simply like to propose an oral amendment as follows : ' having regard to the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War , of 12 August 1949 , together with Additional Protocols I and II thereto , and particularly concerned at the violence suffered by humanitarian , medical and religious personnel in the performance of their duties ' .
That is the text of the amendment . I have consulted widely with colleagues from the various groups and they have assured me that they will not obstruct my proposal .
( Parliament agreed to accept the oral amendment )
6 .
European Code of Conduct on Arms Exports ( vote )
7 .
The particular situation of women in prison and the impact of the imprisonment of parents on social and family life (
- Before the vote :
( ES ) Madam President , before we begin the vote on this report I must say that along with the rapporteur , Mrs Panayotopoulos , and the other rapporteurs , I have an oral amendment to propose regarding the first amendment to paragraph 6 .
It is to remove the last two words of the amendment , I shall say them in English : ( EN ) ' contraception and abortion ' ; ( ES ) this would obviate the need for voting on the second part of the amendment in question .
( Parliament agreed to accept the oral amendment )
- Before the vote on Amendment 7 :

Madam President , this is about a change in the phrase ' detention of girls and boys ' ; and the age is changed too , to 18 instead of 17 .
( Parliament agreed to accept the oral amendment )
8 .
Gender Equality and Women 's Empowerment in Development Cooperation (
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see the minutes )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
Madam President , whatever one thinks of the current debate on climate change - and I can sense a lot of hot air all around me - I think we can all agree on the need for more energy efficiency .
But , if we are going to talk about energy efficiency , let us make sure that we actually have some joined-up thinking on this .
I will give an example : our whole policy on energy-saving light bulbs .
Yes , we want to phase out existing light bulbs , but yet we impose tariffs on the import of energy-saving light bulbs .
Yes , we talk about banning mercury in barometers ( even though it actually constitutes a very small risk ) , yet at the same time we are encouraging energy-saving light bulbs which contain , yes , you guessed it , more mercury .
Not only that , but we are talking about energy efficiency , yet we continue to come to Strasbourg , which emits tonnes and tonnes of needless extra CO2 .
Therefore , if we really want to take a lead on energy efficiency , we should close down the Strasbourg Parliament .
( PL ) Mr President , I voted in favour of Community participation in a research and development programme aimed at enhancing the quality of life of older people through the use of new information and communication technologies .
The project provides development opportunities not only for older people but also for the handicapped , women bringing up children at home and people living in rural areas .
In my view , this initiative will prevent social stratification in Europe in the area of access to digital services , as well as the marginalisation of social groups threatened by less access to modern technology .
However , it is very important to bear in mind that the cost of these technologies must be kept as low as possible .
( PL ) I voted in favour of the report on " enhancing the quality of life of older people ” , which deals with issues of major importance for many European citizens , especially the older generation .
Older people are dependent on retirement benefits , which are mostly at a very low level .
The problem is growing with the increase in the numbers of older people receiving these funds , which are limited since the number of contributors is falling .
Thus we are heading for a situation in which a large group of older people will be applying for various social benefits .
Many of them , however , are still capable of various kinds of work and can remain active on the labour market .
The growing number of older people , plus the need for a wider range of services and products , increases demand in this area .
( PL ) Mr President , I voted against , since the report gives rise to a number of doubts .
I do not support the provisions of the directive on the harmonisation of excise duty rates on gas oil and petrol .
Diversity of excise duty rates creates the possibility of competition among transport firms from different EU countries , which undoubtedly works to the benefit of the consumer .
I also oppose the provisions on the increase of excise duty rates on fuel throughout the European Union .
High oil prices on national markets and the harmonisation of excise duties in all 27 EU countries will put a brake on economic growth in countries with a low GNP .
An increase in fuel prices means an increase in the price of goods and services .
I accordingly voted for the amendments tabled to allow the new Member States , including Poland , to retain different excise duty rates .

( PL ) Mr President , I voted against , because the significant increase in excise duty on gas oil will give rise to an increase in customs duty on goods and services in countries which are supposed to charge a rate of excise duty that is lower than the proposed Community minimum but is in any case high with regard to conditions in those countries .
Given that average income in the Member States that joined the European Union in 2004 and 2007 is relatively low , the proposed increase in excise duty is too great .
Its effects will be felt especially by the poorest families , since the present rise in fuel prices already weighs heavily on their domestic budgets .
The least developed countries , with their low income levels , should therefore be granted much longer transition periods than those proposed by the European Commission , to give them time to adapt .
I consider the proposed increase unjustified and excessive .
Mr President , it is very good to see you back in your chair listening to these explanations of vote , which I know you enjoy so much .
I would also like to say I appreciate the kindness and understanding of your staff and services and interpreters this week whilst we have been making these explanations of vote .
I voted against this particular report for a whole bunch of reasons .
Firstly , I believe in tax competition .
I do not believe tax harmonisation or tax should be a competence of these institutions at all .
Secondly , this week , in my country , the Chancellor of the Exchequer has imposed higher fuel taxes on British car and freight drivers without understanding the consequences of his actions .
I should like to raise a separate problem .
I am running a campaign with the Northampton Chronicle and Echo for the people who live in that vicinity in my region , where we are being charged more for our fuel than all the other major towns around .
I wish to highlight that there are other problems within the fuel market , let alone the problems to do with tax .
Mr President , I would like to echo the comments of my colleague in thanking you , the staff and the interpreters for your kind patience as we seek to deliver these explanations of vote , which at times may be rather entertaining and at times rather boring for you .
I understand that .
But that is the great contrast in this place .
Now , let us talk about tax competition .
We talk about creating the world 's largest single market here , and we talk about making the EU the most competitive economy in the world , and we talk about the world competition , yet what do we do when it comes to tax competition ?
Well , as it actually says in the explanatory statement , the best way to address the problem of competition would be through full harmonisation .
So here we are , seeing competition as a problem , while at the same time talking about the need for a more competitive economy .
This should not be a competence of the EU .
It is a competence of Member States , and we should leave it as such , because the best way to ensure a competitive economy is to make sure that we have tax competition , not harmonisation .
( PL ) Mr President , I voted against .
The European Union has no interest in funding Iraq .
There are other countries in Europe itself that would benefit much more from such aid .
The Caritas Europa report shows that in 14 European countries - including Poland , Austria , Germany and Britain - single parents , especially women , are particularly affected by poverty .
According to an EU report Poland , with 26 % , has the highest percentage of children living in poverty of all the EU countries .
One Pole in five ( 19 % ) lives below the poverty line .
And 22 % of Polish children with at least one working parent are threatened by poverty .
That is the highest figure for Europe .
Thirteen percent of Poles in employment are threatened by poverty .
In Austria , 47 % of unemployed single parents live in chronic poverty .
Let us concentrate our efforts on Europe .
Mr President , yesterday when you were in the chair I emphasised how much I always enjoy reading the reports by the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality in this place and wonder why it exists .
To prove this point today we have a report whose findings are more coherent with somebody who watched too much Prisoner : Cell Block H as a child than on the actual facts of the situation of women in prisons - and whether that should be a competence of this place anyway .
For example , in recital Q , it says : ' whereas the increased number of women in prison is partly due to the worsening economic conditions of women ' .
I think , and I have checked with the statistics from a number of countries in the European Union , the number is going up simply because the population is going up .
In fact , the proportion of women in prison across Europe is dropping .
It says here that access to health care of all kinds should be provided to a very high quality in prisons .
Yes , that is absolutely right .
But there are plenty of elderly women in my constituency who would love to have the same benefits of health-care provision that are provided to women inmates in prisons throughout the UK .
So that is why I have abstained on the report .
( NL ) I pointed yesterday to Turkey 's unassailable position as an aspiring Member State and this report merely confirms that special status .
For weeks Turkey has been bombing the north of Iraq and ten thousand Turkish troops have invaded the country .
And instead of clearly condemning this aggression what does Parliament do ?
It politely asks Turkey to respect the territorial integrity of Iraq .
All rules , all principles , all guidelines and criteria have to step aside for Turkish accession , from the Copenhagen criteria to international law and its ban on the use of aggression .
Turkey regards itself as above the law , any law , and is constantly reinforced in that belief by Europe . One day the European Union will have cause to regret its stance .
( DE ) Mr President , I was a sharp and clear critic and opponent of the Iraq war and I still am .
I believe , however , that we must also make up for the mistakes we committed there .
We in the western world - both Europe and the USA - therefore have a duty to do our utmost to secure peace and stability , which will be difficult enough .
That is why the Gomes report is an outstanding one .
We really should use the opportunity to support Mrs Záborská 's initiative for the release of the kidnapped archbishop .
I am sorry that as a result of a management mistake on the part of this House the resolution on the subject is not on this afternoon 's agenda .
It is our duty to do our utmost to help this representative of a minority whose existence is under threat , which has lived together in peace with its Muslim neighbours for centuries , and which is threatened with genocide precisely at a time when we are responsible in Iraq .
That is not acceptable and that is why we must take strong action here .
( PL ) Mr President , I agree with much of Mrs Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou 's report on the situation of women in prison .
Prison administrations must ensure decent conditions for persons serving prison sentences or under temporary arrest .
I want to draw attention to the situation of women employed in the prison service .
In Poland , 5 000 of the 30 000 prison officers are women .
Prison officers ' remuneration does not exceed EUR 500 a month .
Given the role of prison staff in ensuring that sentences are properly served , it important that most officers dealing with women prisoners should be of the same sex .
That lessens the discomfort of women prisoners and ensures better protection of their rights .
Without a significant increase in remuneration and better working conditions in the prison services , we shall not achieve the aims of the report .
Mr President , I voted with my party 's whip on this particular report and against many of the amendments .
However , I do have a problem with the contents of the recitals .
It says , ' whereas it is necessary to create a national force for maintaining order that brings together all the communities viewed to be trustworthy by them ' .
This is the people of Iraq , the national force created by , I guess , people from within Iraq .
You do wonder actually how much determination the individual Member States that comprise the European Parliament have put behind that effort so far .
All you have to do is look at how many people have supported the efforts in Iraq , believe in them or not .
As we do , we should try and tidy up the problems that we have caused .
I really do think that this resolution shows how trying to have a harmonised EU foreign and security policy in the future will cause us many problems , both in this place and within our Member State capitals .
( DE ) Mr President , like the majority of my Group I voted against this report , not because of the subject-matter but because this important issue keeps being exploited for ideological battles about the concepts of sexual and reproductive health and rights .
I want to appeal to all the Groups in this House to put an end to this ideological dispute , which is detrimental to the matter in hand .
We must make it clear that reproductive health is important , but that it has nothing to do with abortion , because that does not come within the European Union 's remit and each state has the right to decide its own laws in that area .
That is in line with the principle of subsidiarity , which is why the European citizens ' money may not be used for purposes that some EU Member States do not find acceptable on ethical , moral and legal grounds .
We should , therefore , very definitely leave this subject out of our deliberations and concentrate on neutral concepts that actually have something to do with the question of health and nothing to do with the question of abortion , on which opinions differ in this House and where I am strongly in favour of protecting the unborn child .
Written explanations of vote
in writing . - Claude Turmes ' report on the Global Energy and Renewable Energy Fund ( GEEREF ) is one that I endorse .
The GEEREF will use limited public funds to encourage private investment in energy efficient and renewables orientated projects in developing countries and economies in transition .
A fund that helps everyone achieve a certain level of energy efficiency and embrace renewables has my support and I voted in favour of it .
in writing . - ( RO ) The resolution refers to the creation of an innovative financial instrument to support the implementation of certain projects financed by this fund in view of the transition to an economy with low carbon dioxide emissions and adaptation to the effects of climate change .
The development of this type of economy by means of projects financed by the fund means the creation of new jobs , equal conditions for social development and elimination of discrepancies .
In this sense , the special support granted to SMEs in access to funding of their GEEREF projects is beneficial .
I voted for this resolution because I believe that these two forms of action , namely the abatement of greenhouse gas emissions and adaptation to the effects of climate change , must be developed in parallel , by means of coherent and convergent policies with a positive impact on the development of labour market / creation of new jobs and GDP increase .
in writing . - ( PT ) In general terms it can be said that the purpose of this report is to encourage the integration of the ' new ' Member States into EU external policy , particularly ' development cooperation policy ' and ' European neighbourhood policy ' .
The report also considers that the ' new ' Member States represent an opportunity for the EU ' to reinforce its strategic presence in eastern Europe , central Asia and the Caucasus ' , regions with which the ' new ' Member States have priority relationships and which have received less EU ' aid ' to date .
This means seeking to make use of the privileged relationship of the eastern European countries that joined the EU in 2004 as an EU intervention instrument ( taking into account the interests of the major powers and their large economic and financial groups , particularly in the energy sector ) in the countries of the Community of Independent States , the Western Balkans and the Caucasus .
That is , seeking to make use of those countries ' ' experience ' of ' transition ' to capitalism and to inclusion in NATO and the EU as a model to be followed in these regions .
This is ultimately what is at issue : a policy that disguises the interests of capitalism with ' development ' .
in writing . - I support DanutBudreikaitė 's report on the challenge of EU development cooperation policy for new Member States .
While the EU 's new Member States , excluding Malta and Cyprus , provide unique expertise for the application and targeting of development policy in our neighbour countries to the East , we must actively encourage their involvement with Sub-Saharan Africa and other LDCs .
Our new Members strengthen the EU 's role as a world partner and should be fully encouraged in that role .
The report and its recommendations have my support .
in writing . - ( PT ) The mere fact that we are discussing the role of the new Member States in European Union cooperation and development policies , particularly with the African , Caribbean and Pacific countries , is clear evidence of the success of the process of enlargement and of the integration of the countries that have joined in recent years .
The ' former Eastern European countries ' certainly had a long tradition of ' cooperation ' with Africa , and it may be that the links remain , though in completely different terms .
The most relevant issue , however , is that these countries , which are still struggling valiantly with the costs of their reforms , are now capable of contributing to cooperation and development with the active consent of their populations .
This exemplary way forward could and we hope will be followed by other countries in largely the same circumstances in other parts of the world .
in writing . - ( PL ) I am voting in favour of Mrs Budreikaitė 's report on the challenge of EU development cooperation policy for the new Member States .

The report is of a very high quality , providing a detailed analysis of the current situation of development cooperation by the new Member States , the institutions and programmes involved , the recipient countries and the relevant financial contributions .

The issues dealt with in the report put the emphasis on relations between the EU Member States and their new eastern neighbours .
The new Member States are important links between the EU and its new neighbours .
I personally would call for the development of effective forms of cooperation between old and new donors in favour of less developed countries , taking advantage of the predominant influence of the new Member States in specific regions or countries .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of Mrs Gill 's report on the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council on the participation by the Community in a research and development programme .
This programme seeks to enhance the quality of life of older people through the use of new Information and Communication Technologies ( ICT ) .
European Union participation in this programme will ensure that it is better able to address the demographic challenges .
The use of ICT may help older people to become more independent and to remain healthy , and may enhance their quality of life .
in writing . - ( PT ) We voted in favour of this report , which deals with the European Commission proposal on the EU 's involvement in the research and development programme that various EU Member States have decided to set up in the field of the new Information Technologies ( ICT ) to help people as they get older and to enable them to act effectively .
The programme is entitled ' Ambient Assisted Living ' , and seeks to obtain synergies in terms of management and financial resources .
Portugal is also taking part .
The report , which the European Parliament has now approved , draws attention to and makes concrete proposals for promoting the role of women in science and research , and places stress on the involvement of SMEs and on fair access for all Members States to cost-effective solutions so as to avoid widening the digital divide and thus creating a two tier Europe .
It is also proposed that the Commission should conduct an interim evaluation by 2010 to assess the quality and efficiency of the implementation of the programme .
in writing . - ( FR ) I should like to make two comments on the Gill report , which is essentially about organising research programmes with a view to making older people more independent through the use of information and communication technologies .
The first point is on the substance of the proposals : it is hard to see what added value the European Union would bring to a project initiated , quite legitimately , by a number of Member States - aside from making the process more bureaucratic and setting up a new Community body .
The Union 's financial largesse , to the tune of EUR 150 million over a number of years minus the operating costs of the aforesaid new body , does not seem like a clinching argument .
My second point concerns the form of the proposals .
It is increasingly common for legislative reports to be presented in this House in the form of a compromise between Parliament and the Council - the idea being to speed the process by facilitating their adoption at first reading .
In effect , however , what we see is the legislative body held hostage by a handful of expert negotiators .
I regard the spread of this practice as a threat to democracy .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the report proposing European Union participation in the Ambient Assisted Living ( AAL ) research and development programme that has been undertaken jointly by a number of Member States and third countries .
Population ageing is a challenge to European society and to Europe 's economy .
Average life expectancy today is 80 years and the number of people in the 65-80 age bracket will increase by approximately 40 % between 2010 and 2030 .
New solutions are emerging to help people cope with the memory loss , impaired vision , hearing or mobility and loss of independence which are more likely to afflict us as we age .
European Union participation in the programme is envisaged in the context of the European Commission 's seventh Framework Research and Development Programme .
The European Union will provide EUR 150 million to cofinance projects that will have a leverage effect worth at least EUR 600 million between 2008 and 2013 .
The countries taking part in the AAL programme are also to help finance it by making an equivalent or greater contribution , which means that each country will invest at least 20 % of its national research budget in this field .
in writing . - ( PL ) I voted in favour of Mrs Gill 's report ' Enhancing the quality of life of older people ' , which aims to promote the use of modern information and communication technology as a means of support for the elderly .
As we know , our societies are marked by ever-increasing life expectancy .
That is a very positive trend . The EU average is now 80 years , and the proportion of people in the 65 + age bracket will shortly reach 40 % .
The technologies in question can significantly help such people in various situations , including the prolongation of professional and social activity and improvement of the quality of life .
Naturally , the specific needs of handicapped people must also be taken into account , and access to these services and technologies must be ensured mainly through the provision of broadband internet connections in both urban and rural areas so as to avoid geographical discrimination .
in writing . - ( DE ) I am in favour of cofinancing by the European Union of the ' Ambient Assisted Living ' programme , since it would benefit not just older people but also other population groups , such as those with disabilities .
It is precisely because of the major demographic change in the European population and the rising life expectancy over recent decades that we must support new information and communication technologies that would make it considerably easier for older people to cope with the everyday hurdles facing them .
In regard to the general cost reduction in the health sector as a result of the use of these new technologies , I would also draw your attention to the research into ' mobile health monitoring ' systems , the use of which would reduce annual health costs by EUR 1500 million in Germany alone .
Let me underline that one of the benefits of cofinancing is that it would also have a positive impact on the private sector , as it would indirectly assist small and medium-sized enterprises .
I strongly support the AAL Joint Programme because the use of new technologies means continued respect for the private life of older people and allows them to grow old with dignity .
in writing . - I back Nina Gill 's report ' Enhancing the quality of life of older people ' .
In pooling resources and coordinating research and development on a European level we are more adequately able to assess how to improve the lives of our older citizens .
By setting a minimum contribution we ensure the participation of all Member States in this cause .
I would like to commend the rapporteur on her report and support the recommendations contained within .
in writing . - ( SV ) We have chosen to support the report in its entirety since , in our view , the EU must prioritise action on unhealthy tax competition in the fuel sector , in particular with a view to enabling the EU to achieve its climate objectives .
The tax harmonisation proposal would also not prevent individual Member States from raising their CO2 taxes on petrol and diesel .
This is a further important reason for supporting the report .
in writing . - ( PT ) This proposal for a directive seeks to narrow the price differences on fuel among the various Member States that lead to distortions in terms of competition and the environment in road transport activity .
The difference in prices of gas oil used as motor fuel and unleaded petrol are indeed significant .
Hence its importance for Portugal , one of the countries in which this situation is making itself felt , bearing in mind the price differences between our country and Spain : Portuguese enterprises suffer competition from Spanish enterprises because the latter benefit from lower fuel prices - fuel representing around 30 % of costs - due to lower fuel tax ( and VAT ) .

Portuguese enterprises have justified the stagnation of workers ' fixed wages by this pressure on costs , with serious consequences for the labour force .
The European Parliament 's proposal is more positive because it eliminates the transitional periods under Article 18 , a very important aspect in the current situation , in the hope that it will make it possible to reduce the difference between Portugal and Spain in 2010 , since the latter will have to increase its fuel tax from EUR 302 to EUR 330 in the case of gas oil .
The approximation will continue in 2012 and 2015 .
In the case of unleaded petrol , unfortunately , there will be no change by this means .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted against the Schmidt report because what the European Parliament has engaged in here , instead of supporting the Commission initiative , is a sort of conjuring trick playing off the old against the new Member States .
In any event the decision will ultimately rest with the Ministers alone and it will have to be unanimous .
in writing . - ( FR ) Higher taxation and more controls : that is the Brussels recipe for Europe !
Harmonising excise duties , just like harmonising VAT by imposing binding minimum rates such as we have had now for 15 years , is demonstrably ineffective , utterly unnecessary and in some cases even damaging .
Do I need to remind you that measures like this prevent Member States from reducing , for example , VAT in the catering industry , even though that is a sector where the case for distorting cross-border competition is particularly flimsy and where lowering VAT could help to create thousands of jobs ?
Do I need to remind you that the new Member States are being forced to apply tax increases that their people find quite outrageous , in order to comply with European rules - while at the same time being required , under other European rules , to cut their rates of inflation ?
The current proposal is to increase tax on diesel in line with tax on unleaded petrol , the pretexts being a desire to protect the environment and an alleged need to combat ' taxation tourism ' - by which we mean ordinary people taking advantage of competition !
It is all the more scandalous because drivers in a country like France have been encouraged to buy diesel-powered vehicles - presumably so that we can now clobber them harder than ever !
in writing . - ( PT ) This explanation of vote seeks to stress that we are once again wasting an opportunity at EU level - since the mechanism exists - to take action to protect small-scale coastal fishing by failing to apply to petrol at least the same conditions of taxation enjoyed by users of gas oil for farming and fishing .
It should be remembered that petrol is the fuel used by vessels in this important and largest segment of the various Member States ' fleets , notably Portugal 's .
In its 28 September 2006 resolution on improving the economic situation in the fishing industry , the European Parliament , considering that increased fuel prices have a particularly negative effect on the fishing industry - significantly aggravating the existing socioeconomic crisis and drastically reducing fishermen 's incomes - and stressing that there is a serious risk of the disappearance of thousands of fisheries enterprises and the loss of thousands of jobs , adopted a range of proposals to support the sector so that it can cope with increased fuel prices .
A year and a half later , apart from the increase in the ' de minimis ' aid , virtually nothing has been done at EU level .
in writing . - The goal of Olle Schmidt 's report ' Taxation of unleaded petrol , gas and oil ' is to attend to the disparities in excise duty on fuel across the Union .
The current imbalance has encouraged fuel tourism , which has economic and environmental ramifications .
Measures need to be taken to ensure that this practice is discouraged .
Nevertheless I recognise the needs of new Member States still engaged in the process of economic development , who will require time to adjust to the measures proposed .
I voted in favour of this report .
in writing . - ( FR ) The purpose of the Commission proposal was to introduce measures for reducing CO2 emissions in accordance with the stated aims of the energy and climate change package .
However , neither the Commission proposal nor the report adopted today addresses the urgent need to develop a fuel capable of making a real difference in the fight against CO2 emissions .
The disparity of the planned adjustments and the way they are to be spread , both over time and geographically across the Union , will make the proposed measures ineffective .
If we really intend to move into a ' clean-air era ' , we ought to be more environmentally imaginative and support measures that will allow us to tackle climate disruption effectively .
The taxation-change approach proposed by the Commission and by Olle Schmidt 's report fails to promote either research or the concept of a new alternative fuel to curb CO2 emissions .
I want to take a clear stand today in opposition to the thinking behind this report and that is why I voted against what is simply a compromise that subverts the declared aim .
in writing . - ( IT ) The Gomes report takes stock of the dramatic and difficult situation in which Iraq finds itself .
The non-governmental organisations and the various bodies responsible for rebuilding the region are not in practice managing to resolve the problems arising from decades of war , dictatorship and sanctions .
In this context , it is the duty of the European institutions to support a multi-faceted strategy for Iraq which increases direct EU support for technical assistance to promote the rule of law , justice and sound financial management in order to safeguard fundamental human rights by creating regional stability and security .
Parliament therefore urges the Council to encourage investment by European enterprises in Iraqi territory , and to conduct the negotiations on the trading agreement between the EU and Iraq so that the Iraqi market can be brought more into line with European regulations .
In substance , the European Parliament 's proposal , with which I fully agree , suggests a new strategy for Iraq including appropriate use of the European Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights ( EIDHR ) and support for a pluralist and independent information system .
As the Committee on Development 's rapporteur for the Erasmus Mundus 2009-2013 report , I shall now work to increase the financial appropriation allocated to Iraq : the dissemination of culture is a fundamental step in creating a genuine rule of law .
in writing . - ( PT ) The resolution adopted achieves the ' astonishing ' feat of not making a single reference to the brutal and illegal aggression and occupation of Iraq by the USA and its allies .
The resolution glosses over the whole death toll of many hundreds of thousands of Iraqis , the destruction of an entire country and the premeditated and massive disrespect for human rights resulting from the aggression and occupation .
The resolution is completely silent on the first and foremost reason for the extremely serious problems the Iraqi people and their country are now facing , and thus on how to resolve it : the immediate withdrawal of all occupying troops .
In essence , the resolution endorses the status quo , presenting it as a fait accompli and seeking to promote greater EU participation in the intervention in Iraq , seeing this country as another ' state supervised ' by the USA / NATO / EU , like Afghanistan and Kosovo .
This is astounding , in that at the same time it considers that neighbouring countries must refrain from any interference in Iraq and must respect its independence , sovereignty and territorial integrity and the desire of the Iraqi people to build the country 's constitutional and political system by their own efforts .
Hence our vote against .
in writing . - I voted for this report , despite the view expressed in one of the recitals that sees all problems in Iraq as being down to the previous regime .
There is no doubt that Saddam Hussein was a vicious dictator and caused the deaths of many of his people , not least in the systematic attempt to wipe out the Kurds .
However , the total lack of any strategy by the occupying forces to deal with rebuilding the country has also resulted in untold misery .
I am very pleased , however , that Parliament took the view that no country should be forcibly returning people to Iraq .
The country is not safe , not even Iraqi Kurdistan , which has recently seen Turkish tanks cross its borders , causing further fear and instability .
We were told by members of many parties in the Iraqi Parliament that return is dangerous and potentially destabilising for the country itself .
We have also heard in the Subcommittee on Human Rights of the plight of the millions of Iraqis living as refuges in neighbouring countries with little support from the international community .
We should support the public services in those states and at least educate the children .
in writing . - ( FR ) The representatives of the Movement for France in the European Parliament have taken a consistent stand since the beginning of the US intervention in Iraq .
Our country 's own experience and its ties with the Iraqi people alerted us to the human , military and moral disaster that the intervention would bring .
Now the damage is done and it is up to the Member States to act , either alone or collectively , to rescue and re-establish whatever can be salvaged .
Before the US intervention , Iraq was the only Muslim country that was home to a large and prosperous Christian community - a community that had lived there even before the arrival of Islam .
One of the most tragic consequences of the US intervention has been the exodus of sections of that community , driven out by terror and intimidation .
It is a calamity for Iraq , today and in the future .
In the bigger picture , the rapid erosion of a religious population mix in the Middle East spells human and economic impoverishment and threatens the entire region 's stability and prosperity .
The historian Fernand Braudel considered that history began in Sumaria , but it would seem today that the long history of Christian minorities in Iraq is at an end .
We , the nations of Europe , simply cannot condone this enormous injustice by failing to act .
Iraqi Christian communities were once open and welcoming to Islam , and together with their Muslim neighbours they built a country that was prosperous before it was ravaged by fanaticism and wars .
( Explanation of vote cut short under Rule 163 )
in writing . - I am pleased to see that Ana Gomes ' report on the EU 's role in Iraq looks forward and formulates a strategy to build a robust democratic Iraqi state that respects human rights and the country 's rich ethnic and confessional make-up .
Iraq needs Europe to help build upon the recent security improvements that will go a long way in encouraging investment and increased NGO involvement in reconstructing the country .
All of Europe has an interest in a stable and secure Iraq and I feel the report 's recommendations recognise this .
The report is intended to ensure that the EU has a better share in the imperialist booty from the war against Iraq and interventions in the wider region of the Middle East .
In this context :
it seeks ways and means of establishing an EU presence in the country on a long-term basis in order to ' help European firms to bid for contracts to rebuild Iraq ' , i.e. to increase the share of the spoils received by EU monopolies .
it calls for unconditional aid to the collaborationist ' government ' of Iraq .
it puts forward strategies for active participation in the imperialist occupation .
In order for military and police forces to form part of the occupying armies , all that is needed is for different hats to be worn and for the name to be changed to ' UN forces ' .
Therefore , while cynically recognising the catastrophic consequences of the war and the slaughter of the Iraqi people , the report hastily states that events have been wrapped up .
The report legitimises not only the occupying armies , which it terms a ' Multi-National Force ' , but even the private firms of murderers active in Iraq , provided that rules are set for their criminal activities !
The Communist Party of Greece condemns the report . It expresses its solidarity with the resistance of Iraqis and the struggle of the peoples of the region for liberation from the imperialist yoke of occupation and for their inalienable right to decide their own destinies .
in writing . - ( PT ) The fact that Parliament has decided to discuss the future of the European Union 's role in Iraq , rather than insisting on a pointless debate on past issues , is positive .
The five years of importance to us now are the next five years rather than the last .
The starting point for any debate on this issue must now be to recognise that the situation on the ground has improved significantly , though it is still very serious .
What that improvement reveals in particular is that there is a viable way forward in the objective of building a democratic and secure state .
Our objective can be achieved .
Experience in recent years , however , also shows that it will only be achieved with greater commitment , by increasing security , by investing in training the Iraqi authorities and , very importantly , contributing actively to the creation of infrastructure that will make the country 's economy viable , besides oil .
In the European Union 's specific case , this involves investing heavily in the economic reconstruction of Iraq and in building democracy in the country .
A democratic and safe Iraq that respects human rights is vital for the region and for the world .
in writing . - ( DE ) Of course I know that we voted in plenary on the draft report by my colleague Ana Gomes on the role of the European Union and not on her explanatory statement to the report .
Yet I think it is important that in her explanatory statement the rapporteur once again underlines the fact that the invasion of Iraq was a strategic and humanitarian disaster and that Iraqi society was traumatised afresh by the war and the ensuing chaos and violence .
I welcome the fact that in addition to all the other important points she makes the rapporteur refers explicitly to the need to ensure that women have a stronger role and to promote respect for the rights of women , minorities and children if good work is to be done in Iraq .
in writing . - ( NL ) I find it regrettable that the European Parliament has so far produced no analysis at all of the war in Iraq .
In recent years Parliament has in fact maintained a deafening silence and not even challenged the lies put out by the Bush Administration .
For a democratic body like Parliament that matters very much !
It will be hard for us to retain credibility if we do not even act against UN Members which flout the UN Charter .
Mrs Gomes gives us an assessment of the situation in Iraq .
Her report on the European Union 's role in Iraq includes a number of good recommendations for rebuilding the country .
It addresses a range of subjects and all the measures proposed seem to me to be achievable .
I particularly welcome the proposals for multilateral efforts , under UN supervision , to get intensive diplomatic talks under way between the US and Iraq 's neighbours .
The aim has to be to establish democracy in Iraq , based on the principles of the rule of law , good governance and human rights .
So I support the report .
in writing . - ( FR ) The Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War stipulates that humanitarian , medical and religious personnel are to be respected and protected .
It is vital that we support the case of Monsignor Paulos Faraj Rahho , the Chaldean Catholic Archbishop born and resident in Mosul , who was kidnapped on Friday 29 February 2008 .
The three people with him at the time of his abduction were killed by the kidnappers .
It was not possible , in an oral amendment to the Gomes report , to mention Monsignor Rahho by name .
For that reason I would ask the President explicitly to send two letters of support and encouragement on Parliament 's behalf :
one to Iraq 's Shiite Prime Minister , Nouri al-Maliki , who has condemned the attacks on Christian clergy and has offered , on behalf of the Iraqi Government , ' protection and justice ' for Christians , with an assurance that those responsible for the violence will be hunted down and punished ;
the other to the Vice-President of Iraq , Tareq al-Hashemi , a member of the Sunni community , who has also denounced terrorist attacks on Christian communities in no uncertain terms and who , following the kidnapping , expressed solidarity with what he called ' our Christian brothers ' .
It is vital that we encourage the national authorities to do all in their power to secure the immediate and unconditional release of Monsignor Paulos Faraj Rahho .
in writing . - I will be supporting this resolution .
It is essential as I said in my report from more than a decade ago that we have a binding legal basis for our code of conduct on arms exports .
Yet the imperative to export is driven by a divided European industry that is desperate for long production so as to enable it to compete with mass-produced armaments from the US with only batch production domestic demand .
Thus we need to see a single market in defence equipment which will enable Europe to first compete , second to stop feeding regional wars around the world and third move some of its most highly qualified scientists and engineers into the new advanced technology industries of tomorrow .
in writing . - ( SV ) Some Member States have a vested interest in the promotion of arms exports .
Hence , if a common code of conduct for arms exports is drawn up , it is likely that certain Member States with a more restrictive policy may be forced to compromise .
We take the view that the surveillance of arms exports is best achieved by each Member State working through its national legislation .
Sweden must continue to have the right to pursue a restrictive policy on arms exports if it so wishes .
Cooperation is desirable in order to secure further progress in global disarmament work , but this is best achieved on an international basis within the context of the United Nations , having regard to the UN 's experience , expertise and global coverage .
in writing . - ( PT ) An effective EU code of conduct on arms exports undoubtedly becomes increasingly important in the context of its rapid militarisation , which is mirrored in the draft Treaty currently being ratified in each Member State .
Not without a certain irony , the resolution itself specifically refers to ' the evolving European Security and Defence Policy ( ESDP ) , in which more and more EU military and civilian missions are being deployed ( ... ) where EU personnel might be threatened with arms previously supplied by EU Member States ' .
The ' military equipment market ' is expanding in the EU , ' several initiatives to harmonise national arms procurement policies and intra-Community arms transfers and sales ' are being encouraged , and there is a ' willingness to increase arms exports as a tool to promote economic interests ' .
The watchword has been given : an arms race and the militarisation of international relations .
Initiatives and measures seeking at the very least to mitigate such an escalation are therefore positive and necessary .
As we stated previously , however , arms trade regulation will be much more significant if it is accompanied by a process of multilateral and reciprocal disarmament , beginning in particular by dismantling the huge nuclear arsenals .
in writing . - The British Conservative Delegation voted against the resolution on the basis that it does not accept the references to the Lisbon Treaty or to the evolving ESDP , both of which it opposes .
Furthermore , while it is strongly in favour of a responsible arms transfer policy , it is not convinced of the merits of a legally binding Code of Conduct , imposed by the EU , in advance of an internationally binding Arms Trade Treaty .
in writing . - ( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats voted for the report since it is important that prison conditions be improved in certain institutions in Europe and that prisoners ' human and fundamental rights be respected .
Furthermore , an equality perspective must be integrated into the treatment of offenders and prison operation .
However , we have certain objections to some of the content of the report .
We do not want harmonisation of prison conditions in Europe and we have strong misgivings over references in the report to special criminal sanctions or alternative penalties for women , pregnant women and women with young children .
As regards a child 's contact with its parents during periods of custody and thereafter , account should be taken , with the focus on the child 's best interests , of both parents and not just the mother or the one parent .
in writing . - I and my British Conservative colleagues believe that ways should always be looked at to improve the situation of women in prison .
The report suggests a number of possibilities that could be explored further , including the provision of health services .
However , the report is overly prescriptive in what it asks of Member States in this area .
It is for Member States to decide on the details of prison policy .
In particular , we are unable to agree with the premise of Recital C and Recital Q , which we believe distort other aspects of the report that may have value .
For these reasons , we have decided to abstain .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of Mrs Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou 's report on the particular situation of women in prison and the impact of the imprisonment of parents on social and family life , since there is evidence that European prisons are geared largely towards male prisoners and overlook women 's specific needs .
I therefore believe that measures should be adopted to promote the improvement of the situation of women prisoners , particularly in terms of their social and professional reintegration , health care and hygiene , psychological support and the preservation of family ties .
in writing . - ( PT ) Although women represent around 4.5 to 5 % of the prison population in the European Union , prisons continue to be geared basically towards male prisoners and tend to overlook the specific problem of the small but growing percentage of women prisoners .
The principal areas of concern are health care , the situation of imprisoned women with children and professional and social reintegration .
Specific attention should be paid to women 's health care and hygiene needs . Pregnant women prisoners in particular require specialised resources and attention in respect of diet , exercise , clothing , medication and medical care by specialised personnel .
Children who remain with their imprisoned mothers require adequate protection and care and should not suffer from any form of discrimination .
Imprisonment of women can have particularly grave implications when they have been the sole carers of their children prior to imprisonment .
Social inclusion of prisoners must be prepared during and after imprisonment with the cooperation of social services and other relevant organisations in order to ensure a smooth transition from prison to liberty .
in writing . - ( SV ) We support the work being done in the Member States to modernise and adapt penal policy in order to make better provision for the needs of prisoners and , as part of this , to take account of the specific needs of women .
As the treatment of offenders does not fall under the powers of the EU , we have chosen to vote against the report .
Measures concerned with visiting regulations , the operation of institutions , training of staff in the penal system , prisoners ' leisure activities or social assistance are and should remain a matter for the Member States , so that they can be adapted and developed in accordance with national and local needs .
in writing . - ( SV ) Junilistan sympathises with many of the report 's views concerning respect for human rights , better conditions in prisons , respect for equality between women and men and the importance of the resettlement of offenders in society .
Clearly it is also immensely important that the greatest possible consideration be given to the needs of the child in these situations .
However , we think that the Member States themselves should determine how they are to proceed in dealing with these matters .
In particular , we stress the right of every Member State to formulate its own criminal law and hence also to pronounce appropriate sentences .
Also , the European Union should not involve itself in the detailed regulation of whether a prison should have a gym or not , visiting regulations or work during custody .
These things should be subject to the direction of the Member States and their voters and be determined by the public debate in society .
We would remind everyone that all the EU Member States are democratic states complying with the Copenhagen criteria .
in writing . - ( SV ) We support the work being done in the Member States to modernise and adapt penal policy in order to make better provision for the needs of prisoners and , as part of this , to take account of the specific needs of women .
As the treatment of offenders does not fall under the powers of the EU , we have chosen to vote against the report .
Measures concerned with visiting regulations , the operation of institutions , training of staff in the penal system , prisoners ' leisure activities or social assistance are and should remain a matter for the Member States , so that they can be adapted and developed in accordance with national and local needs .
in writing . - I agree with the findings outlined in Marie Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou 's report on the situation of women in prison and the impact of the imprisonment of parents on social and family life .
Prison remains orientated towards the needs of male prisoners and I welcome the report 's aim to highlight the differences experienced by women .
I endorse the report .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of this report because there is an urgent need to adapt conditions of imprisonment to address women 's specific needs .
Even today , prison conditions in many Member States remain very poor and are certainly not geared to providing the particular types of support that women require .
There are specific issues for women prisoners that demand specific attention , notably in the matter of access to healthcare .
That is why I supported the amendment tabled by the Socialist Group calling for women prisoners to have the same access as other women to screening programmes for breast cancer and cervical cancer .
The fact is that early diagnosis of these conditions improves the chances of curing them , so the denial of access to such screening programmes can effectively impose an additional penalty on female prisoners .
Furthermore , women are still central to the family unit .
In the case of mothers , provided that they pose no threat to public order , we should therefore try to facilitate forms of punishment other than imprisonment , wherever possible .
in writing . - ( SV ) This is an area for which there are no powers at EU level .
Despite some positive proposals , the report is too concerned with detailed regulation .
I therefore abstain in the vote .
in writing . - When voting for any policy which includes the term ' sexual and reproductive health ' we understand this to mean the protection and enhancement of the life and health of the mother and the unborn .
We do not accept any other definition that infers abortion to be within this term ; and furthermore we understand that any care , information , policies or any other services pertaining to sexual and reproductive health similarly exclude abortion .
We will work to have this definition accepted at every forum and body we can influence .
We note the reply given by the Council Presidency in Parliament on 4 December 2003 that the term reproductive health does not include the promotion of abortion and , inter alia , that abortion should never be presented as a method of family planning , contrary to what the WHO states on fertility regulation .
It is clear , therefore , that the WHO definition is not binding on or even accepted by governmental and parliamentary institutions .
We will continue to support policies to promote responsible sexual practices , and to protect and enhance the life and health of the mother and the unborn , including supporting the provision of resources to achieve these objectives .
in writing . - ( SV ) This own-initiative report seeks to integrate the equality perspective into the EU 's development cooperation .
Junilistan is opposed to aid at EU level and is therefore voting against the report .
However , several of the amendments which have been tabled by certain Members are of a less congenial nature .
The right of women to sexual and reproductive health is an important element in promoting development .
In this case , we have chosen to support the original proposals as a counterbalance to the disagreeable tendencies in this Parliament .
Work on these questions and development cooperation , however , should in principle be pursued at global level through the UN , not the EU .
in writing . - ( PT ) We consider this report to have several merits , one of which is to draw attention to a major problem , both in the EU and in developing countries : the need to ensure access to information on sexual and reproductive health , to ensure freedom of decision , and to create and promote public services to protect and apply the rights of everyone , particularly women .
We believe that it should be emphasised , however , that the greatest contribution to ' gender equality and women 's empowerment in development cooperation ' will come not from policies that promote relationships of dependency and domination , market liberalisation ( see the EU Economic Partnership Agreements - EPA ) , the exploitation of workers , inequalities and social injustice and disrespect for human rights , which afflict millions and millions of children and women in particular , but from a policy of effective cooperation based on equal rights between states , respect for national sovereignty and the right of each country to define and implement a development model that meets its people 's needs and concerns , i.e. a policy that interprets the word ' solidarity ' accurately .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this amendment , because I strongly believe that fighting against violence , in this case sexual violence against women in crises and conflict areas , has to be the highest priority .
The EU cannot tolerate any kind of violence and therefore I find that the emphasis should be on fighting against sexual violence targeted against women .
Furthermore I think that traditions are not to be seen as something evil .
Sexual and reproductive health and rights are sensitive issues , including traditional societal and also religious dimensions , and therefore should not be generalised and thereby forced upon societies , especially fragile societies , where drastic changes in traditional ways of living can harm the fragile society more than they bring benefits .
in writing . - ( DE ) I vote for gender equality and the empowerment of women in development cooperation .
The way women in developing countries are disadvantaged by religious rules , cultural practices and poverty is usually further worsened by the lack of education .
In that regard I want in particular to draw attention to the potentially enormous social pressure that could come from raising public awareness of women 's basic rights , which could in the final analysis improve the situation of women in the regions concerned .
I further support the idea of regarding ' violence against women ' not purely in terms of female victims but of also developing practical programmes addressing the ' male abusers ' aspect , as proposed in Mrs Uca 's report .
I too am highly critical of the Commission 's failure to include a strategy against culture- or religion-based violence against women in its list of measures .
Poor access to education leads to disadvantages in other areas of life for the simple reason of lack of information .
To be poorly informed in this respect can have lethal consequences in developing countries in which health provision and standards of hygiene are often appalling .
I need only refer to the alarmingly high percentage of HIV-infected women - south of the Sahara the figure is 57 % .
One extremely positive point is the call for ' gender-sensitive performance indicators ' to be developed , which would also make the controversial subject of quotas less acrimonious .
in writing . - When voting for any policy which includes the term ' sexual and reproductive health ' I understand this to mean the protection and enhancement of the life and health of the mother and the unborn .
I do not accept any other definition that infers abortion to be within this term ; and furthermore I understand that any care , information , policies or any other services pertaining to sexual and reproductive health similarly exclude abortion .
We should work to have this definition accepted at every forum and body we can influence .
I note the reply given by the Council Presidency in Parliament on 4 December 2003 that the term reproductive health does not include the promotion of abortion and , inter alia , that abortion should never be presented as a method of family planning , contrary to what the WHO states on fertility regulation .
It is clear , therefore , that the WHO definition is not binding on or even accepted by governmental and parliamentary institutions .
I will continue to support policies to promote responsible sexual practices , and to protect and enhance the life and health of the mother and the unborn , including supporting the provision of resources to achieve these objectives .
in writing . - Feleknas Uca 's report ' Gender Equality and Women 's Empowerment in Development Cooperation ' welcomes the Commission 's strategy on the issue .
I reiterate this approval of a strategy that seeks to mainstream gender equality in development cooperation .
I have voted in favour of the report .
in writing . - ( FR ) While gender equality has been an integral part of the European Union 's development cooperation programmes for many years now , actual progress is still too slow .
The European Commission therefore needs to set itself targets , in terms of figures and deadlines , so that development can become the main driver of improved living conditions for women .
To that end , the Union needs to focus on three priorities in the partnerships that it enters into : fundamental freedoms , women 's status in public life and their access to healthcare .
On the one hand , the Commission needs to be more vigilant than ever with regard to violations of women 's physical integrity and human dignity ( in the form of torture , traditional practices of mutilation and forced marriage ) .
At the same time , cooperation must entail recognition of women 's place in society , which affects everything from access to knowledge through to financial independence .
In addition , commitments are needed so that by 2010 the prevention and treatment of AIDS in developing countries will be a reality .
European development policy will fall flat on its face if it cannot bring about genuine change in women 's circumstances .
The report , despite its accurate findings on the tragic state of women in developing countries , conceals what is to blame : capitalist production methods and the brutal imperialist interventions by the EU , the United States and other imperialist states and organisations . They prey on these countries and plunder their wealth-producing sources , which all results in hunger and the impoverishment of millions of people .
The solutions proposed operate within the bounds of capitalist development and the EU 's developmental aid .
Another typical aspect of this approach is the proposal to reinforce female entrepreneurship in order to increase employment .
In this context , the proposals for fairer and more democratic societies , access for girls and women to education and health services , the eradication of poverty , disease , etc . , are hot air .
They are mere wishes diverting attention away from the truth , because meeting the people 's needs is incompatible with the supreme principle of capitalist development and the pursuit of profit .
For every euro that the EU gives , it steals thousands from these countries .
The improvement of the position of women and the living conditions of the peoples of these countries will be achieved not through the legalised robbery of ' EU developmental aid ' , but through resistance to imperialist intervention , the quest for equal international relations and the struggle for a different developmental approach based on the needs of the people .
in writing . - ( DE ) This report on equality and participation , on the role of women in development cooperation , covers a great number of different aspects and also includes important practical demands .
As a whole , therefore , it should definitely be supported .
One theme that runs through the entire report is sexual and reproductive health and violence against women , together with promoting women 's right to self-determination .
It is important to expand the micro-financing networks , because micro-credits can help improve women 's economic situation .
I cannot understand why people are trying to table various draft amendments that weaken the report and are simply dismissing UN documents that are on hand .
in writing . - Mr President , I am all in favour of gender equality and empowering women and I would have liked to support this positive report .
Sadly , this report , like many others on women and children , has been used to promote abortion under sexual and reproductive rights .
As the majority of my colleagues have voted to include a number of amendments on sexual and reproductive rights , I found myself unable to vote in favour of this report .
in writing . - ( PL ) The Uca report on gender equality in development policy is an expression of European moral imperialism vis-à-vis the developing countries .
It exports the sick social model of the rich European countries to the countries of Africa and Asia .
The repeated references to reproductive rights denote support for generalised abortion .
I was therefore unable to vote in favour of the report .
in writing . - ( FR ) Equality between men and women is a priority in developing countries .
I greatly appreciate the thorough and painstaking work that Mrs Uca has done on this important subject .
Nonetheless , I voted against the report because the substance of certain paragraphs in the final version , which refer to sexual and reproductive health in imprecise terms , remains ambiguous .
Conflicting interpretations persist and some of them imply a threat to the lives of unborn children .
In the next report on the subject , women 's health should not be seen solely in relation to reproduction , for all women have the right to an environment that allows them to enjoy continuing good health .
That means paying particular attention to supplies of safe drinking water , proteins and basic medication , alongside traditional medicines .
Since Gertrude Mongella 's visit on 6 March 2008 , marking International Women 's Day , I would also say that we have a lot to learn from African wisdom with regard to gender equality : it is something that is lived there and is passed on in oral traditions among women and men who are blessed with good spiritual and mental health .
All of us could take inspiration from that .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Communication of Council common positions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 12.50 p.m. and resumed at 3.05 p.m. )

Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
1 .
Armenia
The next item is the debate on five motions for a resolution on Armenia .
author . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , will the tragic events that have occurred in Armenia since the presidential election on 19 February 2008 send out the message that Europe is incapable of supporting the fragile little democracies of the South Caucasus in their struggle to become established ?
Following the crisis in Georgia , it is now Armenia 's turn to suffer major political upheaval .
Despite the high level of attention directed at the country during the election campaign , the international community failed to promote the dialogue that might have prevented the clashes on 1 March .
After 11 days of protest against the election results by the opposition movement under former head of state Levon Ter-Petrosian , police tried to disperse the demonstrators .
The situation degenerated , resulting in the deaths of eight people , injuries to many others and the imposition of a state of emergency with curbs on freedom of information and freedom of assembly , as well as restrictions on political parties .
Since then , 400 people have been arrested .
There is an evident mood of anxiety among the population , who fear that a policy of repression will be imposed .
We have a duty today , in our contacts with all the parties involved in the Armenian conflict , to reflect that fear .
The question , however , is what we should propose as a method of bringing all sides to their senses and getting them to the negotiating table against the current backdrop of heightened tension ?
That is the challenge .
We need to restore the confidence of ordinary Armenian men and women in their fledgling democracy .
Essential preconditions for restoring confidence are the setting up of an inquiry into the recent events and the release of those imprisoned .
The next step - in conjunction with the international community , our Special Representative to the South Caucasus and our partners in the Council of Europe and the OSCE - must be to fix a timescale for our Armenian friends to return to the negotiating table , and we must bring all the conflicting parties to the table , on both the official and the opposition sides .
The rules of democracy depend upon dialogue and non-violence and it is up to us to facilitate such an approach .
With your permission , Mr President , I should like to propose an oral amendment .
I am not sure how to proceed for the fact is that we made a mistake in the resolution .
In recital H we referred to the territory of Nagorno-Karabakh where we should have said the status of Nagorno-Karabakh .
It would seem that my colleagues agree with the oral amendment .
author . - Mr President , I was one of the four Members of the European Parliament election observation mission in Armenia and I fully agree with and endorse its findings concerning the presidential elections , namely that the election was mostly in line with the OSCE and the Council of Europe commitments and standards .
The state authorities made genuine efforts to address shortcomings noted in the previous elections .
Allow me to use this opportunity to thank the Commission 's delegation in Yerevan for all the assistance provided to us .
The election was mostly in line with our standards , as I said , but further improvement and political will are required to address remaining challenges .
I express my deep regret and concern at recent developments that have taken place in Armenia , with violent clashes between police and opposition demonstrators that led to the death of eight citizens and over 100 injured .
It goes without saying that we expect a transparent and independent investigation of the events that took place and the partial lifting of the state of emergency which was imposed after the event .
Even though it is a step in the right direction , it is not enough .
I call on the Armenian authorities to carry out a full lifting of the state of emergency .
On behalf of my group , I call upon all parties involved to show openness and calmness , to tone down statements and to engage immediately in a constructive dialogue .
Last but not least , we regret and we are concerned at the recent unprecedented violation of the ceasefire on the line of contact with Nagorno-Karabakh and we strongly urge the parties to refrain from any actions that could undermine the negotiation process .
We urge them to stay away from the loud and catastrophic power of arms , and we call upon them to exercise the silent and peaceful power of dialogue .
author . - Mr President , recent events in Armenia show how difficult it is for fledgling democracies in the former Soviet Union to trust the electoral process .
Those who hold power are tempted to stack the cards in their favour , especially in the run-up to elections , whilst those who lose find the results difficult to accept .
The problems we have seen in post-election Armenia have been compounded by violent clashes , resulting in eight fatalities , and by the imposition of an extraordinary measure in the form of a state of emergency .
Bans on all political activities and strict censorship of the media were imposed on 1 March 2008 for a 20-day period .
The ban on political activities has subsequently been lifted .
Media freedom , including unrestricted internet access , is to follow .
Indeed , all normal constitutional freedoms should be restored next week .
Unfortunately , it cannot be ruled out that the state of emergency will be extended .
For now , a lid has been put on the pressure-cooker .
I am concerned about what is being done to release the source of the pressure .
Building democracy is a complex process . It must be safeguarded by institutions in which all parties place their trust .
It is , therefore , regrettable that the outgoing President has attacked his country 's human rights ombudsman , who criticised government actions .
It is only by strengthening the role of the ombudsman and also by ensuring impartiality of the constitutional court , which investigates allegations of electoral fraud , that democracy can be protected .
Until there is faith in Armenia 's own guardians of democracy , I strongly urge all parties in the dispute to make use of the mediation offered by the EU and the OSCE envoys and to do so immediately .
author . - ( NL ) Mr President , in presidential elections we increasingly see continuing uncertainty as to whether the preferred candidate of the ruling government has actually won a true majority of the votes as well as just a large number of votes .
Even where that candidate does have a true majority , doubts remain about the size of that majority , certainly where manifest attempts have been made to inflate it artificially .
When , in addition , some candidates are prevented from standing , when only the government-endorsed candidate has access to press , radio and television , when the opposition or foreign observers are not able to monitor the count properly , when peaceful protests against the officially declared results are broken up by army and police and opposition leaders are arrested , there is every reason for very serious doubt that the will of the electorate has been upheld .
We have seen controversial presidential elections of this kind outside Europe in Mexico and Kenya , and within Europe in Belarus , Russia , Georgia and Armenia .
Even without these elections Armenia was in an extremely difficult position .
Traditionally it has strong ties with Russia but is separated from it by neighbouring Georgia , which has a serious conflict with Russia , and neighbouring Azerbaijan , which has for many years had a border dispute with Armenia .
When the Russian province of Transcaucasia was divided up along ethnic lines in the 1920s the enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh , populated by Armenians , was given to Azerbaijan by way of a compromise , with a guarantee of regional Armenian autonomy .
That solution is no longer workable in the post-Soviet era , since the two states of Azerbaijan and Armenia are now enemies .
In fact the territory is currently occupied by Armenia , and this has led to a protracted conflict with its eastern neighbour , though a ceasefire is in force .
This kind of situation , with a permanent threat of war and blockades , provides fertile ground for authoritarian government to flourish and it is unremittingly difficult for democracy to function in the country .
The events since the 19 February elections come as no surprise .
Even so we must make every effort to get democratic conditions restored and the rights of the opposition reinstated .
The wishes of the European Union or its Member States for good relations with the de facto rulers of countries like Russia , Belarus , Georgia or Armenia must take second place behind this prime imperative .
author . - Mr President , Armenia is essentially a relatively recently re-born country , struggling to strengthen its democratic institutions and safeguard the well-being of its citizens whilst squashed between two not-so-democratic but rather hostile neighbours , namely Russia and Turkey , and whilst being disturbingly and unfairly involved in a territorial conflict with the totalitarian regime of Azerbaijan .
In this setting , the recently-held presidential elections were not perfect , but in the words of the international observation mission , were ' administered mostly in line with OSCE and Council of Europe [ ... ] standards ' .
Sadly , in post-election protests it would appear that the police used more than necessary force , which resulted in the death of eight people , including one policeman .
A thorough and fair investigation is called for into the events that led to these deaths .
An investigation is also warranted into allegations that external forces are instigating violence in Armenia in order to destabilise the country .
I call for full support for this resolution .
author . - ( PL ) Mr President , it goes without saying that we would like Armenia to be at peace , to have secure borders and to manage its external affairs successfully .
May I remind you that the elections in Armenia gave rise to no serious protests . What is happening there today must be seen in the specific context of the Caucasus , a highly inflammable region .
While I have the floor , Mr President , I would , with your permission , take this opportunity to voice my outrage at the news I have just received of the murder of Faraj Rahho , the Chaldean Archbishop of Mosul .
He was abducted on 29 February and three of his bodyguards were shot .
This is a further attack , a further crime , by men who lack the courage to show their faces to the world , who kidnap innocent victims , ordinary people pursuing religious activities - mostly Christians , mostly Catholic Christians .
Today we are again witnesses of such a crime , and it seems to me this matter should be placed on the agenda of our next meeting in Brussels as a special item .
May the Lord grant eternal rest to the heroic martyr who died today in Mosul .
on behalf of the PPE-DE group . - ( RO ) What happened in Armenia must be vehemently condemned but unfortunately it was not a surprise .
There are other quite similar events in another country in that area and they represent a continuation of the situation in place after 1990 .
We are facing the consequence of several factors persisting from then to the present day : insufficient economic development , latent conflicts , and the influence of the Russian Federation .
On top of all that we have the situation in Kosovo which , despite all considerable but useless efforts of the authors , will form a precedent for all those interested .
For the population in the region , it can only result in insecurity , lack of confidence in the authorities , and vulnerability to manipulation .
There is only one solution to restore a state of normality : economic development that will generate a higher standard of living .
There are energy resources .
The development of such resources and of their transit will solve the problem of economic development , as well as that of independence from the Russian Federation and it will also solve Europe 's problem in general .
The European Union did not really take a stand and if we want to find solutions to the problems in the Southern Caucasus , the Union must take active steps in the development of energy routes in the Black Sea region .
When a country that participates in the European Neighbourhood Policy and is favourably disposed towards the EU holds a successful democratic election , it is a victory for us as well .
If it goes wrong , it is a case of mutual defeat .
The Presidential election in Armenia was conducted in line with international standards , according to the international observation mission .
Alas , subsequent developments cancel this unsteady step forward .
Bloodshed and the imposition of a state of emergency have swept Armenia off the road to democracy , impeding its relations with the European Union .
Human rights are suppressed in Armenia and there is no freedom of speech .
Yerevan should lift the state of emergency entirely and the OSCE representative should assist in finding a solution to the crisis .
Hopefully , both negotiating parties will show moderation and will base their work on European values .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the present political crisis in Armenia is not the first .
During the presidency of Levon Ter-Petrosian the country began to depart sharply from liberal and democratic standards .
The main opposition parties were banned , freedom of the press was restricted , and parliamentary elections were generally recognised as not meeting all democratic criteria .
Mr Ter-Petrosian resigned as president under the pressure of demonstrations . That brought some stability to the country , but it was ended by the dramatic murder in parliament of nine leading Armenian politicians , including the prime minister , by unknown assassins .
We are now seeing a repeat of what happened some 10 years ago .
The present crisis , however , may perhaps be due to the weariness of Armenian society with the governments of the so-called Karabakh Clan , to which both the former and the present president belong .
The government is widely accused of restoring authoritarian rule under the guise of democracy , with mafia-type control of business activities and a deteriorating economy .
There is also a growing fear of Armenia 's increasing isolation and the gradual weakening of its position in the unresolved conflict over Nagorno-Karabakh .
When Mr Ter-Petrosian decided to return to politics and stand for election , his promise of greater flexibility in foreign policy won him considerable support .
The present crisis is very deep , however .
Let us hope it will be resolved by political means , although that is not at all certain .
If not , the conflict in Nagorno-Karabakh may be stepped up in an attempt to unite society around the government .
A recent incident in Karabakh in which 11 people died confirms this fear .
Another result may be a further strengthening of Armenia 's increasing dependence on Russia . The recent inauguration of the Armenia-Iran pipeline will not weaken that dependence , since the gas , and the pipeline itself , will of course be controlled by Gazprom .
Our attitude to the serious situation in Armenia should be friendly , but we should not refrain from criticism or from expressing concern where necessary .
I believe the position proposed in this resolution meets those criteria .

on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the outcome of the presidential election of 19 February 2008 was a factor in the political destabilisation of Armenia , although it should be emphasised that the conduct of the election was recognised by the OCSE as complying with democratic standards .
The demonstrations following the placing of Levon Ter-Petrosian under house arrest and their brutal repression on 1 March ended with eight people dead , many others injured , and the declaration of a state of emergency .
Restrictions on the media and the arrest of more and more members of the opposition are causing serious concern .
We call on the Armenian authorities to restore civil rights without delay , end the state of emergency , respect human rights and determine who was responsible for the tragic events of 1 March 2008 .
Investigation of this matter must not be a pretext for further persecution of the opposition .
The situation in Armenia is very difficult indeed , and our representatives must pay great attention to it .
Mr President , I should like to add that the democratic standards in Armenia are not as we would like to see them .
What aggravates the situation is the socioeconomic situation , and this , naturally , brings additional people to the street .
I would like to appeal both to the Armenian authorities and , of course , to Azerbaijan to endeavour to settle this long-lasting conflict .
There are areas occupied by Armenia which should be freed because there are no Armenians there .
What is really worrying is that both countries are in the process of rearmament , which , of course , reflects the situation as to the real social problems facing the countries , particularly Armenia .
Therefore , I support this joint motion for a resolution , but I think we should continue to follow the situation very closely , because it is worrying .
( PL ) Mr President , Armenia is one of a group of countries that receive support from the European Union for introducing political and economic reforms , establishing the institutions of a state governed by the rule of law , and combating corruption and organised crime .
We are therefore right to keep the political process and respect for democratic principles in that country under scrutiny .
That is especially important in view of the changes taking place in Armenia since the collapse of the Soviet Union .
Governments very often seek to influence the media , but when they resort to violence and the use of force they must be opposed with exceptional determination . And when there are fatal victims , the situation is exceptionally difficult .
We categorically demand the restoration of freedom , respect for other views , and the maintenance of democracy and civil rights .
We condemn the use of force and the violent dispersal of democratic meetings , protests and demonstrations .
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission keeps a particularly close watch on the situation with regard to democracy and human rights in Armenia , which , as you know , is one of our partners under the European Neighbourhood Policy .
We follow developments there attentively through the intermediaries of our delegation in Yerevan , with the Member States , and in close cooperation with the European Union Special Representative , Peter Semneby .
As part of the process , we are also in regular contact with local and international NGOs working in the fields of democracy and human rights .
In relation to the tragic events that occurred in Yerevan on 1 March in the aftermath of the election , the Commission shares the general concern over the violent clashes between police and opposition demonstrators , which resulted in a number of deaths .
The Commission has therefore called for the immediate establishment of a thorough investigation and for the prosecution of persons who broke the law .
We have also called on the Armenian Government to lift the state of emergency immediately .
The Commission believes it is important that all sides should refrain from using force .
We expect all parties in Armenia to commit to political dialogue as the means of overcoming their differences .
At the same time , the Commission also deplores the shadow cast by the recent events on Armenia 's increasingly positive progress towards implementation of its ENP action plan , particularly in the areas of human rights and democracy .
The call to pursue political reform and to respect human rights is an integral element of the partnership between the European Union and Armenia , and the Commission will therefore use every means at its disposal to encourage the Armenian authorities to forge ahead in those areas .
By adopting the joint EU-Armenia ENP Action Plan in 2006 , we acquired a policy tool for promoting the observance of principles based on our shared values .
We are firmly convinced that an ongoing dialogue with Armenia , conducted in accordance with the policy provisions of the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement and the ENP Action Plan , is indeed the most effective means of conveying the European Union 's messages about respect for human rights and international law .
The annual meetings of the Cooperation Committee and Cooperation Council , and of the Parliamentary Cooperation Committee are thus particularly important .
The Commission also remains determined to contribute to the reform process by providing Armenia with financial and technical assistance .
Supporting political reform in the areas of human rights and democracy continues to be a priority in the national indicative programme for 2007-2010 .
Approximately a third of our bilateral aid - which will amount over that period to EUR 98.4 million - will be used to assist relevant projects .
More specifically , the 2007 bilateral aid programme with Armenia is targeting financial support in the field of judicial reform , to the tune of EUR 18 million .
I am sure that the European Parliament will back us in that effort and , indeed , will be our staunchest ally .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debate .
2 .
Russia
The next item is the debate on five motions for a resolution on the arrest of demonstrators following the presidential election in Russia .
author . - ( DE ) Mr President , in the run-up to drafting this resolution , some of us were accused of being enemies or opponents of Russia .
We are just the opposite !
We are friends of Russia , we are concerned about democracy and the rule of law in this important European country .
We protest vehemently against the imprisonment of opposition activists who did no more than draw attention to a fact that has been noted by all international institutions , namely that the presidential elections in Russia were extremely unfair .
We call for the immediate release of the opposition activists and of others who have been held in prisons and work camps for a long time , like the so-called Yukos prisoners Khodorkovsky and Lebedev , and I support Chancellor Merkel 's call for the two men finally to be released .
We must , however , be quite clear about one thing .
The newly elected President of Russia has the unique opportunity to make a new beginning , to move towards democracy and the rule of law and towards a less nationalistic and aggressive foreign policy .
That means , however , that he will have to extricate himself from the coils of Gazprom and free himself from the Putin system ; sadly , there is not the least indication of that .
That is why it is our duty to voice honest criticisms .
It is not those who , like former German Chancellor Schröder , sing the praises of the Putin system and allow themselves to become involved in the propaganda and in the economic and nationalistic interests of that system , who are Russia 's friends ; no , Russia 's friends support the human and civil rights of the Russian people , who have a chance of democratic development .
If we remain silent , the small seeds of democracy and the rule of law that President Yeltsin sowed and that President Putin has endangered will finally be suffocated , and that cannot be in the interest of Europe or in the interest of the Russian people .
( Applause )
author . - Mr President , I am talking in a personal capacity on this matter .
In recent years significant changes have been occurring in Russia , from Stalinist Communism to the beginnings of liberal capitalism ; from the nuclear threat of the Cold War to the initiation of friendly disarmament and military cooperation talks with the West .
At the same time , more democratic reforms in the country have been instituted and the standard of living of the Russian people has been increasing steadily .
We welcome these changes and must support them .
We do not always have to be critical of the bad things ; we sometimes have to condone and support the good things .
In this way , we will not only be objective but we will encourage changes for the better to a faster and greater extent .
With these thoughts in mind , and looking at the recent presidential elections in Russia , we have to say that these were held in a more democratic fashion than previously , although there was still the problem of unequal access of candidates to the media .
But , let us be honest , is this a problem we do not have ourselves in the EU Member States ?
Unfortunately , we do .
Following the elections , there were protests in the streets .
It was reported that some of these protests were met with disproportionate force by the Russian police .
Can we honestly say that our own police forces in EU Member States or candidate member states are angels and do not sometimes - more often than we would like - use disproportionate force ?
Yes , we condemn the unfair treatment of candidates by the Russian state-run media ; yes , we condemn the undue use of force by the Russian police against protesters , but we do so in exactly the same way and with the same spirit as we would when dealing with similar happenings in any other country or union of countries , including our own .
Mr President , I have to disappoint you .
I am not the author of this resolution and my group did not co-sign the resolution .
The reason why my group did not do so is not to avoid having a discussion today .
It is not because we think that we do not need to discuss these matters and not because we think there are no problems in Russia , nor is it because we think we do not need to address the implications of the Russian presidential elections , but rather it is because we strongly believe that , when we are dealing with Russia - a world player , a member of the UN Security Council and one of the major partners of the EU - we need an extensive and well-prepared plenary debate to take place .
Russia is not only a close neighbour for us , it is also a strategic partner .
We want to have a broad debate on our relationship where all significant issues will be addressed , from trade to investment - which is booming - and energy , democracy , and also human rights .
There are many different opinions on Russia , but I think everybody agrees that Russia is a key partner for us in tackling regional conflicts and global challenges , and that much remains to be done to develop the full potential of our relationship .
We need to be able to have an extensive exchange of views in this House , but also with the Commission and Council , on how to formulate a pragmatic approach cooperating in issues where we can , and disagreeing on issues where we cannot cooperate .
It is more than obvious that it is not possible or appropriate to deal with this significant and important issue in a time slot of 20 minutes on a Thursday afternoon , and this is the reason why my group cannot support the draft resolution and the reason why my group will abstain in the vote later on .
author . - ( PL ) Mr President , there has been another election in Russia , and once again many candidates were eliminated before the vote .
Once again opposition activists protesting against the result of the election were forcibly dispersed .
And once again the West is surprised , on three accounts . First , that in Russia civil rights are not respected .
Second , why persecute the opposition since it is so weak anyway ?
Third , why do so if the public supports every government decision on principle ?
We must realise that nobody who treats Russia and the Russians like a normal society and a normal civilised western state can understand that country .
The Russian mentality is completely different , as those who have always been Russia 's neighbours , like many Central and Eastern European nations , can testify . We know full well that Russian society always supports the government and the authorities - elections or no elections .
That is how it always was in Russia , and that is how it is and will be .
Of course , I entirely agree with Mr Posselt that true friends of Russia must do everything possible to change that state of affairs .
But in my opinion there is nothing to be surprised about .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , the Russian Federation is a country with which we desperately want to conclude strategic partnerships .
If not democracy , then rule of law is the key point here .
27 February : an activist of The Other Russia coalition was released from a mental hospital in the Russian city of Tver .
Roman Nikolaychik was a victim of punitive psychiatry .
Political pressure increased on him after he was chosen as a local candidate on the party list of The Other Russia coalition .
Larisa Arap was held for 46 days after she published a critical article in the Murmansk Oblast .
Artem Basyrov was hospitalised for over a month in the Mari-El Republic for supporting The Other Russia .
1 March : an open letter to the Federal Security Service of Russia . ' We , journalists and colleagues of Natalya Morar , a correspondent of The New Times magazine , demand that the leadership of the FSB ceases her anti-constitutional detention in the customs area of the Domodedovo airport , and opens the Russian border for her . '
4 March : thousands marched in Moscow and in the streets of St Petersburg .
In Moscow , where authorities refused to grant a permit of assembly , dozens were arrested as police rushed the crowd with batons .
Nikita Belykh , the leader of the Union of Right Forces Party , was carried off by camouflaged OMON Special Forces troops .
Lev Ponomarev , the chairman of the For Human Rights movement , and Denis Bulinov , the executive director of the United Civil Front , were also among those arrested .
7 March : journalists silenced during Russian vote .
In South Sakhalin , an army lieutenant attacked a reporter of the Yuzhno Sakhalinsk Tvoya Gazeta .
In Novosibirsk , photographer Yevgeny Ivanov was accused of ' resisting the authorities ' and ' failing to register ' .
In St Petersburg , a reporter of Grazhdansky Golos was detained by the militsiya for ' being in a polling station without authorisation ' .
Her newspaper is run by Golos , an independent electoral monitoring group .
A reporter of Vpered ( Forward ) , a local daily from Khimki in the Moscow Oblast , was attacked by militsiya officers when he tried to put in his ballot .
This is the rule of law ?
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the EU 's agreements with Russia concern not only increased cooperation in the economic , security and energy spheres but also respect for the rule of law , democracy and fundamental human rights .
Despite this , in the run-up to the election , opposition groups and non-governmental organisations were subjected to much tighter rules on the right of assembly and peaceful demonstration .
What is more , the main daily newspapers and radio and television stations were placed under close government control .
The march organised by opposition parties on 3 May at first did not receive the approval of the Moscow authorities and then ended with the arrest of the participants , including the leaders of the opposition .
Regrettably , the recent election showed that democracy and respect for the rule of law are not strong in Russia .
I refer not only to the use of disproportional force by the police during the demonstration but also to the hostile attitude to the OSCE observation mission .
The international community is entitled to expect from Russia 's new president more than an assurance that democracy will continue to be built in the world 's largest country , namely concrete measures such as a review of the situation of political activists who have been in prison for years .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , neither the Russian presidential election campaign nor the election itself complied with the rules of democracy .
During the announcement of candidacies there was not even an attempt to keep up appearances .
The media were under constant pressure not to publish information critical of the candidate backed by the president-in-office .
The opposition 's access to the media was blocked , and observation of the conduct of the election was impeded .
That is difficult to accept , especially in view of Russia 's membership of the Council of Europe and the Russian authorities ' earlier declarations on respect for human rights .
I must admit that such declarations are credible only to people who do not know Russia .
The infringement of democratic principles during the election was followed by protests , brutal repression of a demonstration and the arrest of demonstrators .
Russia has decidedly departed from democratic standards .
We call for the rapid release of all prisoners of conscience .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am happy to see that the issue of developments in Russia has found its way into the debates in plenary .
There is no doubt that good mutual relations with the Russian Federation are a precondition for a strong European Union in the future .
I very much regret that the elections in Russia did not take place without any interference from the authorities .
On the other hand what we are lacking , like so many times before , is a simple demonstration of basic respect , on our part , for the work that has been carried out and for the culture of the nation and the country we are discussing today .
Without a shadow of a doubt Russia is still a long way from reaching the level of social justice and quality of life that we would like to see all over the world .
It has difficulty coping with its demographic crisis .
On the other hand , for the first time in Russian history the highest country 's representative is leaving the Kremlin voluntarily and his successor has been chosen by the people .
There is no doubt that political technologies , tools and management methods , including voting procedures , have been tuned to perfection in Russia .
These technologies , however , have been imported from the West .
I want to ask those who today cry over the plight of democracy in Russia whether they are also upset about the European Parliament 's somewhat cowardly refusal to ask how Mr Solana handles international law ?

on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the subject of today 's debate is the infringement of human rights in Russia with regard to people protesting against the lack of democracy , especially during the recent presidential election .
Not only was force used against demonstrators , as well as arrests , but the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe had to call off its observation mission because of the excessive restrictions imposed by the Russian Government .
The Russian authorities exerted pressure on opposition groups , tolerated electoral fraud and subjugated the media .
Non-governmental organisations were prevented from acting and restrictions were placed on the organisation of meetings .
We obviously cannot accept the lack of respect for human rights and democracy , the lack of free speech , the discrimination against national minorities and the restrictions on independent organisations . We must however bear in mind that Russia does not have democratic traditions .
The short period of democratisation that begin in 1864 ended in 1917 with the establishment of Soviet Russia , a typical totalitarian state , led first by Lenin and Stalin and then by their disciples , that was the very negation of democracy .
The situation in Russia should serve as a warning to other empires and totalitarian states that are afraid of the democratic process even when the opposition is a minority and threatens only to reveal the truth , which they want to conceal at all costs .
( NL ) Just two points .
I have no problem at all in supporting this resolution .
But of course we all know that Russia is too important a supplier of energy and so the European heads of state and government will put this piece of paper quietly to one side .
We know from experience that once economic interests are at stake , whether in China , Russia or Saudi Arabia , the passion for human rights of all these authors of fundamental rights charters must yield to Realpolitik .
So let us be under no illusions .
Secondly , ladies and gentlemen , replace ' Russia ' in this resolution with ' Belgium ' and the text remains every bit as relevant . Because it is not so long ago that in Belgium too , police were incited to beat up peaceful demonstrators on orders from the mayor of Brussels .
In Belgium too , the opposition is to a large extent denied access to the media .
In Belgium too , politically appointed judges banned an opposition party at the request of the government , at the request too of the party of which the Commissioner , here with us today , is a member .
And the judges in question were promoted as a result .
Let 's see Europe clean up its own act first and deal with these sham democrats .
Mr President , Russia is a great country , a global player , a member of the UN Security Council and a strategic partner of the European Union .
Firstly , I would like to appeal for a serious , calm and objective debate in the European Parliament on the plight of Russian democracy and on human rights in that country .
The reality is that Russia made it difficult for international actors to monitor the last parliamentary election .
The European Court of Human Rights has ruled against Russia in 15 cases related to Chechnya to date .
Torture and illegal detention by government forces under the leadership of the Chechen President Ramzan Kadyrov remain widespread and systematic .
In the period leading up to the elections the Russian authorities tightened their grip on freedom of assembly and used excessive force to break up peaceful demonstrations .
The Russian laws relating to non-governmental organisations are particularly restrictive .
It is not possible to hold a proper debate on all these issues this afternoon .
Once again , I would like to appeal for a serious plenary debate on the plight of democracy and human rights in Russia .
( PL ) Mr President , as it turns out , the democratic changes in Russia are not being accompanied by an improvement in fundamental civil rights , especially the rights of the opposition .
People in Russia have learned to think proudly but live in miserable servitude .
The authorities will not pay too much attention to us , whatever we say , but the Russian people should be made aware of Europe 's position .
This is perhaps a long and slow process of contributing to the gradual realisation that , in Russia too , things can be different , more normal , and people happier , since the country has that potential .
We must support that consciousness-raising process .
( SK ) I agree with the previous speakers that good neighbourly relations between the European Union and Russia are crucial for the stability , safety and prosperity of Europe as a whole .
On the one hand , the European Union must endeavour to step up cooperation with Russia , notably on political , security , economic and , above all , energy issues .
On the other hand , we must not remain silent about the breaches of democracy and political freedom in Russia .
We have to express our dissatisfaction in cases where we are given advanced notice of a breach of democracy , as happened in the case of disqualification of presidential candidate Mr Mikhail Kasyanov .
I trust that the newly elected Russian President , Dmitry Medvedev , will respect the rule of law and democracy and create the conditions for an early start to the negotiations on the new Partnership and Cooperation Agreement between the European Union and Russia .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to add one more thing to the list of abuses in this election , which made it not really an election at all since there was nobody to choose between .
I refer to the fact that a number of candidates could not afford to enter the lists because of financial difficulties affecting their parties .
Why financial difficulties ?
Because , in the preceding election to the Duma , political broadcasts made under an entitlement to free air time have to be paid for if the party fails to cross a certain poll threshold .
As a result , some parties are in debt and cannot afford any political activity . Worse still , they risk being declared illegal on the grounds of bankruptcy .
This bizarre situation must also be borne in mind .
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , I should like to begin with a brief personal comment .
I heard the contribution from Mr Dillen , representing a Belgian party of the far right , who indulged in a quite disgraceful comparison between circumstances in Belgium and those in Russia .
Obviously I am bound to refute his assertions .
I recognise in them the familiar methods to which his party habitually resorts and which merely amount to a form of insult .
Let me state very clearly that such methods reflect no credit on those who employ them .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission is closely following developments in the wake of the demonstrations in Moscow and St Petersburg on 3 March : we are doing so not only via our delegation in Moscow but also through direct contacts with Member States .
In addition , we liaise regularly with Russian and international NGOs working in the field of human rights .
The Commission shares your concern about the apparent deterioration of the human rights situation in Russia and the incidence of reported human rights violations , particularly with regard to freedom of assembly and freedom of expression .
We were extremely disappointed when the OSCE 's Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights was forced to conclude that it was not feasible to send an election observation mission .
In its bilateral contacts with Russia , including at the highest level , the European Union regularly underscores the importance of respecting human rights .
In a month 's time , we shall have one of our two annual consultations with Russia on the subject of human rights .
These consultations give us an opportunity to explore general trends in human rights in greater depth and to hear the Russian point of view on individual cases .
In the forthcoming consultation we will convey our concerns , particularly about the rights to freedom of expression and freedom of assembly , the problems posed by the rise of racism and xenophobia , and cooperation with Russia in international organisations such as the OSCE and the Council of Europe .
The consultations also enable us to raise the cases of individuals .
Before and after this consultation , we will meet a group representing Russian and international NGOs which work for human rights .
Such meetings put the European Union in touch with the concerns of human rights activists and enable us to exchange views directly .
Looking somewhat further ahead , we should soon be in a position to embark on negotiations on a new agreement between the European Union and the Russian Federation .
It will be a comprehensive agreement , embracing the growing number of policy areas in which we cooperate .
As the European Union statement following the Russian presidential election pointed out , we have a common interest in furthering our ties and we hope that our partnership will be consolidated and developed constructively under the presidency of Dmitri Medvedev .
We will take care , when negotiating the new agreement , to ensure that it reflects the values to which both sides have committed themselves : a thriving civil society and independent media are the natural and necessary allies of growth and stability in Russia .
We have learned this from our own experience in the European Union and it is a message that we shall doggedly continue - as neighbours and partners - to convey to our Russian friends both on a day-to-day basis and in discussions about the shape of our future relations .
I know already that the European Parliament will lend us its unstinting support in these efforts .
in writing . - ( PL ) Mr President , I am always amazed at people who make high demands on American democracy but often have very low expectations of Russia .
That is humiliating for Russia and the Russians .
From the great and powerful one should expect more , not less .
Those who condemn the methods applied in Guantanamo and the fight against terrorism , who look for the footprints of the CIA and CIA conspiracies in Europe , ought perhaps to scrutinise Russia more thoroughly .
But such people , and the politicians who share their philosophy , do not want to hear about human and civil rights in Russia .
On the contrary , they find all sorts of reasons and excuses for not discussing the problems of Russian democracy .
We cannot be content with Russia 's imagined achievements , such as the fact that President Putin did not breach the Russian constitution and left office of his own accord .
That is no achievement , it is a minimum rule of conduct .
I am reminded of a joke about Stalin 's benevolence . A child comes out of Stalin 's office , bleeding but smiling .
' What are you smiling about ? ' someone asks . ' I 'm smiling because Stalin was so good to me . '
' What do you mean , good ? ' the questioner replies .
' He beat you didn 't he ? '
' Yes , ' says the child , ' but he could have killed me . '
in writing . - ( ET ) Mr President , I would just like to say that I do not , unfortunately , support my Group 's position of abstaining in the vote on the resolution on Russia .

We will indeed need a resolution when the President-elect , Mr Medvedev , is in office ; it remains to be seen what his first steps will be and the role that Vladimir Putin will give himself under the new President .
I am also of the view that given the present situation , in which democratically-minded candidates were not allowed to participate in the elections or express their views on the situation in the street with people after the elections , it is important to express my own view .
Otherwise , we will end up in the same situation as the Council of Europe , which has further postponed its own report on Russia until a more appropriate moment .
Although I shall be voting , and will be doing so in favour of the resolution , the text is not perhaps exactly as I would like it to be .
I believe that as a democratic institution it is our duty to take a principled and courageous stand in expressing our opinions on an important issue such as this concerning free elections .
3 .
Afghan journalist Perwiz Kambakhsh - The case of the Iranian citizen Seyed Mehdi Kazemi
The next item is the debate on six motions for a resolution on the case of the journalist Perwiz Kambakhsh and the debate on four motions for a resolution on the case of the Iranian citizen Seyed Mehdi Kazemi .
author . - Mr President , I will link this discussion to the previous debate on Russia because I strongly believe that , if we believe in a core set of values , we cannot uphold them only in countries that are weak , and give countries that are strong an exemption .
I am proud that this Parliament debated the resolution on Russia , and we should all be proud of that .
We should fear the day when the European Parliament stops debating these resolutions and stops standing firmly for the values that we believe in .
Because , today , democracy is not the right of everyone to be equal , it is the equal right of everyone to be different .
This is a core message that we need to pass on to our partners in Russia , and we need to pass it to our partners in Afghanistan .
President Karzai and the Afghan Government have committed themselves to building a democratic , modern state .
In a democratic and modern state , the death sentence is unacceptable .
There is not debate about that .
No form of death punishment is acceptable in a democratic and modern state .
This is the core of our European value .
The case of the Afghan journalist Mr Kambakhsh is even more perplexing , because he has been sentenced to death because of exercising his right to free access to information .
We should encourage very strongly the authorities in Afghanistan , the Government and the President to intervene on his behalf and use their powers to spare his life and to make sure that he is pardoned at the end of the process which he needs to go through now , meaning the appeal process .
We should , however , also continue to help the authorities build the institutions that they need to function as a democratic and modern state , support civil society and , most important of all , continue our commitment to the security of Afghanistan .
Finally , we should never forget that education is the core value that we need to impress on a country like Afghanistan .
Girls have been able to go to school only in the last few years .
There is so much work for us to do there .
We should not shy away from that work , and we should impress very strongly , both on the Commission and the Council and all the Member States , the fact that we should invest in education in Afghanistan .
author . - ( PL ) Mr President , the Afghan journalist Perwiz Kambakhsh has been sentenced to death .
As usual , authoritarian governments are attacking those who speak out on human rights , and hence journalists and religious activists .
I agree with previous speakers that we should not be more indulgent towards powerful countries like Russia and China .
As Mr Mladenov quite rightly said , the standards should be the same for all .
I would also point out that those who say we should be more indulgent towards China or Russia because they are powerful states are wrong on two accounts .
First , because the standards must be the same . Secondly , because the fact that governments have to make certain compromises is a different matter .
In the history of Europe , parliaments have always been the conscience of the nation .
And parliaments cannot make such compromises as we unfortunately must sometimes accept on the part of governments .
I therefore call on this Parliament not to apply different standards to the powerful and the weak .
author . - ( NL ) Capital punishment is barbaric and freedom of expression is set in stone in Afghanistan 's constitution .
And yet the journalist Perwiz Kambakhsh has been sentenced to death for blasphemy , far from the capital Kabul , because of an article on women 's rights under Islam which he did not even write himself .
His brother writes critically about local leaders , so clearly that was not helpful to Perwiz 's case .
This death sentence came as an enormous shock , even in countries with a large Muslim population .
Journalists in Pakistan , in Iran , in Qatar , everyone is painfully aware of the importance of safeguarding freedom of expression everywhere , worldwide . In the teeth of considerable opposition , in spite of ultraconservative clubs that hold no brief for freedoms , women 's rights or open debate .
Even though those conservatives need freedom of expression too .
What should Europe do ?
1 .
Offer more help than was promised in 2007 for reform of the judiciary in Afghanistan ;
2 .
Appeal forcefully to President Karzai to take action and support him on this ;
3 .
The European Union must make respect for human rights and the Afghan constitution a central pillar of the European Commission 's policy .
There is absolutely no point in forcing this issue more than the ultraconservatives are willing to tolerate .
That would be playing into their hands .
But Perwiz Kambakhsh must be freed forthwith .
author . - Mr President , some believe that Afghanistan is a country which in recent years has been in a state of continuous turmoil and chaotic tension .
Poverty , illiteracy , tribal violent rivalry , drug barons , warlords , Russian occupation , Taliban terrorism , followed by formidable US-UK military intervention , and on top of all this , strict Islamic sharia law .
If ever there was to be hell on earth , Afghanistan would be a very strong candidate indeed .
Yet , in the face of this extreme adversity , there are weak acts of defiance , and hope for freedom of speech and democracy .
Such is the case concerning a young journalist , Perwez Kambakhsh , who dared to circulate an article about women 's rights in Islam , which he had downloaded from the internet .
This brave act was considered blasphemy in accordance with Palaeolithic-era sharia law and he was sentenced to death by hemi-encephalic fanatically blinded so-called judges in a so-called regional court in northern Afghanistan .
As we all know , women in fanatic Islam terms are regarded as little more than pieces of furniture and any attempt to dispute this is met with extreme action , such as the one under consideration in this resolution .
But things have to change for the better and we in the West have a duty to see that such a change happens sooner rather than later .
Since the West , including the EU , has a formidable military presence in Afghanistan and since the West , including the EU , pours billions of euros in financial aid into that country , I think we are perfectly correct in demanding that not only the young man in question be immediately and unconditionally released , but that similar occurrences in relation to backward Islamic sharia law do not occur again - ever !
Otherwise we should seriously consider pulling both our troops and our money out of Afghanistan and letting that country follow the hellish course that it will be sentenced to by its fanatic religious destiny .

author . - Mr President , my group strongly supports the motion for a resolution concerning Mr Kambakhsh , although I am not sure I would agree with everything the previous speaker has said .
However , I want to shift attention to another young man whose life is also in danger at the moment , Mehdi Kazemi , who is from Iran , and where the British Government , in this case , could make a difference .
Many of us hope that the Home Secretary , Jacqui Smith , will now intervene on the basis of new evidence .
This Parliament has passed many motions for resolutions which have condemned the human rights record in Iran .
We believe that it is a dangerous country for homosexuals .
Indeed , we have seen the bodies hanging from cranes , so we know that it is , and many of us believe that it is dangerous for this young man in particular .
There are those who have said that it is safe for him to be returned if his behaviour is discreet .
I would suggest that what constitutes ' discreet ' behaviour in Iran is rather different from what that might mean in our own Member States .
But the issue is that for many , in certain countries , whether they are in Iran , Jamaica or elsewhere , being gay is a crime and they are at risk .
My group has been very critical of the Dublin Regulation which is involved in this case , because we know there are still very large variations in the way in which asylum requests are treated between Member States , and that even access to the procedure can be extremely difficult .
We have seen a climate where numbers have been regarded as more important than life .
This is the substance of a protection procedure : it is about saving somebody 's life when it is at risk .
It is not about the niceties of correct procedures : it is about the effect .
We want a functioning asylum policy which is able to correct errors and take account of new information , and which gives the same high standard across Member States .
We hope that in this case the British Government will be demonstrating that this is possible .
rapporteur . - ( SV ) Mr President , let me first make two brief observations .
To begin with , we can never , ever stay silent when the death penalty is applied , irrespective of where in the world it happens .
Secondly , it is deeply regrettable that , every time we meet here in Strasbourg , we have a number of crimes against human rights on the table .
Sometimes it feels as though it will never end .
In relation to this resolution , we note that Article 34 of the Afghan Constitution very clearly enunciates the right to freedom of expression , stipulating that freedom of expression must not be restricted and that every Afghan must have the right to express his ideas in speech , image and the written word and through any other medium .
Despite this , the 23-year-old journalist , Perwiz Kambakhsh , has been sentenced to death in an unlawful trial , and his legal rights are being denied him .
The trial is closed to journalists and organisations working for human rights .
The so-called crime was that he had disseminated an article on the situation of women under Islam .
So the background is well known .
We now emphatically demand that Perwiz Kambakhsh be released immediately .
He has not done anything criminal whatsoever ; he has acted entirely in accordance with the law and the Constitution .
The EU and the entire world must now rally behind this demand : free Perwiz Kambakhsh .
author . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in the case of Mehdi Kazemi we are having to discuss something that really should not require a single second of debate .
If anyone was asked whether they thought it possible for a European country to consign someone into the hands of an executioner and a dictatorship such as Iran , the answer would undoubtedly be that it was unimaginable .
However , the unimaginable may well happen , and is about to happen , despite the reassurances that are being given .
That means that something very serious is happening , that Europe is being gripped by a kind of madness .
Some say that there are various legal quibbles that may bring about Mehdi Kazemi 's deportation and death .
That simply must not be possible .
The founding principles of the European Union , of respect for human rights and life , have not yet been abolished .
If Mr Kazemi is put to death , no one will really be able to shift the blame onto bureaucratic procedures , unless they resign themselves to the view that that is solely what Europe is about : bureaucratic procedures , nation states which are so powerful that they cannot even manage to save a life .
I would thank the 140 MEPs who have rallied round this cause and I hope that this House will vote unanimously for the resolution that has been tabled .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , on 22 January 2008 the primary court in Afghanistan 's northern province of Balkh sentenced to death Perwiz Kambakhsh , a 23-year-old journalism student writing in the local newspaper , for downloading an article on women 's rights from the internet and distributing it electronically .
The trial took place without any right of defence .
The accused was beaten and a confession extracted by brutal treatment .
We demand that the Afghan authorities release Perwiz Kambakhsh and that the Afghan Government restore respect for human rights , especially the right to life .
May I be so bold as to hope that Afghanistan will rapidly introduce a moratorium on execution of the death penalty .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , a few months ago the Iranian President , Mahmud Ahmadinejad , solemnly declared to the United Nations that there was no problem of homosexuality in Iran because , quite simply , there were no homosexuals there .
What he failed to say was that they execute any homosexuals there are there .
The case of Mehdi Kazemi highlights once again the huge loopholes in the European Union asylum system : the fact that someone must seek asylum these days on the ground that he or she is being persecuted and threatened with death because of being a homosexual is a matter of utmost concern and shows that the promotion of LGBT rights must be moved up the international agenda .
More serious still is the fact that the European Union , the champion of rights and freedoms , does not consider persecution on grounds of sexual orientation a sufficiently important factor for automatically granting asylum in cases such as that of Mehdi Kazemi .
Unfortunately , this is not the first case of this type , and it will undoubtedly not be the last .
The fact is that there are still many countries where the LGBT population continues to suffer persecution of all kinds and are even condemned to death , as in Iran .
I therefore hope that this House and all the political groups are aware of the circumstances and will join in the just petitions made in the resolution we are submitting today , especially in relation to full implementation of the Qualification Directive , which recognises persecution on grounds of sexual orientation as a determining factor in the granting of asylum .
Similarly , it provides for Member States to consider cases on an individual basis , taking into account the circumstances in the country of origin , including its laws and regulations and the manner in which they are applied .
It is also necessary for the Member States to find a common solution which ensures that Mehdi Kazemi is granted refugee status and the protection he needs within the European Union and that he will not be returned to Iran where he will very probably be executed as his partner was .
To that end all that needs to be done is to comply with Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights under which expulsion and extradition of persons to countries where there is a high risk of their being subjected to persecution , torture or even the death penalty , is prohibited .
- ( EL ) Mr President , I certainly support the resolution because the present situation in Afghanistan happens to be unacceptable and disappointing .
Taliban rule has set the country back many years .
Let us be honest , however .
Who strengthened the Taliban ?
Was it not the Americans , with their arms and economic resources , who strengthened the Taliban to fight against the Soviets ?
Is it not also a fact that today opium production in that country has increased five times ?
Why is this ?
Let each of us draw his own conclusion .

( NL ) I am pretty appalled by the Mehdi Kazemi case and the fact that we are not all just saying without further ado that he should be given asylum : I urge the representatives of the Dutch and UK Governments , along with members of this House who plan to vote against this resolution , to stop and think : what exactly is the purpose of the rule of law ?
Is it to enforce rules and procedures correctly and to the letter , or is it to see justice done ?
So give serious thought to that before you vote .
( DE ) Mr President , my Group is quite definitely in favour of protecting Mr Kazemi and , naturally , against his being deported to Iran .
Yet we are against this resolution because it does not concern , as intended , an urgent case , but asylum law in the European Union in general and the relationship between two EU Member States , the Netherlands and the UK , in regard to that difficult question .
This is not what these urgent resolutions are about .
Here they are being used as a means of raising domestic policy issues .
We want Mr Kazemi to be given protection and we will support every initiative to that end , but not this resolution , whose title bears Mr Kazemi 's name but whose content is about something entirely different .
Mr President , I support both these resolutions .
But it is my country that is proposing to send a young teenage man home to his death in Iran .
A death already suffered by his friend .
Not for any crime , but because of his sexuality .
It is my country which in the past has had the proud boast that it has an absolute standard that we never send people back to face a penalty worse than they would suffer if they were facing a penalty in Britain .
Here we have no crime and we have a penalty which we in Britain abolished many years ago .
It is my country which , if it does not relent in this case , should hang its head in shame .
I hope that this Parliament will not have to hang its head in shame .
I hope they will support this resolution .
For God 's sake , this is a 19-year-old we are talking about !
( Loud applause )
( PL ) Mr President , one of the values of the European Union is to coordinate action and adopt positions in defence of human rights .
That applies to the case of an Afghan journalist sentenced to death by a court in a northern Afghanistan province for distributing an article on women 's rights in Islam .
During his trial he was refused the right to defending counsel and was subjected to various forms of physical violence .
Yet the Afghan constitution contains a clause on the right to freedom of speech .
As we see , law and reality do not coincide .
Many governments guarantee respect for the Declaration of Human Rights but shut their eyes to the way it is applied in their own countries .
That should make us even more determined to defend human rights , freedom and democracy .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should just like to stress that , despite my Group 's concerns , to some extent founded , that some of the content of the resolution may be put to wider use , there is no getting away from the fact that the information we are receiving from Iranian sources and authorities is unambiguous .
Mehdi Kazemi 's fate , if he returns to Iran , is death and it is for that reason that I shall depart from the norm and vote in a different way to my Group .
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you for giving us this opportunity to talk with you about the cases of Perwiz Kambakhsh in Afghanistan and the Iranian citizen Mehdi Kazemi .
In relation to Mr Kambakhsh , we obviously share all your concerns and we are following the case closely on the ground through our delegation to Afghanistan in cooperation with the head of mission and the EU Special Representative .
We have raised the case repeatedly with the Afghan authorities , most recently with the Foreign Affairs Minister , Mr Spanta , at the troïka meeting in Ljubljana on 21 February .
I know that the European Parliament 's Afghanistan delegation also raised the issue directly with the Afghan Parliament and that the Afghan MPs gave you an assurance that a satisfactory solution would be found .
I believe we should continue to take the approach followed thus far , relying at least for now on discreet diplomatic activity .
Judging by the current political climate in Afghanistan , it will be harder to secure Mr Kambakhsh 's safe release if it appears that the Afghan authorities are bowing to international pressure .
I want to assure you , however , that we shall continue to follow this case very closely and that we shall be ready to take further steps in the event of the death sentence being confirmed on appeal .
Almost 30 years of armed conflict have wrecked Afghanistan 's judicial system .
We have therefore made reform of the country 's judicial institutions a priority in our programme of aid to Afghanistan .
We already have experts working there with the Supreme Court , the Public Prosecutor 's Office and the Ministry of Justice , with a view to professionalising those institutions at both central and provincial level .
The European Commission programme will also help the authorities to put in place a new legal-aid system - something that is sorely needed in Afghanistan , as this case has shown .
There is currently no firmly established , independent Bar and no access to public legal aid .
I am very hopeful that the Commission 's judicial reform programme - being implemented in close cooperation with the EUPOL Afghanistan police mission deployed under the ESDP - will help to improve the human rights situation in the medium and long term .
Obviously , the Commission also shares your deep concern about Mehdi Kazemi and other similar cases .
The Dutch and British authorities are currently considering Mr Kazemi 's case very carefully .
With regard to the protection of refugees , we would point out that international law stipulates , notably in the Geneva Convention in relation to the status of refugees , that no contracting state shall expel or return a refugee in any manner whatsoever to the frontiers of territories where his life or freedom would be threatened on account of his race , religion , nationality , membership of a particular social group or political opinion .
Under the Iranian criminal code the act known as lavat is punishable by death .
However , the term lavat makes no distinction between sexual relations freely entered into and forced sexual relations .
In the latter case it would seem that , where the penalty is pronounced for lavat in conjunction with other offences , the term normally denotes rape .
It goes without saying that the Commission is categorically opposed to the death penalty in all circumstances , and all the more so where no crime has been committed .
The situation of homosexuals in Iran is a cause for concern .
Violations of the right to private life and discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation are entirely at odds with Iran 's obligations under International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights , which it has ratified .
The European Union conveys these messages about human rights to Iran in a general way and also through action on a number of fronts .
Unfortunately , Iran has not yet accepted our offer to resume bilateral dialogue about human rights .
Nonetheless , in our discussions with Iranian representatives , we emphasise that we wish to see progress on all the issues of concern to the European Union in the fields of politics , nuclear policy , trade and human rights .
Without general improvement in the human rights situation there , our relations with Iran cannot develop satisfactorily .

On a personal note , I should like to extend my own warmest thanks and congratulations to Mr Bowis on his contribution : I fully share the sentiments he expressed .
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( debate )
Membership of committees and delegations : see Minutes
1 .
Armenia ( vote )
- Before voting commenced :
on behalf of the ALDE group . - Mr President , this is just a simple amendment that has been agreed with the main political groups .
It is to replace in the PPE-DE Group amendment the word ' by ' Turkey to the word ' with ' Turkey .
I understand that this is acceptable to all the main groups .
Since I have the floor , there is a second amendment concerning recital H , which a colleague mentioned earlier on , which is to replace the word ' territory ' with the word ' status ' .
I understand that this is also acceptable to the main groups .
I am very grateful to the Secretariat because this was a very late oral amendment .
( The oral amendment was adopted )
2 .
Russia ( vote )
- Before voting commenced :
author , on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) I wish to propose a stylistic amendment .
The words " European Court ” should be replaced by " European Court of Human Rights ” , otherwise the text will be unintelligible .
( The oral amendment was adopted )
3 .
Afghan journalist Perwiz Kambakhsh - The case of the Iranian citizen Seyed Mehdi Kazemi ( vote )
- Before voting commenced :
author . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would just like to ask , under Rule 115 of the Rules of Procedure , that the vote we are about to take should not be invalidated by what might be termed procedural questions .
The item on Mehdi Kazemi has been included among the items on breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law .
While it is not a resolution on asylum policy , the Bureau nevertheless decided to include this item under urgent resolutions .
In my view , we would be giving a really negative and incomprehensible signal if a procedural reason were to undermine what I consider to be the underlying unanimity of this Chamber .
( DE ) Mr President , the information is so contradictory in this case .
What the Commissioner said was also different from what it says in the motion for a resolution .
He said the UK would not hand him over .
That is why I propose to my Group that we should not vote against , as we originally intended , but should abstain and that in future we should look at cases of this kind in more detail in this House .
They really are not a matter for urgent debate .
The vote is closed .
Voting time
Documents received : see Minutes
Decisions concerning certain documents : see Minutes
Action taken on Parliament 's positions and resolutions : see Minutes
Written declarations for entry in the register ( Rule 116 ) : see Minutes
Forwarding of texts adopted during the sitting : see Minutes
Dates for next sittings : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 4.35 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 2.15 p.m. )
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Agenda : see Minutes
Results of the European Council ( Brussels , 13-14 March 2008 ) ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the European Council report and Commission statement - Results of the European Council ( Brussels , 13-14 March 2008 ) .
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) Mr President , President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen .
The March part-session of the European Council started with an address by the President of the European Parliament , Hans-Gert Pöttering , whose speech gave us a good foundation for debate and decision-making on the major topics .
There were three of these : continuation of economic growth and the creation of new jobs , response to climate change , and stabilisation of financial markets .
Three decisions of the part-session summarise its achievements . We launched an ambitious and more modern three-year cycle of the Lisbon Strategy , which offers a better balance between care for people and the environment on the one hand and the competitive , knowledge-based market economy on the other .
Secondly , we confirmed the basic principles and schedule for adoption of the energy and climate change package .
Thirdly , we defined further measures to stabilise the financial markets .
The new cycle of the Lisbon Strategy primarily emphasises implementation of the reforms .
Lately we have often witnessed some erroneous perceptions that the reason for the rise in retail prices and unstable financial markets is that the European Union has a weak economic foundation .
The truth is precisely the opposite : it is the relatively firm foundation of the European economy that explains why the uncertainties in the global financial market and the price of crude oil and other commodities have had fewer consequences for the European Union than would have been the case had the economic foundation of the European Union been weak .
Let us glance at some of the economic indicators .
The European Union 's public finance deficit has fallen by more than half since 2005 .
Public debt has gone down to less than 60 % .
Economic growth reached almost 3 % in 2007 .
The labour market is offering 6.5 million more jobs than two years ago .
These results are largely due to the renewed Lisbon Strategy .
These are grounds for sober pride and greater self-confidence , but not self-satisfaction .
At a time of ever-increasing unpredictability in the global economy , it would be very wrong to rest on one 's laurels and discontinue the reforms .
At the launch of the second cycle of the Lisbon Strategy , or the second Lisbon cycle , the European Council stressed that in the period between 2008 and 2010 we must direct all our efforts primarily towards consistent implementation of the reforms .
We are supported by the stability of the integrated guidelines , which are still valid , and by the adopted specific recommendations , on the basis of which the Member States will be able to renew and realise their national reform programmes even faster .
The priority areas will remain the same : knowledge and innovation , stimulation of entrepreneurial potential , modernisation of the labour markets , and climate change and energy .
For each of these areas we have defined concrete measures based on the recognition , famously summarised by Francis Bacon four hundred years ago , that knowledge is power .
In the European Community today , the importance of knowledge is as great as or greater than that attached to coal in the past .
It is the catalyst for economic growth , structural adjustments and social inclusion .
For that reason the European Council introduced the ' fifth freedom ' in the field of knowledge and innovation .
The ' fifth freedom ' will eliminate barriers to the free flow of knowledge .
It will provide mobility for talented people and open access to knowledge and innovation , which should attract even more Europeans to take part in creative processes .
The establishment of the new European Institute of Innovation and Technology , confirmed two weeks ago by the European Parliament , also offers new opportunities for the utilisation of Europe 's research and development potential .
To strengthen the competitiveness of companies , particularly small and medium enterprises , the European Union is planning measures to facilitate operations and speed up development in the unified market .
In view of the fact that small and medium enterprise employs the greatest number of people and is an important force in research and development , it has to be provided with suitable legislation , easier access to sources of finance and , most of all , more intensive cooperation in innovation .
The social dimension of the Lisbon Strategy was strongly stressed at this session of the European Council .
I think it was given the strongest support to date .
We have reconfirmed the importance of investment in human resources .
Through learning and training we can eliminate inequality and poverty , reduce youth unemployment , create new and better jobs , and ease the transition to a knowledge-based economy .
That is why we have invited the Commission to prepare a review of the knowledge requirements of the European Union up to 2020 .
At the same time , the Member States have committed themselves to implementing the common principles of flexicurity , increasing social inclusion and consistently linking economic , employment and social policies .
The adopted conclusions reflect the positions of the European Parliament and European social partners .
Knowledge is also of crucial importance when dealing with climate change .
Only with the help of new technologies will we achieve the ambitious targets we adopted at last year 's spring session of the European Council .
The strategic energy technology plan forms the basis of the coordinated European policy in this field , which will provide support for ecologically sound , green industry .
As confirmed by our social partners at the tripartite summit held at the fringes of the European Council session , climate change brings opportunities for all , that is to say both companies and employees .
The ecoindustry alone is growing by 5 % a year and today employs 3 400 000 people .
Within the energy and climate package we have reached an agreement on the basic principles and the schedule .
This is probably the most resounding achievement of this session of the European Council .
Our ambitions in the fields of climate change and energy were reconfirmed .
It is important that less than two months after the package was published on 23 January , we have reached an accord on two key elements for furthering the debate on basic principles and schedule .
The leaders of the Member States have committed themselves to reaching an agreement by the end of 2008 and thus enabling adoption of the package within the deadline , or at any event before the end of the current European Parliament mandate .
Ladies and gentlemen , success is down to you too .
Only if we adopt the package within the deadline will we justify the expectations of all European citizens and give a positive sign to our partners in the world , especially in the light of the negotiations on the overall post-Kyoto agreement next year in Copenhagen .
I would like to underline this last point in particular .
The European Council has confirmed three fundamental principles which will guide us in the sharing of tasks and targets among the Member States . Firstly , economic success and cost effectiveness ; secondly , solidarity and justice ; and thirdly , transparency .
I was pleased to note that the Member States no longer regard this process as a sharing of burdens , but as a new opportunity for development .
I am also aware of the European Council 's achievement in agreeing to shape a unified European system for limiting emissions and trading in them , and thereby rewarding the current system of national limits .
The European Council also faced the possibility that , in the event of failure of the international negotiations , it should assist the energy-intensive sectors in the European Union , because their relocation to countries with lower environmental standards would risk losing jobs in the European Union , at the same time increasing greenhouse gases in general .
An important item in the agenda was the question of liberalisation of the internal energy market .
It was clear , even at the time when the Commission published its first proposal for the directives in the early nineties , that it would not be easy to establish a unified market , but that it would be a protracted process .
Seventeen years later , with the European Council calling for adoption of the political agreement by June of this year , we are getting closer to the target .
Here , too , the key to success will be strengthened cooperation with the European Parliament .
Melting glaciers , longer droughts and changes in precipitation patterns have a direct effect on geostrategic and security interests .
The report by the High Representative , Mr Solana , and the Commission on the security aspects of climate change realistically presents the situation and the risks facing the European Union .
This was first document of its kind to have been debated .
The European Council supported this report as a basis for further action .
Energy and climate issues will be the main topics in all future summits between the European Union and third countries or regions until the end of June 2008 , more especially with Japan , Latin America and the Caribbean , the Russian Federation and the United States of America .
To enable us to speak and act in unison , we will need to bring our positions closer in next few months .
Now something about the financial markets .
In response to the crisis in the financial markets , the European Council has unanimously confirmed the need for four measures : firstly , increasing transparency ; secondly , improving evaluation standards ; thirdly , strengthening credit status ; and fourthly , improving market efficiency and giving structural incentives .
The state asset funds play a positive role in securing capital and liquidity , even in these uncertain times .
However , the appearance of new players whose investment strategies are not totally transparent gives rise to some doubts about uneconomic practices .
The leaders of the Member States have agreed on an initiative to design a voluntary code of practice for such funds .
The European Council devoted a lot of time to an agreement on strengthening the Barcelona process .
In my opinion , it was a significant achievement that we managed to place in an institutional framework a debate which had hitherto been informal and closed , or limited to closed circles and informal channels .
According to the agreement reached at the last session of the European Council , all the Member States of the European Union and other Mediterranean countries will participate in the Barcelona process , that is to say the Mediterranean Union .
In view of standard practice within the Barcelona process , it is entirely understandable that the European Parliament , as an exceedingly important player in the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly , will be appropriately involved in the debate on future steps .
Because the Slovenian Presidency is striving for a balanced approach to all the European Union 's neighbours , we would like to point out the eastern dimension of European policies towards our neighbours , which must be strengthened in parallel with the Mediterranean dimension .
We expect the June session of the European Council to debate these issues in detail on the basis of the proposal put forward by our Polish colleagues .
Ladies and gentlemen , the tripartite social summit and the European Council realise that no single measure can be effective on its own without being meaningfully integrated with other measures .
At the same time the integrated measures , be it the Lisbon Strategy or the energy and climate measures , are not enough unless we are all fully aware of their importance and contribute to their implementation .
In the long run these topics demand much more than impersonal measures ; they require fundamental shifts and a change in habits , that is to say a change in our way of life .
Confucius said : ' If you are thinking one year ahead , sow a seed ; if you are thinking ten years ahead , plant trees ; if you are thinking a hundred years ahead , educate the people . '
All of us together should learn to live a more creative life .
We must learn to exchange information quickly and to adopt environmentally friendly habits .
The most effective teaching method is by good example .
For that reason the governments of the Member States agreed at the European Council to lower the energy consumption of their own buildings and car fleets and to secure a fast internet connection for all schools by 2010 .
After the March session of the European Council we can say that the debates and conclusions were devoted to the most pressing European issues of the moment .
However , the media did not find it very attractive because - and I regard this as a success - we managed to avoid certain debates which would have diverted our attention from the key developmental issues without reaching any solutions .
This was one of the reasons why we managed to take a few more steps forward , but there is still more to be done .
President of the European Commission . - Mr President , over the past few years , we have had many opportunities to discuss together the importance of partnership .
That the European Union 's ambitions are such that Europeans at every level have to be engaged .
That we need a common vision about where we are heading .
That the European Union institutions need to work together to deliver on our citizens ' expectations .
After the Spring European Council , we can see clearly the tasks before us , for the rest of the year and beyond .
I would like to congratulate the Slovenian Presidency and Prime Minister Janša for the very competent way in which he chaired this European Council .
I believe now we can better see how partnership will make us progress , namely in terms of concrete delivery .
This must be a truly decisive year for our ambition concerning a ' Europe of results ' - concrete results for our citizens .
We must prove that Europe has the strength and the focus to withstand global pressures and to face up to global challenges .
And we must demonstrate that the European Union is the right way to bring in the changes that are needed .
The Spring European Council was a moment of truth .
Would the ambitions , namely regarding the new Lisbon Strategy for growth and jobs , but also the ambitions in terms of our policy against climate change and for energy policy , would those ambitions that had been set when the economic climate was more favourable , still hold when we got into rougher waters ?
Before the European Council , many had doubts about it .
I myself spoke about the need for Europe to keep its commitments so that we could be credible .
After the European Council , I am happy to say that we had a very good , substantive debate in which the European Council not only confirmed that it remained fully committed to the targets it had set for energy and climate change , but also backed them up with agreement on precise deadlines .
Also , the European Council confirmed the goals regarding the renewed Lisbon Strategy for growth and jobs .
Let me highlight some of the issues discussed in more detail , focusing in particular on how the Commission intends to take work forward .
As has become the tradition at the Spring meeting , the European Council reviewed the economic situation in Europe .
The emerging picture is a mixed one : while the economic fundamentals in Europe remain sound , the global economic outlook is deteriorating as a result of the slowdown of economic activity in the US .
Confidence in our capacity to tackle the future therefore needs to be coupled with vigilance .
Confidence and vigilance .
This is also true against the backdrop of the continuing turmoil on the international financial markets .
The message from the European Council has been clear : all authorities in the European Union stand ready to take regulatory and supervisory action if necessary .
Now it will be up to the ECOFIN Council to implement swiftly and vigorously the road map agreed last autumn , strengthening the transparency and functioning of financial markets .
The European Union must be vigilant - and be seen to be vigilant - as the situation evolves .
I am also pleased that the European Council endorsed the Commission paper on sovereign wealth funds , subscribing to the need for a common European approach and the objective of agreeing at international level on a voluntary code of conduct for sovereign wealth funds and defining principles for recipient countries at international level .
The European Council also reaffirmed its commitment to sustained reform efforts through the full implementation of the revised Lisbon strategy .
The consensus at the European Council around this priority was indeed impressive .
And we gave Lisbon a fresh impetus with the launch of an ambitious new cycle .
I was pleased that the European Council followed our suggestion to give particular emphasis to investing in people and , notably , to reducing the number of young people who cannot read properly and the number of early school leavers .
Flexicurity is also key .
We must build on the recent , very positive agreement between social partners and see those principles translated into results across the European Union Member States .
Another example is the goal of a ' fifth freedom ' : the freedom of circulation of knowledge .
The European Council set out key measures required to make it a reality .
For example , high-speed internet is to be made available to all schools by 2010 , and ambitious targets will also be set for household access .
We should now press ahead to ensure that the fruits of reforms are felt at every level .
The objectives - like investing in people , unlocking business potential , making the internal market work , investing in research and innovation - must be backed up with improvements felt by people and businesses on the ground .
This was also a point many of you emphasised in the debate we had in Parliament before the European Council .
I count on the continued support of this House to ensure that action at European and national level delivers on the objectives we have set ourselves .
The European Council also set out a clear road map and gave new impetus to ongoing legislative work .
I particularly want to mention , as Prime Minister Janša just did , the two key deadlines set by the European Council , on the internal market in energy and on the climate change and renewable energy package .
These deadlines are not just about ' tidying up the desk ' before the institutional changes of next year .
They are about bringing in essential changes as quickly as possible , so that the European Union can lead the world in this very important dossier .
On the energy internal market package , we need to reach an agreement to show that institutions are able to deliver in the interests of citizens , consumers and businesses , and here we committed to trying to reach political agreement by June 2008 .
The Commission remains of the view that full ownership unbundling is the best way forward , but we have continued to make clear that we are ready to consider alternatives that are the functional equivalent of that .
And we will continue close cooperation with this House and with the Council in order to help bridge the remaining gaps .
On the climate and renewables package , political agreement by the end of this year will be the clearest possible sign to our international partners - a sign that Europe is serious about its commitments .
This would enable adoption of the proposals within Parliament 's legislative term early in 2009 .
This is vital as we enter the final straight towards an international agreement on climate change in Copenhagen next year .
This international agreement is our top priority , and is the single best way of both cutting global emissions and ensuring that our energy-intensive industries will have the level playing field they need .
In the mean time , we should spell out , in the revised emission trading scheme , the steps we will take in the event that there are problems for certain sectors or subsectors that face the risk of carbon leakage because they are unable to pass through costs .
The Commission , together with all stakeholders and , in particular , with the social partners , will step up work to gather data and identify the necessary solution to apply in the future in such cases .
I know that the European Parliament is devoting particular attention to these two dossiers .
I hope that you will be able to join the Council in the deadlines so that we can give credibility to our negotiating position at global level .
In a number of areas , the European Council looked forward to specific proposals from the Commission in the coming months .
I would like to give you a flavour of three areas on which we will be working to come forward with proposals before the summer .
First , the renewal of our social agenda .
Our objective is to pave the way towards a European wide consensus on a social vision for the 21st century :
a social vision which responds to new challenges , such as globalisation and demographic change ;
a vision which is based on the principle of providing ' life chances ' to everyone through opportunities , access and solidarity ;
a vision looking at social challenges for society as a whole , addressing issues such as youth , education , migration , ageing as well as intercultural dialogue ;
a vision that , of course , takes more specifically into consideration the problems of poverty that we are still facing in our Europe .
We will build on the ongoing consultation following our social stock-taking , and make concrete proposals - exactly as we did with the Internal Market Review last November .
The Social Agenda Forum that we are organising in May is a good opportunity for us to test this approach .
Secondly , the forthcoming proposal on the Small Business Act .
The key to our thinking is the need to look at the whole life cycle of an SME .
There is little value in helping start-ups if SMEs are then blocked from growth .
The business world has made it very clear that what small businesses need is not another political declaration but some real action .
That means removing obstacles to growth , simplifying regulation , promoting e-government , helping access to public procurement and cutting unnecessary delays : generally speaking , cutting red tape .
I look forward to discussing with Parliament how to take these ideas forward .
The third area where we will swiftly bring forward proposals is the Mediterranean Union .
The Commission strongly supports the commitment to give fresh impetus to our Mediterranean policy .
I am glad that there is now a consensus that the project will move ahead with all 27 Member States , taking the Barcelona Process one step further .
And I am very proud of the confidence that the European Council expressed in the Commission by asking us to come forward with the necessary proposals to define the modalities for this Union for the Mediterranean .
The European Council recognised that the Commission is best placed to devise an institutional architecture compatible with the Treaty and with the range of activities and forums which already exist .
We will be working quickly to find the right institutional architecture to deliver a new level of ambition , one which helps us to move ahead swiftly on tangible projects with our partners across the Mediterranean Sea .
But , let us make no mistake : institutions and instruments will not deliver on their own .
What we need most to turn ambition into action is political will - on both sides of the Mediterranean .
We can come with proposals for new institutional arrangements , but if there is no political will on both sides , we will not produce concrete results .
I know that this is a concern that many honourable Members share , and we will of course keep you fully involved in further work .
Indeed , I will have the opportunity to address the Euro-Med Parliamentary Assembly in Athens later this week .
I believe the European Council was indeed an important step forward .
Now the EU partnership needs to deliver , and make 2008 a landmark year for Europe .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Mr President of the European Council , Mr President of the European Commission , ladies and gentlemen , the recent European Council was largely devoted to defining the new cycle of the Lisbon Strategy and took place in a very difficult international economic and financial context .
The indicators within the Union are , however , somewhat encouraging : more jobs , a growth rate of 2.9 % in 2007 and falling budget deficits .
This progress is above all the fruit of the business restructuring efforts of course , but it is also the result of a policy of reform and sound administration on the part of most of the Member States .
These efforts have been encouraged by the Commission and I congratulate it on its determination and steady work in that direction .
The wind blowing from the other side of the Atlantic does not augur well and the growth forecasts for 2008 are lower than we might have hoped .
In such a context , it is very tempting to withdraw into oneself , to suspend the reforms and to protect one 's borders while waiting for brighter days .
There is a great temptation - and our political opponents give in to it much too often - to spend money that we do not have , to make the people of Europe believe that everything can continue as before .
Our parliamentary group is genuinely in favour of a responsible policy , a policy of movement , reform and solidarity .
We would ask the Commission to present to us its economic policy guidelines and its employment guidelines so that they can be adopted as soon as possible .
The national authorities must explain more clearly to their populations the benefits of the reforms envisaged under the Lisbon Strategy .
These reforms are often misrepresented but not sufficiently implemented .
It is still difficult for them to make their presence felt .
Our group will nevertheless continue to defend them and to oppose those who , in order to flatter their electorate , strive to tone them down or postpone them indefinitely .
We want to go even further and send the European knowledge policy into overdrive .
We propose promoting the free movement of researchers , students and scientists and adopting a unified regime on the protection of intellectual property rights .
We call for the removal of obstacles to the mutual recognition of qualifications and the modernisation of our European universities with financial backing from the EU .
Ladies and gentlemen , the European Council 's second task was to clarify the conditions in which the ambitious climate change targets adopted in March 2007 will be implemented .
These details were essential in order to enable the firms concerned eventually to plan for the future .
Indeed , making significant efforts to ' decarbonise ' the economy must not affect the competitiveness of energy-intensive industries .
Finally , I welcome the agreement on the Union for the Mediterranean proposed by France to the Council on the basis that the Barcelona process has not produced the desired results .
This initiative seeks to give a boost to Euro-Mediterranean relations .
We are all aware of the extent to which the challenges of development , migration and political stability in these countries affect us directly .
We therefore hope that this project will mark a turning point in our relations with the Mediterranean countries , which must become more concrete , more effective and , above all , more political , with a view to achieving real peace in the Middle East .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the economic situation in the European Union is stable but it is under threat .
That is the conclusion drawn by this European Council .
Growth is still stable and employment is increasing , but it is nonetheless under threat .
The question is this : what is the source of this threat ?
The threat comes from the slowdown of economic activity in the US , which is one outcome of the financial crisis in the major corporate banks , in other words , in the investment banks , in that country .
President Barroso , you have said that as one of its conclusions , the Council states that we in the European Union must be ready to take regulatory and supervisory action if necessary in response to this development in the international financial markets .
Let me ask you this : when , if not now , should this action be initiated ?
Now is the time to look at the precise mechanisms by which the ' Wild West ' capitalism pursued by investors in the international financial markets is putting Europe 's growth at risk .
In my view , as one of its conclusions this European Council should have set out in a far more detailed fashion which instruments we should use in order to exercise this scrutiny .
( Applause )
Mr President , we have taken note of the fact that this Council has made an effort to talk in slightly more detail about the social dimension of Europe .
However , rather than offering a coherent concept , it does so on a ' piecemeal ' basis .
The fifth freedom , for example , Prime Minister Janša , is part of social policy .
You are right , knowledge is power , that is absolutely right .
However , knowledge also creates opportunities for access to economic development in the world , and knowledge creates opportunities to have a stake in an increasingly diverse labour market .
In all occupational sectors , the best-placed worker is the one who is well-qualified , who has access to knowledge and who is in a position to update this knowledge on an ongoing basis .
For that reason , access to knowledge also means access to social justice .
When we talk about the social dimension of Europe , to us this means that we must adopt an integral approach .
It does not mean merely passing a few comments here and there about social policy .
That is why , from our perspective - from the Socialist Group 's perspective - the Council has once again fallen short of our expectations in relation to the social dimension of Europe .
That is why we listened with great interest when you said that the Commission is going to undertake coherent stock-taking of the social dimension of the internal market , the European Union 's social dimension , this summer and will present the results of this process to us .
We will use this as a yardstick to gauge your performance .
You are aiming to make progress here , and we will be watching to see how you match up .
However , we will be gauging your performance in another sense as well .
It is not acceptable that the Council - and I am turning to you , Prime Minister Janša , and to you , Commission President - should be ignoring the opinions of the European Parliament .
I have here a list of the official documents submitted to the Council .
It includes eight documents submitted by various formations of the Council , an Opinion of the EESC on the employment of priority categories ( Lisbon Strategy ) and a resolution of the Committee of the Regions .
There is not a single document from the European Parliament on this list , not even the document we produced about the Lisbon Strategy .
This is a lamentable state of affairs , in my Group 's view , because it shows that you are not taking the social dimension , the European Parliament itself and the opinion of this House sufficiently seriously .
( Applause )
Some progress has been made : that was what my colleagues said when we asked them during our Group debate what they thought of climate policy .
Yes , it is true that climate change is the key challenge that we face , and substantial progress has been made at this Council , with a balance having been struck between climate policy requirements , on the one hand , and industry requirements , on the other .
Achieving this balance is a task for all the institutions .
Just so that there are no misunderstandings : there are certain industry lobbyists who will interpret this to mean that there are not enough checks and not enough pressure on industry when the Council makes pronouncements of this kind .
In fact , the opposite is the case .
We will only achieve our climate targets if industry plays its part .
By the same token , however , we will only achieve our targets if we allow industry to play its part .
Both aspects are essential .
If we want to tackle climate change , we have to do so in Europe , and that is why the international agreements rightly give European industry the chance to compete on an equal footing with industry elsewhere in the world .
That conclusion was the right one and we greatly welcome it .
Let me make a final comment about the Mediterranean Union , which you will now find mentioned on page 19 of the Conclusions , and that itself is another message from the Council .
We are pleased that there is now clarity on this issue , and you are right in what you have been saying about neighbourhood policy in the Mediterranean .
Prime Minister Janša has rightly pointed out that partnership policy here must entail partnership policy elsewhere .
My colleague Mr Swoboda will comment in a moment on the Eastern dimension in particular on behalf of our Group , as we will be putting forward our own set of proposals on this issue .
Let me conclude with an appraisal .
This was a Council of normality .
It fell short of the mark in terms of social policy : that has unfortunately become the norm in the European Union , but it is something that can be addressed .
It was ' business as usual ' as far as the Mediterranean Union was concerned .
We saw the ' helicopter method ' being deployed here : ' whip up a storm of dust and before the dust settles , the helicopter takes off again ' .
We need something more tangible here , you are quite right .
If these tangible results are to be delivered - and this final sentence is directed at you , Mr President - they must be delivered through cooperation with the European Parliament .
The fact is that anything that is decided within the framework of the Mediterranean Union requires funding from the European Parliament , which is why it is extremely important that the Conclusions should state that the European Parliament will be fully involved in the future structures of the Mediterranean Union .
Thank you very much for your attention . I would also like to thank our unfailingly cheerful colleagues from the CSU who have had to show me such forbearance .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , one thing is certain : without the pressure of collective action and accountability , Member States would lack the will to act on climate change , yet the inconvenient truth for the EU is that the summit conclusions are often long on rhetoric and short on delivery .
We can already see signs of Member States looking for ways to cut corners and costs on last year 's political commitments , even though the Stern report of 2006 warned that the costs of action now will be far less than the costs of inaction later .
Some of the language in the final conclusion suggests that the urgency and imperative of responding to climate change is already waning .
This would spell disaster , both for our climate and for our credibility .
Somewhat overlooked in this debate is energy efficiency , the simplest and most cost-effective way of reducing our overall emissions .
An early draft of the Council conclusions committed Member States to a 10 % reduction in energy use in government buildings and car fleets , yet now reads simply as ' substantial progress ' .
It would be a small but significant gesture showing that governments are leading by example .
Fiscal instruments to stimulate better environmental behaviour should indeed be exploited .
ETS has proved its worth and been taken up as a global standard for providing economic incentives for emission reductions .
Green taxes such as reduced VAT rates can also have a similar effect , by stimulating demand for low consumption vehicles and domestic appliances .
Turning to the economic aspects of the summit , the conclusions boast that the fundamentals of the EU economy remain sound , yet this is not how the outlook is perceived by many of our citizens facing higher bills and growing indebtedness , which should caution us against excessive optimism .
The underlying principles of the Lisbon Strategy are worth recalling : structural reforms , fiscal discipline and targeted investments in productive areas that will deliver future growth .
EU Member States remain - with one or two honourable exceptions - well short of their commitment to spend 3 % of their GDP on R & D. Now we talk of a fifth freedom for knowledge and innovation , but we should not forget that we have not yet managed to complete the original four freedoms , especially in the area of free movement of labour and services across the whole of the EU .
Finally , support for SMEs is rightly identified as key to economic growth and innovation .
We must enable them to reap the full benefit of the internal market , yet the Council could achieve much for European competitiveness by bringing the long-running disputes over a European patent and private company statute to a successful conclusion .
The Council conclusions cautiously declare that the challenge is to deliver .
Parliament , for its part , certainly will .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - Mr President , I would like to thank the President-in-Office and the Commission President for their contributions today .
It is quite interesting that , when we speak about the threats to growth and the economy , a lot of people fall back into their default position : you are either in favour of capitalism or against capitalism .
They never see that there is a middle ground as well and an area where you can operate .
There is an old saying in the investment platform : ' When there is blood in the streets , there is money to be made . '
The reality is that the real threat to employment creation and economic growth within the European Union is not so much the subprime market crisis in America but our inability or unwillingness to take risks and be innovative in finding opportunities in these crisis areas .
It is interesting that , if you look back over the last 100 years , at every stage of industrial development and at every stage of economic development either the US or the European Union has been at the core of creating a new industry , creating a new economic upturn , because of a difficulty that was perceived in some areas and was grabbed in another area .
One of the successes to come out of the European Council is that the Council has seen that there are risks and dangers - whether it is climate change or the fact that innovation and technology requirements are increased or the regulatory burden upon SMEs - but there are also opportunities .
By taking action now we can take the long-term view , as the Prime Minister said by using the Confucius analogy : by planting a tree , we are looking 10 years down the line .
That is the real way that we can achieve true growth and development within the European Union in the short term , as well as setting solid foundations for the long term , even though some of the headlines that you read will tell you negative things .
Today 's headline in one of the newspapers is about Jaguar and Land Rover being taken over by an Indian company as an example of how the economic power has shifted from the West to the East .
The reality is that corporate and sovereign wealth funds are investing in industry and investing in business .
We must find a way to ensure that we not only capture that wealth and those funds but we guarantee that they return dividends into our own economies by creating greater economic growth and by creating more jobs .
When we speak about innovation and technology , it is important to remember that 73 % of the workforce in the European Union who will be working in 2017 are already in place .
But only 10 % of the technology that we will be using in 2017 is in existence today .
So the requirement to invest further in educating our people , upskilling them , giving them new training and new knowledge to deal with the new economies is vitally important .
The last point that I would make - and Mr Schulz touched on this in a very important way - is that the success of the European Union over the last 20 years has been predicated on the twin-track approach of economic growth and social development and protection .
You cannot have one without the other .
We must ensure at all stages of our economic development not just that the rich get richer - that is going to happen anyway - but that there is a greater opportunity for us to show generosity and solidarity amongst our people - not just in energy markets , not just in financial markets - to guarantee that we can all benefit from the growth and the creation that have occurred .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Mr President of the Commission , during the course of the debate , I had the impression that we were talking about two quite different events .
I observed the Council on behalf of my Group , but I did not gain any impression at all from that event that it aimed to forge any new , more advanced , ambitious joint climate policy initiatives , for example .
You may recall that shortly before the Council , Javier Solana unveiled his climate scenario from a security perspective .
If the Greens had published something of the sort , which describes how climate change will escalate conflicts all over the world , intensifying pressure on the developed world in particular , everyone would probably have said , ' the Greens have lost the plot , putting forward such apocalyptic scenarios ' .
In fact , the Solana paper contains a lot of truth , and I am surprised that none of the valid points that it puts forward were taken up by the Council .
Indeed , in areas where it should have been more consistent compared with what was presented last year , we see greater inconsistency .
Our Federal Chancellor , Angela Merkel , in particular , of whom I was so proud last year , was the very person who battled for a delay , a slowdown and exemptions .
Let us be under no illusion : if we make exemption rules for European industry in emissions trading the focal point of the Council at this time , then we must assume from the outset that the Council has failed .
I think it is an extremely negative message to send out to the rest of the world if we talk about exemptions for emissions trading for the next decade .
How , under those circumstances , can we achieve the ambitious goal of bringing the rest of the world on board in Poznan or Copenhagen ?
In my view , what has happened is a self-fulfilling prophecy .
Let me say this very clearly on behalf of my Group .
We want proper emissions trading , not exemptions .
We would rather be protecting at our external borders a European industry that is sustainable , rather than bowing to pressure , at this crucial juncture in the climate process , from the steel and automobile industries and other lobbyists who , as we see from a recent report , are already exerting direct and , indeed , excessive influence on decisions in Brussels .
In my view , this was not an ambitious summit ; it was fainthearted .
That was not only due to the new role of Angela Merkel , who has ceased to be the Climate Chancellor .
It was also due to the fact that so many countries in Europe are going it alone .
Some countries are negotiating separately about visa agreements .
Others are discussing their own approach to missile defence with the Americans .
There is no unity on Kosovo or on the issue of energy security : the Germans are conducting their own business with Russia 's Gasprom , and the Italians and Hungarians are also doing business on their own .
The Mediterranean Union was actually just Mr Sarkozy 's idea as a way of safeguarding uranium imports into France in exchange for arms and nuclear technology exports .
In my view , the overall framework for this summit was extremely poor and its outcome is negatively influenced by far too much ' go-it-alone ' and far too little commonality .
To me , an ambitious approach is one thing ; faintheartedness another , and my overall impression of this summit is its faintheartedness .
That is certainly not good , but what is worse is that there is so little honesty about it in the House today .
Mr President , President of the Commission , President-in-Office of the Council , it is understandable , up to a point , that you should come here and try to whitewash the results of the summit .
However , I expected greater frankness and greater modesty from you .
Instead of simply congratulating each other and praising yourselves , I would also expect you talk about the shortcomings of your policy , and about your failures .
I would expect you to talk about the social agenda , and the social failing that was conspicuous by its absence from the summit discussion : the 70 million poor , 20 million of whom are children .
Instead of saying ' we have created jobs ' , you should say that those jobs are badly paid , with flexible employment terms , and that 20 million workers in the European Union are poor .
You should talk about your interim review of your own Lisbon targets , Mr Barroso : from the three pillars of the Lisbon Strategy ( competitiveness , the environment , cohesion ) , you have eliminated social , regional and territorial cohesion and you have downgraded environmental issues .
On the subject of climate change , the President-in-Office himself admitted that a number of Member States meeting in the Council had been trying , from the start , to whittle away at your package of proposals , Mr Barroso , in the name of competitiveness .
Instead of seeing how they can make their targets more ambitious and more binding when they go to Copenhagen , the Commission and the Council are trying to exempt large sectors of industry and the economy .
To conclude , I would like to emphasise that at a time when even the most fanatical neo-liberals in the world are discovering the meaning of public intervention , at a time of falling stock markets and the credit crunch , the Council and the Commission are even now allowing a dogmatically unilateral , uncontrolled Central Bank to concern itself only with inflation , forgetting the risk posed to the European economy by a depression or zero growth .
( Applause )
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) At last year 's spring summit the European Council expressed its desire for an ambitious climate policy .
On 23 January this came about in concrete form through legislative proposals , which were warmly welcomed by this Parliament .
I am convinced that in order for it to be effective , we must ensure that a constructive agreement is reached between the Council and Parliament before Potsdam , and we must therefore avoid procedures that would render an agreement at first reading impossible .
Such an agreement requires flexibility on the part of Parliament and certainly on the part of the Council .
The European Union 's efforts are valuable , but they would be more valuable still if the entire international community applied itself to the issue of the environment and climate .
An important step was taken in Bali .
I am delighted that the Council will continue to make intensive efforts to come to an agreement with all the participants at Potsdam .
The Lisbon Strategy is being energetically implemented as a result of the last spring summit .
That is good news .
It suggests that the Heads of State or Government see the need for a social dimension .
Can the Council President , Mr Janša , tell us what any more about this ?
Can we expect any additional proposals ?
Finally , freedom of expression is a good thing .
It testifies to an adult attitude which is very wise .
In the Netherlands a Member of Parliament is making a controversial film about Islam .
I hope that Europe will speak as one if it should cause unexpected disruption .
Mr President , the Presidency conclusions from the European Council contain all the usual clichés about social dimensions and SMEs and totally fail to address the main problems of European economies , which are that Europe is over-taxed and over-regulated and therefore unable to face the challenges of global competitiveness .
May I say that the report was also remarkable for what it omitted .
We hear a lot about the Lisbon Process , but very little indeed about the Lisbon Treaty , which , as we all know , is in effect the failed Constitution .
Despite all the promises that were made to European citizens , we have decided to ratify this Treaty in most Member States without referendums .
We have made that decision because we know that the people would withhold their consent .
In my region a recent postal ballot showed that nearly 90 % of the people opposed the Treaty .
This is a defiance of democracy .
Later this afternoon we shall be debating the issue of Tibet but , before we criticise too seriously , perhaps we should look very carefully at our own record of democratic accountability .
In the mean time , we should indeed be looking at the Tibet issue and condemning China for its outrageous behaviour and suppression of rights .
I think the time has come when we should seriously consider whether free nations can attend the celebrations in Beijing for the Olympics later this year .
Mr President , in welcoming the conclusions of the Council , I wish to focus my remarks on the section entitled ' Climate change and energy ' .
Many have identified these issues as the most important that we face in the world today , and it is good that the EU is taking the lead over climate change .
However , we have something of a track record in adopting very ambitious targets which have so far proved difficult to achieve .
So I welcome the note of caution that I detect in some parts of the text .
I support calls for the transition to a low-carbon economy to be made in a way that is consistent with the EU 's sustainable development , competitiveness , security of supply , and sound and sustainable public finance , especially when coupled with a recognition of the risks of carbon leakage or the offshoring of European jobs and linked with the call for flexibility in achieving national renewable targets .
I am of the view that we have placed too much emphasis on renewable energy sources as an objective rather than as a means to an end , because I am absolutely certain that renewables are not the sole solution .
It seems to me that we should rather think of our real objective , which I take to be at least a 60 % reduction in CO2 emissions by 2050 , and then look to a range of options for achieving it .
We have already recognised - through the principle of burden-sharing - that different Member States have very different energy situations , so why not restrict ourselves to setting that goal and allowing Member States to decide for themselves how to reach it ?
In that context , may I give credit to the UK Government - not something I do easily - for its announcements on the prospects for nuclear energy .

Mr President , there are much better and far more reasons to support the British Government , but let me come to my subject .
( DE ) I would like to take up two points where I also believe that the summit 's results have rather fallen short of our expectations , namely external energy policy and energy security .
Mr President of the Commission , when your Commission was formed , we asked the two Commissioners with responsibility for external relations and energy to take a very pro-active role in this area .
There has been little input from the Council too , and all I see is generalisations here .
As I recall , when Thomas Ilves visited Parliament in Strasbourg , he pointed out that Russia has a neighbourhood policy and an external energy policy .
Unfortunately , we do not , and that is a disadvantage in terms of our competitiveness .
It is time to leave the generalisations behind and adopt practical measures .
I hope that by the time the next summit takes place in June , there will be genuine proposals on the table for more concerted action .
The second point , which has already been touched upon by Martin Schulz , relates to the issue of the Mediterranean Union and the Black Sea Union .
I am concerned that there is no balance between our cooperation in the Mediterranean region and in the Black Sea region .
Are countries like Ukraine , the Republic of Moldova , Georgia and others such as those in the South Caucasus really less important ?
Do they have a lesser right , are they less entitled than the Mediterranean countries to more intensive cooperation ?
I do not believe so .
In common with Martin Schulz and the rest of my Group , I am a strong supporter of the Mediterranean Union as a ' forced ' Barcelona union or Barcelona process .
However , I would have liked to see the Commission present some finished proposals and make it clear from the outset that a union between the European Union and the Mediterranean countries must and will act , and that the heart of this union , in both administrative and political terms , is the European Union .
We are envisaging something similar for the Black Sea region too , for issues such as energy security , migration and the environment all affect not only the Mediterranean but also , and equally , the Black Sea region .
For that reason , Mr President-in-Office , our Group will be submitting our proposals to you , and also to you , Mr President of the Commission .
We hope that the summit in June will offer the opportunity to redress the balance , for it is important for you , too , as your country 's Prime Minister and the President-in-Office of the Council , to make it clear once and for all that both communities are important .
I was rather surprised , Mr President of the Commission , that you only talked about the Mediterranean Union and made no reference to the Black Sea .
We believe that both elements are important .
We are in favour of establishing neighbourhood policy on a new qualitative footing .
Our Group will therefore be presenting a set of proposals in due course .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the Presidency on the outcome of the spring summit and the fact that the details of the new Lisbon discussions are based on truly sustainable economic growth , which I think is absolutely necessary .
What we have to face now is the difficulties on the financial markets .
We have to face the problems with climate change .
These are often described as ' problems for European industry ' ; however , I would like to remind you that the modern , energy-efficient , knowledgeable industry is the industry that survives .
Therefore , we have to put more money into innovation and research , and I hope you will keep that in mind when we enter the budgetary discussions and follow more of a parliamentary line , financing innovation and research .
I also want to remind you about what we are in : a new engineering revolution , like when we went from steam to electricity .
Where would Europe have been if we had sat back and said , ' Look , we will not do anything until they have electrified the United States ' ?
Again , the modern , energy-efficient industry is the one that will survive .
Therefore , we also have to be tough on climate issues , because that promotes innovation , not only a better environment .
Also , the single market for energy is , of course , extremely efficient .
However , there is a problem with both the energy package and the climate package as it has been presented , and that is in combination with the situation of SMEs .
Because , if you look - especially at the climate package - from an SME point of view , we have a lot of cleaning-up to do to make it more simple , to simplify the rules and procedures to accommodate both climate and the tolerance - and even the promotion - of SMEs in the European Union .
I do hope that we will see results from this in the next summit .
Hope is very good for breakfast but very bad for dinner , so we expect results .
Ms Ek , it is remarkable to see your book of knowledge here in the Chamber .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , among the top 500 listed companies in the world , the European ones are distinctive for being behind the times , unlike those in the US and emerging countries .
There is no easy finance available , especially for SMEs , given that it is only the people 's banks which will lend to SMEs ; they should be supported rather than obstructed .
Furthermore , while we are speaking here in this House , the Speaker of the Tibetan Parliament-in-exile is announcing - underscoring - the massacres which are taking place as we speak here in our peaceful Europe .
In Tibet , where a people is being slaughtered , your wise words on attendance at the Olympic Games will come across as worthy and courageous , Mr President .
Mr Solana , on the other hand , tells us that he will go .
I should like to know whom he will be representing : the Europe of the banks , the Europe of business and trade ; not the people 's Europe .
We in Padania are with the Tibetan people who are fighting for their freedom , for their right to self-determination , a right sanctioned by the UN Charter on human rights and also by the EU .
( PT ) While the social situation in various European Union countries is deteriorating , the Council is insisting on extending the application of the neoliberal policies of the Lisbon Strategy and the stability and flexicurity pact , when it knows that this will only worsen the social and territorial inequalities .
As a result , the profits and gains of economic and financial groups will clearly remain stable at very high levels , while precarious employment and poor pay will continue to spread .
Poverty and social exclusion will be maintained at high levels , as is already the case , affecting in particular tens of millions of women , children and the elderly .
However , as we have seen , the Council and the Commission are not particularly concerned about this .
For them , a bit of rhetoric is enough , which we can only vehemently oppose .
What was really needed was a break with these policies so that the countries with weaker economies can be supported and so that public investment can be increased in order to improve and extend those public services that are essential in the fight against poverty and social exclusion .
This would also have helped to create jobs with rights and to develop micro , small and medium-sized enterprises .
The financial crisis in the US and the high price of fossil fuels and certain agricultural goods will have particularly serious consequences in terms of poverty and social exclusion and will be felt in those countries with weaker economies .
It is therefore absolutely imperative that these policies are changed so that we can prevent their consequences in the European Union , avoid worsening the social situation and respond to the concerns of the population .
As a result , we need to break away from the neoliberal policies of the Lisbon Strategy , the Stability Pact , the high interest rates of the European Central Bank and the support for the agricultural production of biofuels when food products are scarce .
We need to adopt alternative policies .
Mr President , this is one of my last speeches in the European Parliament .
I have decided to leave by 9 May and deliver the seat to my successor , Minister Hanne Dahl , to bring a change in sex and generation for the Danish June Movement .
I intend to continue my political work .
As President of the transnational party , the EUDemocrats , I cannot stop my lifelong battle for transparency , proximity and democracy .
We have achieved a great deal .
The Commission 's internal telephone book is no longer a secret document .
Agendas and minutes of Commission meetings are no longer secret , in French only .
They can now be found on the net .
The Commission 's 3 000 secret working groups can be downloaded , for instance from my website , thanks to Commission President Barroso .
From next year the names of the advisers can be found on the net as well .
From next year we will also have a complete list of all recipients of agricultural spending .
The list of victories for transparency is long .
The Council has still not learnt .
Eighty-five per cent of all European laws are still decided behind closed doors in the 300 secret working groups in the Council .
Elected Members of this Parliament and the national parliaments cannot follow the legislative process in the Council .
The few formal deliberations and public votes do not involve the public and the media .
We urgently need a review of our legislative process .
No EU law should be passed without a visible voting majority both in this Parliament and in the Council .
Citizens should be able to hold law-makers accountable .
They should be able to reward us or punish us at the next polling day .
The core of democracy is the ability to hold elections , obtain a new majority and then a new law .
This basic democratic principle unites all of us .
Why , then , forget it when we share our sovereignty ?
Why not permit full transparency in the legislative procedure ?
Why are you in the Commission and the Council still hiding the major part of the legislative process , even under so-called ' codecision ' , where we are not properly informed about your deliberations and the divisions between Member States ?
I shall continue our joint fight for transparency from the outside .
Dear colleagues , I hope you will continue the battles from the inside of this Parliament .
( SK ) Thank you , Mr President .
Ladies and gentlemen , I welcome the outcome of the European Council Spring Summit where the focus was on progress on the Lisbon Strategy and on launching the new cycle of the renewed Lisbon Strategy for growth and jobs ( 2008-2010 ) .
Since each Member knows which point of the Strategy is crucial for his / her Member State , I too have chosen from among the conclusions presented the one that is , in my opinion , important for Slovakia at present : investing in knowledge and innovation .
It is a sad statement of fact that although we have been since 2004 a full member of the European Union where free movement of people is guaranteed , although we are Schengen members and , as I believe , soon we will also be members of the Economic and Monetary Union , to this date the citizens of our country still have to cope with obstacles and a lack of transparency concerning employment and they often find themselves in jobs that are below their qualifications in spite of their education level or work under far worse financial conditions than their colleagues .
Difficulties in accessing health care are another problem that has been ignored until now : this is a significant fact that has an impact on equality among employees , students and scientists .
That is why I support creating a ' fifth freedom ' based on enhancing the cross-border mobility of researchers , as well as students , scientists and university teaching staff .
I believe that this will enhance the quality and credibility of our universities and that Slovakia , too , will help , within the framework of globalisation , to enhance the prestige of the European Union .
By doing away with the inequalities between the old and new Member States we will achieve what the founders of the European Union envisaged .
Let us remember that a chain is only as strong as its weakest link .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I feel as if some of us always expect some kind of sensation .
In view of the starting point and the issues to be addressed , this was not a normal summit ; it was far better than might have been feared for some other summits .
It was a good summit and I welcome the results , but it is true that the citizens want action and the issue of credibility also needs to be addressed .
On the day the summit produced its results , I was asked by a schoolgirl why I had any confidence in these results , given that they were developed and adopted by the very people who are failing to meet the Kyoto targets and implement the objectives of the Lisbon Strategy in full .
That is why I have now taken to emphasising one particular point : the European Union 's credibility with the citizens hinges on whether we actually put into practice what we adopt on paper .
What we need now is joint and tangible action within the agreed timeframe , not national squabbling .
Implementing these decisions will require a great deal of hard work .
If we do the job properly , the summit will have strengthened innovation and competitiveness and bolstered growth and employment , and that is the best form of social policy .
We see the social dimension as being an integral part of our policy .
It is judged not only by the number of times the world ' social ' appears in the document , Mr Schulz , but how much responsibility and social commitment it contains .
Mr President , I am going to make my remarks on the climate change package .
The PSE Group gives broad support to the conclusions on climate change .
We very much welcome the fact that it is now recognised that this is the year to deliver .
The commitments were made last year but now the whole world is watching - the Commission President made that point - to see whether Europe will deliver on what it signed up to last March .
We welcome that .
We , like you , hope that we can make major progress before the end of this parliamentary term - if we can get the right package of course .
We will be keeping an eye on that .
I want to pick up on three specific points .
Firstly on carbon capture and storage .
You are right in picking this out as extremely important .
But you do not talk anywhere about how we are going to fund the demonstration projects which Europe needs to set up in the next few years .
I hope you and the Commission will turn your attention to this very urgently indeed .
Without funding we will not get this technology up and running .
The second point is about biofuels .
I think it is widely accepted now that we must have a sustainable biofuels strategy and , if we do not get it , then we have to look again at the targets we have set .
The third point is about the emissions trading scheme .
You have committed yourselves to two very important principles : that there is a single European cap and that there is a downward trajectory in emissions .
Without those two ingredients there is no viable ETS .
All the problems of the first period arose because we did not have those things , so they are extremely welcome now .
You have also recognised the problem of carbon leakage .
We know that this is a real concern to citizens , to trade unionists , to employers , and we need to look at this .
My group attaches a lot of importance to making sure that we remain competitive and retain jobs in Europe .
In paragraph 20 , you also talk at length about flexibility .
You mentioned it three times .
But I hope we are all clear what we are talking about when we talk about flexibility , because we must not confuse flexibility with actually doing something .
Out there is an army of lobbyists , all making special cases for their industry .
There is only one special case , and that is the planet .
We all need to remember that .
Every company , every country and every citizen will have to make an effort .
It is how we share that effort , not whether or not we make it , that we have to debate .
Mr President , our citizens are worried , nervous , uncertain about climate change and energy security - yes , of course , and others have dealt with that - but also about their financial security .
And what answer do we give them ?
Let us wait and see .
There is not much in these conclusions about our citizens ' rights as investors , as pensioners , as consumers .
Consumer and SME confidence could do much .
It could be a key to better economic success .
' Yes ' to new ideas - and there are many of those in the conclusions - but what about the outstanding projects that could build confidence amongst our consumers and SMEs ?
What about the European patent , stuck in Council ?
The contract law project , stuck in Council ?
Patient mobility , stuck in Council ?
The idea for a European private company statute - will Council undertake with us to get it through by the end of this mandate ?
That would be some achievement .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to take the opportunity provided by this debate to draw attention to just two issues linked to the so-called climate package .
Firstly , the burden of combating climate change has been distributed very unfairly within the European Union .
The CO2 emission limits were shared between individual Member States without taking sufficient account of how far some of the latter lagged behind in terms of development .
This approach meant that countries such as Poland were allocated lower limits .
It also meant that Polish power stations were obliged to purchase part of their limits at auction from the outset , which resulted in the cost of electricity rising by between 10 % and 20 % .
If Polish power stations are required to purchase all of their limits at auction from 2013 , electricity prices will increase by several dozen percentage points , and many sectors of the Polish economy will therefore cease to be competitive .
Secondly , according to the European Commission 's own estimates , implementation of the climate package will cost around EUR 50 billion a year , at a time when most of the countries of the world , notably the United States , are not taking any action whatsoever to combat global warming .
It may well be that European industry will no longer be competitive on the world market .
This calls for the introduction of provisions to protect European manufacturing , which is burdened by such high additional costs .
( NL ) Permit me once again to express my amazement that nothing was said at the most recent European summit about the problems in Turkey .
The use of headscarves in Turkish universities has provoked a large constitutional crisis and that crisis was completely predictable .
Now we have the situation that the AKP , the ruling Islamic party , risks being banned , and both the Prime Minister and the President of Turkey are in danger of losing their political rights .
We have never experienced anything like this in a candidate Member State .
Commissioner Rehn says that the whole crisis will have no effect on the accession process , which is , to put it mildly , a thoughtless statement .
How can he say that , when he does not even know with whom he may shortly have to negotiate ?
What is the Council 's standpoint on the question ?
It seems as though nobody is interested in the problems in Turkey any more .
As long as we think that the problems will blow over of their own accord , however , as long as we say nothing , then I fear that a large number of unpleasant surprises await us .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , Mr President-in-Office , sometimes subjects which appear to be quite unrelated are in fact inextricably linked .
When we talk about climate change , we talk about migration , and when we talk about migration , we also talk about the Mediterranean Union .
It becomes apparent that issues are often strongly interconnected and so the right solutions have to be found .
However , Mrs Harms , this means that we need to try to find a proper balance in each subject area , for on the issue of climate change , for example , the action we take must not produce any undesired effects which could have social consequences .
That is why a balance must be found in industry too , so that developments can proceed in a rational way .
I view the Mediterranean Union as a key issue and I believe it is important to bring more pressure to bear here , in the interests of security and economic development in these regions .
It is in our own interest to forge a more effective and more intensive policy towards the Mediterranean .
Similarly , however , we should strengthen our neighbourhood policy - which after all is the basis for all these policies - towards our Eastern European neighbours .
We must find ways of offering these countries in the Mediterranean and Eastern Europe - especially if , like Ukraine , they have a prospect of joining the European Union - the opportunity to complete the domestic developments that are important for these countries .
I would add that it is also in our security interests if these countries benefit from better social conditions , more democracy and the rule of law .
However , this policy is a responsibility that is incumbent on the European Union as a whole .
Just as Germany must take on responsibility for Morocco in the Mediterranean region , so too must Spain take on responsibility for Ukraine .
That is why we cannot have a situation in which some countries participate , as originally envisaged , and others do not .
This is a policy to be pursued by the European Union as a whole .
Mr President of the Commission , you have , thankfully , been requested to deal with the details of the June summit .
The Commission as a whole needs to take responsibility here .
The European Parliament must also take on full responsibility ; otherwise you will have budget problems .
We must send out a clear message that the European Union is pursuing a unified foreign and security policy , and I would ask you once again to check that the Council presidency does indeed always act as the Council presidency and is not simply a separate rotating body from one Member State .
This is one of the weaknesses still besetting the concept , to my mind , and I think it needs to be reviewed in order to arrive at a coherent solution .

( DE ) Mr President , I would like to turn to Mr Karas and ask him to convey the European Parliament 's greetings to the schoolgirl whom he mentioned .
Based on what you have told us about her critical thinking , it seems to me that she could go a long way in politics for obviously her mind has not yet been clouded by the endless procession of unvarying texts that are submitted to us , with no follow-up - none at all - in terms of practical policy implementation .
In relation to the European Council 's resolution on the core topics of the Lisbon Strategy , on economic and social policy , I have asked myself how this text can take us forward , how what it says will make any difference tomorrow compared with previous years and whether it responds appropriately to the economic situation that we have identified .
The answer is : it does not !
If we look at the situation from a straightforward economic perspective , we have a recession or at least stagnation in the US .
We have weakening growth in Asia and no identifiable actor who could take over as a driving force .
We are about to experience hard knocks in the European Union : no longer the 3 % growth that we have been aiming for , nor even 2.9 % growth , but 1.3 % or 1.6 % , perhaps 1.8 % if all goes well .
That means that with the productivity trends that are likely , unemployment will increase again in most countries .
If I look at this text - which has been prepared by the Commission services , Mr Barroso , in such a way that there is nothing new in the Council 's resolutions - I want to know what the alternative is .
Where is the engine for our economy ?
Can we do this in Europe ?
Can we offer ourselves some kind of perspective ?
The answer is , yes , we could , because the workers in Europe can do so , because business can do so , because the SMEs are waiting for some kind of ' kick-start ' mechanism from politicians .
However , there is no political leadership to bring this about .
There are no adjustment mechanisms .
A decent vehicle has an engine to propel it , but what you are offering us has an empty space where the engine should be , nothing but an empty space .
You make no connection with public investment and raising the level of private investment , and you seem to lack any connection with the workers and their demands , workers who - at least in most European countries , the core countries that have been the bedrock of economic growth - are suffering from the lack of any margin of distribution .
There is not a word about minimum wages and not a word about social rights being integral to any market economic activity , so that we could move towards prosperity for everyone .
I think this a missed opportunity for the Lisbon Strategy and I hope that together we can remedy this situation .
It is surely no coincidence that as Mr Schulz has already pointed out , none of Parliament 's documents were submitted to the European Council .
( SL ) I agree with the European Council 's conclusion that the outcome of the fight against the dangerous reality of climate change depends on reducing the emission of greenhouse gases .
That is why it is most important to exploit every opportunity to refrain from using natural resources and limit gas emissions pursuant to the Kyoto Protocol .
Reducing gas emissions from household waste is one of the unexploited opportunities .
In 2005 these amounted to 2 % of all emissions .
One of them , methane , is generated mainly in refuse dumps , which are the worst possible way of managing waste .
The European Environment Agency has recently calculated that it would be possible to reduce emissions appreciably if waste management were more closely linked with policies for alleviating the effects of climate change .
We have now been given the opportunity to do that , because we are currently updating the 20-year-old Waste Directive .
This opportunity should be used to increase recycling and burn the remainder to produce electricity and heat .
Both these activities should adhere to the strictest environmental standards .
( NL ) You have made steady progress , certainly as regards the large legislative packages concerning energy and climate .
I support all of this .
I am happy about this clear progress and I therefore also support you as a member of the Dutch delegation when it comes to unbundling , the separation of policy and implementation between energy networks and producers .
As regional policy coordinator I am glad that the text of the Lisbon Agenda now sets out the position of the regions and cities very clearly .
It is there , close to the citizens , that innovation occurs and that our funds , the Structural and Cohesion Funds but also the research funds , are being used .
These priorities , which this Parliament set out in its resolution and on which the Committee of the Regions has also spoken , have now been well formulated .
I have just one comment .
For the first time the Lisbon Treaty has incorporated territorial cohesion .
One thing that was missing - it is referred to in only one place - was the vision of the Council and the Commission in this respect .
It was initially foreseen that the Council would also make progress on this point ; it is now waiting for the White Paper due in September .
I want to make one more common on this .
Cohesion , particularly as a response to globalisation , means that on the one hand you say ' yes ' to the concentration of research and development and important activities in certain parts of our territory -for example , the aviation industry or nanotechnology - but on the other hand you have to have a vision for the rest .
This becomes all the more important if globalisation continues , as we expect it to .
I hope therefore that before the next Council a vision will be set out and that the decisions taken on it , including those in the Commission , will be positive .
( PL ) In general , the Slovenian Presidency has proved capable of focusing on matters that are important to countries and to their citizens .
I should like to congratulate it on that .
The latest Council , which dealt with issues as important as the Lisbon Strategy , economic growth , employment , the state of public finances and combating climate change , provided confirmation of this ability .
I would , however , now like to pose the question as to what this Council has actually achieved for the average citizen of the European Union .
Were the tremendous social and economic differences across Europe taken into account when debating the important issues I just referred to ?
Was ongoing discrimination taken into account too , along with the fact that as we enter the 21st century a very large area of Europe remains in genuine poverty ?
Sadly , the Council failed to provide answers to these questions .
The Presidency Conclusions make scant reference to social policy .
In fact , the latter is treated at best as a by-product of this major debate .
I suspect that European citizens will not be pleased with such an approach , because it means that one year before elections to the European Parliament we can only offer them three points in these conclusions .
These points are : No 14 , in which the European Council looks forward to a renewed Social Agenda , No 15 , where it urges Member States to take concrete action , and No 16 , which is very lengthy and wherein certain solutions are proposed and old and well-known mechanisms advocated .
These suggestions will not get through to the citizens of the European Union .
The language must be revised .
Suggestions alone are not enough : what is needed is action , and that action should start now .
( FI ) Mr President , people are worried about climate change and its effects .
The fight against climate change , however , will be much cheaper than anticipated .
Studies show that reducing greenhouse gas emissions by as much as is needed to pre-empt the worst scenarios will slow down worldwide economic growth by around 1 % .
If no action is taken , the loss in economic growth could rise to as much as ten times that .
The fight against climate change will create a huge market for clean environmental technology and a use for that technology in its different forms .
What we urgently need now in the European Union is additional investment in product development and marketing , so that European companies can acquire a clear leading position in the global market for environmental technology .
It will not do us any good now if we are slow to move and simply put miserly sums of money into product development , because technological development is forging ahead at a furious rate the whole time , and will also be the case in other countries unless the EU acts .
Mr President , like others , I welcome the opportunity to support the summit conclusions , particularly on the climate change package .
I note the ambitious timetable , and I assure you we will do everything possible on our side here in Parliament to meet that timetable , because we are very conscious of the need - which is externally imposed on us , but nonetheless very welcome - the need , before Poznań and , particularly , before Copenhagen , to have a very clear EU position on the emissions trading system , as we are now calling it .
I have the responsibility to be the rapporteur for the European Parliament on this most important part of the package .
I welcome that responsibility and have broad shoulders .
I hope I will live up to the trust placed in me , and I look forward to working with rapporteurs across all the political groups to get an agreed position as soon as possible .
There are just two concerns I would like to raise today .
First of all , the lack of recognition of carbon sequestration , particularly afforestation ( as distinct from avoided deforestation ) : forestry and carbon credits - the lack of accreditation in this area .
A huge omission .
I would like to hear , through the Chair , from the President of the Commission as to whether we can make good on that .
I know there are some discussions going on somewhere in the Commission , but it is like finding a needle in a haystack to find out who is doing what where .
They try to run when one talks about carbon sequestration , particularly afforestation and avoided deforestation .
I know it is difficult , but we cannot leave it out .
The second point I would like to raise is that the Commission - having said it would decide which energy-intensive industries would get free exemptions , at least initially , and in the absence of an international agreement , and that by mid-2010 the Commission would decide which industries would so qualify , and then take another year to come up with answers to the carbon-leakage problem - has caused a huge clamour from likely energy-intensive industries for more and earlier legal certainty .
We do not want any delay in this decision , because it will result in lack of investment in these areas or investment being put on hold and likely to migrate to other regions .
Please , political direction early - now , if possible - on this very difficult area .
( HU ) Thank you very much , Mr President .
I would like to speak on two topics : climate change , and research and development .
Mr Barroso began by saying that the Spring Council was a moment of truth .
I suggest we continue in this vein .
The objectives , the road maps and the various policies set out in this regard by the European Union institutions are good and adequate , I believe , and the goals are as ambitious as they need to be .
The problem that I foresee is more likely to relate to their implementation .
The will to implement these goals on the part of the Member States is variable , and in many cases there is disappointingly little will to do so .
I would like to call to your attention the European Environment Agency 's recent report stating that carbon dioxide emissions in Europe have not decreased since 2000 , but have increased .
I suggest we should be honest about this .
Sadly , the attitude and behaviour of Member States is far from united , let alone desirable .
In practical terms , the eastern half of Europe is doing nothing .
It is operating on the basis that its industry collapsed after 1990 , and so it still has considerable reserves .
Europe 's western half , rather than cutting emissions , has increased them , despite its Kyoto promises .
Only a few countries - Germany , the United Kingdom and Sweden - have met their Kyoto commitments as regards reducing carbon dioxide emissions .
We must take note : being flexible is not synonymous with doing nothing .
Similarly , the European Environment Agency report shows that the Member States of the European Union will have to pay EUR 2.9 billion to use the clean development mechanism - the instrument of the Kyoto Protocol - starting this year .
Europe is increasingly lagging behind as regards research and development too .
The goal of according a 3 % share of GDP to R & D is no longer much more than fantasy .
The United States and Japan are forging ahead , while many Member States , my own country included , barely manage 1 % of GDP .
Wakey-wakey !
The ambitious plans are in place ; now we need ambitious implementation of them .
Mr President , the second topic of the summit , the climate / energy package , remains in some contradiction with the first one , the Lisbon Strategy , or the competitiveness of the EU .
Emission limits for the less developed countries of the EU are extremely low , not taking into account the future GDP growth rate in those countries .
However , I very strongly support the package .
I support it , even knowing that it is a major step for our economy and will cost EUR 60 billion per year .
How can we help our economy , then ?
I can see only one way , maybe the simplest : cheap , efficient , new low-carbon technologies .
We cannot achieve that in the short term without financial support at EU level .
Common European funds for new technologies means , firstly , partnership .
You spoke about that in your speech , Mr President .
Secondly , you also talked about the fifth freedom and the flow of knowledge .
Thirdly , European added value for innovation means a more innovative Europe .
Fourthly , give a strong political signal for European industry to start with co-financing those technologies to take responsibility for them .
We need such new technologies for energy efficiency , renewables , zero emission , coal use and nuclear energy .
We need at least EUR 2 billion per year .
This means EUR 10 billion from now until 2013 - in advance , as a matter of fact .
In this way we can diminish the cost of the climate / energy package to our economy .
Additionally , in future we can also offer our technologies to third countries , to develop emerging economies and - in reality , not only theoretically - to save our planet .
Finally , I would like to add that I believe in our priorities - energy , fighting climate change , the Lisbon Strategy - but we need some EU money for our priorities .
( SK ) Mr President , thank you for allowing me to speak in this debate .
A working visit by the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection in China from 16 to 21 March in which I participated confirmed my belief that it is high time for Europe to kick-start its knowledge-based economy , and to encourage the creativity and innovative abilities of small and medium-sized enterprises for the future development of the European economy .
I personally experienced how well the Chinese export economy is doing today thanks to its investment in research , innovation and education , enhancing the basic technological skills of the workforce and transport infrastructure .
The Chinese Government gives massive support to Chinese firms .
I am therefore pleased to see that this year 's EU spring summit plans to create a ' fifth freedom ' based on cross-border mobility of knowledge , focusing on the need to make knowledge more accessible and on the recognition of qualifications and diplomas .
That is the only way to enhance the quality of life for our people and the only chance we have of becoming a competitive knowledge-based economy . Thank you .
( DE ) Mr President-in-Office , Mr President of the Commission , Mr President of Parliament , I agree with Mr Karas on one point , namely that it is not about the number of times that the word ' social ' is mentioned but the spirit of the text itself .
Nonetheless , I must contradict him .
It is precisely this spirit which is lacking in the text , even though the word ' social ' appears time after time .
What we want , as the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , is for the social dimension to be enshrined not only in the text but also in the policies that we are helping to shape .
We cannot continue to have a situation in which the social dimension is the fifth wheel on the wagon , as it were , which is how it appears in the Council 's text ; social union must be the driving force behind Europe 's policies .
Only then will we be able to convince our citizens that we are doing something useful for them .
That is the message we want to convey .

( HU ) Mr President , the fact that we have avoided a poor compromise on the issue of climate change is very important .
I would like to draw Mr Barroso 's attention to the fact that the directive currently being drafted on renewable energy sources , expected to be ready in autumn 2008 , will only bring results if it takes adequate account of the need for Europe to take joint action to develop methods and technologies , as renewable energy is still too expensive at present , and otherwise the 20 % goal will be illusory .
The other matter relates to interoperability and flexibility .
Please take into account that the new Member States dismantled their industry from 1990 onwards , and we would like the emissions reduction for the period 1990-2020 to be included , because this makes it fair .
We do not want to reduce our emissions by less than the old Member States ; we want to make the same reduction , but the particular situation in our case was different .
Thank you for your attention .
( FR ) Mr President of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , Mr President of Parliament , the icecap is melting and this morning Mr Pachauri , head of the IPCC and Nobel laureate , told us of his concerns .
He spoke about the possible sudden increase in the sea level and we are aware of the consequences that would entail .
Of course , we must act quickly and effectively , and the 10 % biofuel target will have a negative effect when we are hoping for the best .
Ladies and gentlemen , we must prevent this poor decision and adopt a positive approach instead : let us do away with the 10 % target .
Finally , Mr Barroso , I would like to put one question to you : I would like to know why you did not tell President Sarkozy that the European Union already had a European Neighbourhood Policy and it was entirely unnecessary to invent a new structure : one that , at the end of the day , would be an office of 20 people whose job would be to resolve the problems of the Mediterranean , without any consultation .
I personally believe that it is actually an insult to our Mediterranean partners that they were not consulted about the establishment of this project for a Union - a symbolic term for those of us who are part of the European Union - for the Mediterranean .

( PL ) Mr President , I am glad that one of the specific measures to bring about development through knowledge mentioned by Mr Barroso was the provision of an Internet connection for every school .
This is very important because it ensures equality of opportunity for all children and young people .
The question arises , however , as to how the poorer Member States are to cope with this challenge , and what help the Union will offer .
Another matter I would like to raise is the establishment of the European Institute of Innovation and Technology .
I believe it would be worth accepting Wrocław 's proposal .
Wrocław would indeed be a suitable city in which to locate the seat of this Institute .
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) I would like to thank all the Members of Parliament who offered their comments on the conclusions of the last session of the European Council .
I must say that some of them were very substantial .
I am especially grateful to Mr Daul and others who supported the continuation of the Lisbon reforms .
I think it would be wrong to respond to the current challenges in the financial markets and the global economy in general by saying that we should abandon or temporarily interrupt the reforms .
I am very pleased with this support for the second cycle of the Lisbon Strategy .
As regards social policy in the European Council 's conclusions , I should say that I have been personally involved in the work of the European Council for four years now and we have never before spoken so much about the social dimension of the Lisbon Policy .
This goes for all the conclusions and not only item 14 .
The social policy was included in all items where it was necessary to do so .
However , it is still a fact that for prosperity in Europe , we need real economic growth .
The appropriate social policy can be built only on the basis of real economic growth , which we will achieve through the Lisbon reforms .
All commitments to the welfare state are in vain if there is no growth and if there are no resources for the social policy , so I think that these are in the correct order .
I would also like to add that the social policy has been included in numerous other projects .
During the Slovenian Presidency , we have come very close to solutions on some issues .
For example , I hope that we are just about to complete the directive on the transfer of supplementary pension insurance rights .
A consensus on this question is just a step away .
I hope this project will be concluded soon .
Together with the European Parliament we are working on declaring 2010 as the year of the fight against poverty and social exclusion .
This would give greater importance to some of the conclusions relating to social policy that were reached at this session of the European Council .
Regarding climate change and some of the sceptical comments made about the conclusions relating to it , I must say that this session of the European Council did not change any of the commitments undertaken last year , so it could not be said that it was less ambitious .
We moved a step closer when we agreed on the schedule for adopting this environment and energy package and , of course , when we agreed the key principles .
Without this agreement there cannot be any concrete steps forward .
I would like to draw your attention to the fact that the only successful fight against climate change is a global one .
The numbers make it very clear : The United States emit into the atmosphere 5.817 billion tonnes of CO2 , the European Union 5.177 billion tonnes , China 5.059 billion tonnes , the Russian Federation 1.543 billion tonnes and India 1.147 billion tonnes .
Even if the European Union stops all emissions of greenhouse gases , the world will still be faced with the dangers brought on by climate change .
These proportions are therefore clear and the key target is not just to reduce emissions from the European Union , but to reach a global agreement - without that we will achieve nothing .
When we look at per capita CO2 emissions , we can see that the United States emit 20 million tonnes per head of population , the European Union 10 million tonnes , the Russian Federation 10 million tonnes , China 3.2 million tonnes and India 1.2 million tonnes .
These figures tell us that those of us who have been emitting more CO2 per head of population for a considerable length of time need to make greater changes .
The European Union committed itself to these greater changes last year , and this year we have planned a way of achieving them .
I think the fears that we may have made a retrograde step when we expressed concern about energy-intensive industries moving from Europe to environments with lower standards are unfounded .
The relocation of energy-intensive industries to areas with lower ecological standards means more than job losses in Europe .
It also means that we have contributed nothing to reducing emissions , because these industries will emit their greenhouse gases somewhere else .
Therefore , whichever way we look at it , we can see that we can be successful only if we achieve success over the entire planet .
This is where the European Union made a great step forward with the commitments it undertook last year , when the world was seeing many changes .
For example , Australia joined the Kyoto agreement .
We can also detect positive moves in the United States .
China , which will quite soon overtake Europe in greenhouse gas emissions , has also made some positive signs lately .
All this is largely because Europe took the first step , and the European Union must continue to lead .
As regards the decisions and conclusions of the European Council and their effect on European citizens , I think there are few conclusions which will have such a great and long-term effect on the individual as these .
If we want to be successful , we must change our habits and adjust our way of life .
This is very demanding , but circumstances require it .
Therefore , these conclusions will have a long-term effect on every individual .
Based on the debates in the last few years on the importance of combating climate change , I am of the opinion that the mood of the European Union is such that we can follow this road .
Finally , I would like to comment on the remarks made about the Mediterranean Union .
This was a statement adopted by the European Council , not a conclusion .
I would like to remind those who were listening to the statement of priorities for the Slovenian Presidency in January that the statement , on which the Council was united , included everything we considered to be the criteria for a good project .
All the Member States of the European Union are included ; there is no duplication of the present institutions .
That is why it is no longer the European Union , but the Barcelona Process , that is to say the Mediterranean Union .
It is building on something that already exists , which means that we will not have to duplicate administration and it will not demand additional costs .
Thirdly , the European Commission is involved in further preparations , which of course ensures the practical and operational involvement of the whole of the European Union .
What some of you pointed out as a problem was also emphasised at the session of the European Council .
The eastern dimension , that is to say the Black Sea dimension , of the European neighbourhood policy was also given appropriate attention .
Our Polish colleagues addressed this project or , more precisely , this part with a suggestion and we gave them the task of making a more concrete proposal .
On the basis of the preparations to be carried out in the meantime , the European Union will debate this topic in June .
I think the European Council paid full attention to the concerns and positions expressed by the European Parliament in the matter of the Mediterranean Union .
President of the Commission . - Mr President , I think the debate , generally speaking , has shown support for the conclusions of the European Council .
At the same time , there were some clear differences regarding the level of ambition .
Let me say very frankly that I think we should not underestimate the ambition that was just reiterated regarding climate change and renewables and , generally speaking , our energy policy .
Let us not forget that we are speaking of a common policy for 27 different Member States with different energy mixes , different priorities , sometimes different concerns when it comes to security of supply , also - let us be even more frank about this - very often with different levels of awareness of the problems of climate change and environmental commitment .
So it is not an easy task to reach a common approach for a common energy policy and ambitious goals on climate change for Europe .
We do not do ourselves a favour in undervaluing what was achieved a year ago under the German Presidency in the European Council and what has now been confirmed with more precise targets in the European Council under the Slovene Presidency .
I also understand concerns - in fact I have expressed them myself before the European Council - about the delivery .
Are we or are we not going to deliver on those commitments ?
This is indeed a serious concern .
However , I will advise distinguished Members of this House not to be pessimistic because a lot will depend on you .
A lot will depend on the role of the European Parliament because now the proposals are there and , together with the European Council , you are the legislators .
So , instead of being sceptical about how far we are going , let us keep to our commitments and let us show our ambition in concrete legislative work .
I welcome the remarks by all those who have mentioned the commitment and the will to work for that goal in due course , as have Mrs Doyle and others .
To answer some of the concrete questions , starting with Mrs Doyle 's question regarding the energy-intensive industries : let us be clear that the goal is and remains an international agreement , for reasons well known to everybody .
It is not just European warming , it is global warming .
We need a global agreement to face a global challenge .
At the same time as we are working for the global agreement , the directive should clearly spell out the mechanisms in favour of energy-intensive industries to be fully or partially activated if the international negotiations fall short of our expectations .
This being said , what exactly must be activated and for whom will depend on the outcome of the international negotiations .
That is why we cannot now , today , state precisely and in detail the concrete mechanisms for those specific sectors of our industry .
But what we want - and what we will do already - is to give legal certainty .
I understand the point : we can and already do give legal certainty to those concerned .
That is why the directive that we will propose should bring full legal security to energy-intensive industries because they will already know that either the directive or an equivalent international agreement will apply to them .
This was always the Commission 's intention .
I myself , together with my colleagues in the Commission , have been consulting with some of the leaders of European industry and they accept this point , generally speaking .
What they want is to be sure that , in the event of there being no agreement , there will be some mechanisms to safeguard their competitive position .
I think this is a fair position , not only with the business community , of which I have been speaking , but also with social partners .
There is the European Trade Union Confederation , which we also spoke about .
We are very concerned about this issue and we believe it is possible , but not by reducing the level of ambition now .
If we reduce the level of ambition now , we will not be credible when we have discussions with our external partners , with our American partners , or with the Chinese , Indians and others .
They are very much engaged and , incidentally , seeing some progress on their side - not enough , but seeing some progress .
The concrete question about afforestation is very important .
As you know , in Bali we stated our commitment to promoting afforestation .
On the question of credits for afforestation , we are not against credits .
On the contrary , in principle we are in favour .
They are not yet included in the conclusions because there are some methodological difficulties .
So we are preparing this point and of course we are ready to discuss your contribution .
The contribution of others will also be welcome .
We are now in the process of consulting our stakeholders .
Another point that was highlighted by some of you , namely Mr Buzek and others , is the need to invest more in technology and innovation .
This is true .
That is why , for instance , we have suggested that the first Knowledge and Innovation Community of the new European Institute of Technology should be devoted to climate change , energy and environmentally friendly industries , because this is a major concern and we now need to streamline some of our programmes in the European Union within our budget and with the resources we have available , in order to put more priority and more emphasis on this area .
Certainly it will require a huge effort .
We never said it would be an easy task .
It is going to be a very difficult task .
We have a very demanding and challenging task in front of us but I believe that with real commitment - commitment that this Parliament has shown in the past - we can deliver on this , with innovation , with more technological investment and of course working with our main partners .
Concerning the other point about the Lisbon Strategy , as has already been said by Prime Minister Janša , I think there is now a much greater awareness of the social dimension .
I also noted what Mr Schulz said today and has indeed said in the past .
That is why we are preparing a very important package in terms of access , opportunities and solidarity , which will be ready before the summer .
We would like to work with you , with all political forces in this Parliament , in that manner .
But I would like to give you a word of warning .
Please do not ask the European institutions for what they cannot deliver .
We have areas of responsibility that we should assume but there are others that are mainly the responsibility of the Member States .
No one is asking for responsibilities relating to social security , employment and national health services to be at European level .
What we can do is improve and indeed invest more in some European instruments , in order to promote social goals and also , as we have been doing through the Lisbon Strategy , promote jobs .
When we speak of economic growth in Europe , I of course mean sustainable growth .
This means growth that is sustainable from a social and environmental point of view .
I think that is quite obvious .
We have to realise that the instruments available at European level are limited .
You will remember that when this Commission proposed a ' globalisation adjustment fund ' , a new instrument , there were some arguments against that instrument concerning subsidiarity and questions why something that should be done was being done only at European Union level .
We got the agreement in the end and I am happy to see the instrument , even if it is modest , now exists and is a concrete sign of our commitment to look after those who are not the winners in globalisation .
Among those who are really pro-Europe and support the European project , I think we should be careful not to put the European Union in a position where it does not fulfil some commitments that the European Union as such cannot deliver if it does not have the support of the Member States and our governments .
A lot has to be done at national level .
This is why , while we can highlight that concern and you can certainly put forward proposals and legislative proposals for our package in May , it is important to do so with a sense of what is the responsibility of the European Union institutions and what is the responsibility of our national governments .
Finally , regarding the Mediterranean Union , I think we could make this project a good project for Europe that translates a renewed commitment to the Mediterranean .
It is true that we should do more - at the same time , hopefully , keeping the European Union together and not divided .
Of course when I speak of the European Union , I am not only speaking about the Member States but also about the European institutions .
Certainly we expect the European Parliament to retain a very important role in this Mediterranean Union .
That is a way of making the Barcelona Process and our neighbourhood policy more ambitious .
( Applause )
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( FR ) I would like to begin by thanking the President-in-Office of the European Union , the excellent Slovenian Prime Minister Janez Janša , his government and his administration for the very admirable and difficult work they have done .
As regards the results of the European Council of 13 and 14 March 2008 , I welcome the political consensus on the Euro-Mediterranean issue .
I am also pleased with the move towards establishing knowledge as the fifth Community freedom .
Given the current disruption in the financial markets , I am sorry that the European Council , a high-level political body in the Union , did not have the strength , wisdom or clarity of thought to propose a policy that might help to regulate the financial markets , at the very least within Europe , such as the establishment of European regulatory bodies in the key sectors of the internal market ( energy , postal services , telecommunications , auditing , banking , insurance , etc . ) .
Finally , given the current chaos in the monetary markets , I do not understand why these problems have not been examined at all or to only a minor degree : it is becoming urgent to interpret what is meant by the price stability envisaged in the mandate of the European Central Bank enshrined in Article 105 of the Treaty and to call on the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) to engage in a global monetary dialogue .
in writing . - ( RO ) The conclusions of the European Council of 13 / 14 March 2008 and the debates in the European Parliament of 26 March 2008 point out the importance of the EU neighbourhood policy and approve the Mediterranean Union principle , a more substantial mechanism of cooperation between the EU Member States and the non-member states in the southern vicinity of the Union .
I believe that EU priorities should also be focused on the eastern issue of the neighbourhood policy : to this end , I point out the necessity of closer cooperation with the Republic of Moldova .
Thus , I support the conclusion of a new cooperation agreement between the EU and the Republic of Moldova , with clear and strict references to the much required progress in Kishinev in the field of democracy , the federal state and the enforcement of human rights .
EU expectations should focus on assuring the true freedom of the press in Kishinev .
Flagrant cases of violation of freedom of the press such as the case of the journalists at the radio station " Voice of Basarabia ” or certain televisions or newspapers in Romanian operated or published in Kishinev have been frequently cited lately .
Such reports should not be a matter of indifference to the European Council and Commission .
I truly hope that a more consistent EU policy in the eastern neighbourhood will become a priority for the political action of the European Council and Commission .
in writing . - A co-ordinated long-term policy is needed which sets out ways to tackle climate change by sector .
The package submitted by President Barroso to the Parliament is a step forward and it is encouraging that the Council recognizes that the EU must agree on a range of policies before the end of 2008 .
I welcome the target to increase the use of renewable , sustainable energy by 20 % and there should also be a target in place to improve energy efficiency .
The package should include a target to decrease carbon emissions by 30 % by the year 2020 and targets for decreasing carbon emissions every year are needed at Member State level as well .
These targets need to be outlined in legislation .
It would seem that such legislation is the only way to guarantee that we are tackling carbon emissions properly in every aspect of policy making and political decision-making .
We must be careful that a target for motor fuel partially composed of biofuel does not cause damage .
Unless climate change is tackled worldwide disasters will result .
It will damage our surroundings , our economies and our society .
Following the decisions of the European Council , I have only one small comment to make on the guidelines for employment policies in the various Member States .
The European Council has confirmed ( which is not surprising ) the current EU guidelines in order to complete another stage in the liberalisation of labour markets and in the intensification of worker exploitation , with the aim of increasing capital gains .
This must be how to interpret these guidelines , which , under the deceitful guise of flexicurity , have the objective of increasing flexibility in labour markets , work organisation and labour relations , including what they advocate on amending labour law by revising , where necessary , various contract terms and provisions on working time .
The result will be more time at work , a faster rate of work , a loss of wages , fewer rights and less job security for workers , purely in the interests of employers .
Using this Trojan horse of the alleged modernisation of labour markets , job protection mechanisms , public administration and social welfare systems , the EU is confirming its goals of dismantling and destroying the economic and social victories of workers .
Given these goals , how can national referenda on the proposed Treaty be avoided ?
in writing . - ( RO ) The beginning of the new 3-year cycle of the Lisbon strategy was a central part of this European summit .
Among the Council proposals I would like to point out the importance of the principle of the free movement of knowledge within the European Union .
The introduction of this freedom should be supplemented by legislative proposals from the Commission to be presented in the course of this year .
I remind you that , in parallel with the Lisbon strategy , the Bologna process on the establishment of a common education space by 2010 should also be implemented as soon as possible .
Thus , mutual recognition of university diplomas and other formal and informal qualifications , the extension and adequate funding of European mobility programmes such as Erasmus , Comenius or Leonardo , as well as the launching of a new generation of educational curricula and institutions jointly elaborated by the Member States could contribute to the implementation of the free movement of knowledge .
In order to enhance the consistency of this new principle of Community law , we must also elaborate a programme with well-established deadlines to eliminate all current barriers to the free movement of knowledge .
I believe that a commitment to adopt a Charter of Intellectual Property Rights by the end of 2008 is a good step in this direction .
in writing . - ( HU ) The lesson to be learned from the March summit is that the world 's financial markets , and global flows of goods and capital , are poised between Scylla and Charybdis , and only responsible strategic thinking based on Community policy can help to avert the increasing uncertainty and shock to the European Union 's economy .
These fault lines , as we know , are not only breaking up the global economy .
In the Presidency conclusions of the Council meeting , considerable emphasis is given to a multifaceted interpretation of cohesion , which will be able to rely to an extent on Community resources , but there is also a warning inherent in the call upon national policies to speed up the reduction of their deficits and debt , and to spend any unexpected surplus income on this .
In other words , the hole in the budget is not just a matter for Member States ; it is also an impediment to implementation of European Union cohesion policy .
After all the fine pronouncements , it is time for decisions and for binding regulations , even if these sometimes entail announcing painful consequences .
As far as I am concerned , the first priority is unquestionably to increase young people 's knowledge capital .
Increasing the kind of knowledge that also reaches poor people , Roma people and immigrants .
Increasing the kind of knowledge that is European and broad-based , the kind of cohesion policy that does not rob poorer Member States of their intellectual capital by way of a ' brain drain ' , but that also finds a way , with solidarity , to reproduce the increasingly global and continuous flow of knowledge capital .
In this way , investment in people will represent a special comparative advantage in the global market , and movement of knowledge capital will not represent the threat of some new kind of delocalisation , but rather a source of wealth on a European scale .
in writing . - ( RO ) I would like to point out five themes among the conclusions of the Council , that thousands of Romanians , and perhaps many other Europeans , thought of this morning before leaving for work .
1 .
A reduction in the administrative burden under EU legislation .
The lesson should be learnt by all Member States , and for instance by Romania , where a reduction of bureaucracy costs by 1 % would generate a saving of one billion euros .
2 .
The adoption of the Small Business Act - the initiative on SMEs - and the principle of enactment taking account of small businesses .
This is a good idea for Romania , where SMEs account for 70 % of GDP and jobs for 60 % of the employed population .
3 .
The rate of unemployment amongst young people : Romania ranks second at Union level , with an unemployment rate of 21 % among young people .
4 .
The provision of quality , affordable structures for child care .
In large Romanian towns kindergartens cover less than 70 % of parents ' demand .
5 .
The improvement of energy efficiency .
A simple way to achieve this goal is thermal rehabilitation of buildings .
In Romania there are more than 80,000 blocks of flats that are an enemy to energy and cost savings .
Over the last six years , insulation work on two such blocks of flats started in the capital of Romania .
in writing . - ( RO ) The Council expressed its intention to conclude the climate change and energy package by the end of the mandate in 2009 , and for this reason the European Union must endeavour to observe this commitment and to remain a leader in the fight against global warming .
The goal is to conclude , in Copenhagen , in 2009 , an ambitious agreement on climate change , for the period after 2012 , so that EU preserves its credibility at international level .
Another important elements debated in the Council was the risk of relocation of CO2 emissions released by energy intensive industries which are exposed to international competition and will migrate to less regulated markets with a cheaper labour force .
The European Union is committed to protect the competitiveness of European industries and , implicitly , the jobs generated thereby , and this matter will be included in an international agreement on solving this problem .
The ambitious proposed package presented by the Commission represents a true challenge for the European Union and we , the European Parliament , will endeavour to assure that this package is finalised in 2009 .
in writing . - ( DE ) Last year we committed to tough and ambitious environmental targets and the time has now come to face up to the challenge of achieving them .
The imperative for the EU , however , is to attain its environmental goals without committing economic suicide .
We must not play ecology off against the economy .
I therefore welcome the compromise that was identified at the recent summit .
Combating climate change comes at a cost of course .
However , the cost of inaction will greatly exceed the cost of the mitigation measures required .
Nonetheless , it is essential to ensure that the burden of reducing CO2 emissions is divided equitably among the Member States and industrial sectors , and also , in my view , to ensure that those Member States that have already done more than the others to combat climate change are not put at a disadvantage .
The energy-intensive sectors must make their contribution to cutting CO2 emissions as well .
We must demand that they , too , convert their production processes to the latest environmentally-friendly technologies .
In the interests of competitiveness in the European economy , however , we must do our utmost to prevent any relocation of CO2-intensive sectors to countries outside the EU .
If the climate movement in Europe could motivate developing economies such as China or India to play their part as well , that would be a welcome step .
in writing . - ( FI ) The suggestion by the representative of the country holding the presidency that there was a link between the EU 's favourable economic growth and the Lisbon Strategy is not credible .
The Lisbon Strategy has none of the informed criteria that would explain the reduction in budget deficits and in public indebtedness or the creation of 6.5 million new jobs .
The credit for this goes to the Member States .
It is in their economies that the lack of any social dimension in the Lisbon Strategy is made conspicuous .
The buzzword for today is ' flexicurity ' .
It means that making working conditions more flexible should be rewarded with job security .
A better description of the spirit of the times , however , would be the world ' flexinsecurity ' .
EU nationals are being threatened with redundancy should they not agree to enforced flexibility .
in writing . - ( RO ) The European Union must become a leader in the fight against climate change .
The adoption of a less polluting policy would improve the quality of life of the 490 million of European citizens .
The Member States should develop policies and actions for energy security and the fight against climate change leading to sustained economic development and job creation .
The European Council established several guidelines : investments in research and development , promotion of ecological transport , review of the Directive on energy taxation , increase in energy efficiency and , above all , the provision of information to and involvement of European citizens in the fight against climate change .
The European Council held in March 2008 pointed out the importance of enhancing EU energy security .
The European Council held in 2007 declared the Nabucco project to be a project of European interest for the diversification of energy sources and energy security within the Union .
We are looking forward to the presentation , in November 2008 , of the revised strategic energy policy that will focus on the security of the energy supply , interconnection and the Union 's external policy in the field of energy .
I congratulate the European Council on the introduction of the fifth freedom : " the free movement of knowledge ” .
This is a great challenge to which the Union must respond by investing in human resources , SMEs and the social Europe .
Welcome
May I extend a very warm welcome to a delegation in the visitors ' gallery from the Tibetan Parliament-in-exile , led by its Speaker , Karma Chophel .
Welcome to the European Parliament !
( Applause )
Situation in Tibet ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the situation in Tibet .
For many years now the European Parliament has resolutely championed the cause of human rights in Tibet .
In numerous resolutions we have called for a constructive dialogue between the Chinese leadership and the Dalai Lama and respect for the human rights of the Tibetan people .
In doing so , we are guided by our principles and values , of which fundamental rights are an integral part : the dignity of each and every individual , and the realisation of their own and their ethnic community 's cultural and religious identity are the values we espouse .
The events in Lhasa , the capital of Tibet , and in other Chinese cities since 10 March this year are deeply disturbing .
We condemn every form of violence and the disproportionate use of the military and police .
( Applause )
We condemn the deaths of people who were acting peacefully .
We declare our solidarity with the Dalai Lama , who is a symbol of peace , understanding and compromise .
We cannot allow a situation in which the Dalai Lama 's name is linked with terrorism .
( Applause )
We cannot allow the demonisation of the Dalai Lama .
On a personal note , may I say that whenever I have met the Dalai Lama , the impression that I have always gained is of a person with a profound commitment to peace , reconciliation and human rights .
I have every confidence and trust in the Dalai Lama and wish to convey my great respect and appreciation to him .
I therefore call on those in power in Beijing to negotiate with the Dalai Lama and , while upholding the territorial integrity of China , to reach an understanding that respects and guarantees the cultural and religious identity of the Tibetan people .
The Dalai Lama has accepted our invitation to address the European Parliament as part of the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue , and this has been scheduled for the month of December .
However , I hope you will agree that in light of recent events in Tibet , the Dalai Lama is welcome here in the European Parliament at any time .
( Applause )
Dialogue and cooperation between the European Union and China are in our mutual interests .
China is a great nation and we wish to cooperate with China on the basis of partnership .
In a few months ' time , China will host the Olympic Games .
We want these Games to be a success .
However , there are certain preconditions for this : respect for the cultural and religious identity of the Tibetan people , and free and fair reporting before and during the games .
The fact that journalists and correspondents have been expelled from Tibet must therefore be condemned .
As someone who was very pleased to be attending the opening ceremony of the Games in Beijing together with the Presidents of the other institutions , let me make one thing very clear , here and now , in the plenary sitting of the European Parliament : every politician with a sense of responsibility must ask themselves whether they can take part in the opening ceremony if the Chinese leadership does not seek dialogue and compromise .
( Applause )
Ladies and gentlemen , we wish to make our contribution so that the world 's athletes can meet in fair and free competition in Beijing .
However , our values and our self-respect will not allow us to surrender our principles .
We in the European Parliament have a special responsibility in this regard .
( The House rose and accorded the speaker a standing ovation )
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) Ladies and gentlemen , the European Union is following with anguish the development of the situation in Tibet and the neighbouring provinces in China which have a sizeable Tibetan population , such as Tsinghai , Szechwan and Kansu .

European Union representatives have been in frequent contact with Chinese representatives ever since the start of the disturbances in Tibet .
In response to the request by the European Union , their Chinese counterparts gave the EU troika the first report on the events in the Tibetan capital , Lhasa , on 15 March .
The situation in Tibet was also discussed at the meeting of European Union representatives with the Chinese Deputy Foreign Minister on 17 March .
Both sides agreed at that meeting that dialogue about the events in Tibet must be continuous and open .
Following the incident at the Chinese Embassy in Brussels , European Union representatives were invited for talks with the same official on 19 March .
Because of numerous protests in Europe relating to the events in Tibet , this official demanded an apology and compensation in the event of damage to Chinese Embassies .
At the beginning of last week , on 17 March , the Presidency expressed its deep concern in the light of numerous reports about the disturbances in Tibet .
It expressed its deepest sympathies to victims ' families and stressed that it would like to receive from the Chinese government urgent clarification of the situation in Tibet .
The Presidency advised all parties to act with restraint .
It called on the Chinese government to renounce the use of force against the protesters and to respond to the protests in accordance with internationally adopted democratic principles .
At the same time the Presidency called on the protesters to renounce violence .
It emphasised the importance it gave to the right to free expression and peaceful protest .
As we know , the European Union supports the territorial integrity of China , but it strives for peaceful reconciliation between the Chinese authorities and the Tibetan religious leader , the Dalai Lama , and his representatives .
That is why our statement calls on the Chinese government to respond to the concerns of the Tibetans in respect of the human rights .
The European Union is encouraging both parties to enter into constructive dialogue .
This could be the foundation for a permanent solution which would be acceptable to all and would respect Tibetan culture , religion and identity .
In addition to the previously mentioned statement by the Presidency , the European Union called on the Chinese government to allow independent international media access to Tibet .
This is an issue that you yourself mentioned , Mr President .
The Chinese have so far rejected the suggestion , saying that media access would be allowed as soon as the situation in Tibet became safe .
The international community is still unable to obtain reliable information on the numbers of casualties among the Tibetan protesters .
During the latest discussions , the Chinese authorities hinted to the Slovenian Presidency that , in the next few days , it would allow a group of European journalists access to Tibet and freedom to report .
The Presidency hopes that this will come to fruition .
I would also like to stress that we have asked the Chinese authorities for clarification on the future fate of those protesters who had not reported to the authorities by the end of last week .
They answered that all those who violated Chinese laws would be prosecuted according to current legislation .
The European Union expressed concern that further detention of protesters who had peacefully expressed their will might cause renewed tension between the Tibetans and the Han , that is to say the Chinese community in Tibet .
At the same time the EU would like to stress that national security legislation should not be applied in order to restrict human rights .
Mr President , you also mentioned the question of the Olympic Games in China .
I must emphasise that , at last week 's informal ministerial meeting in Slovenia , the European Union Ministers for Sport , together with the Presidents of the national Olympic committees of all the Member States , the countries of the Western Balkans and Norway , unanimously adopted a declaration in which they stressed the importance of the Olympic movement and its values in promoting and supporting human rights .
At the same time they spoke out against a boycott of the Olympic Games .
They did not discuss participation in the opening ceremony .
The Presidency is of the opinion that a boycott of the Games or other sporting events in the year of intercultural dialogue would not be an appropriate response to unresolved political questions .
It could also mean a lost opportunity to promote respect for human rights .
May I also say that the session of the Human Rights Council in Geneva was marked by concerns about the situation in Tibet .
In the debate on the Vienna Declaration and the Action Plan , the European Union invited both sides to avoid the use of force and to respect internationally approved standards of human rights .
Dialogue between the European Union and China has been continuing this week .
In yesterday 's telephone conversation , the President of the EU General Affairs and External Relations Council , the Slovenian Foreign Minister , Dr Rupel , and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Peoples ' Republic of China , Mr Yang Jeichi , discussed among other topics the situation of the Tibetan community .
Dr Rupel reiterated to Mr Yang the European Union 's hope that the Chinese authorities and the Dalai Lama or his representatives would begin dialogue as soon as possible .
At the same time he called on the Chinese authorities urgently to release protesters who had peacefully expressed their opinions .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I am very happy that this debate is taking place today because the Foreign Ministers are still to discuss exactly how to deal with the situation .
The debate today is therefore a very timely one .
It is good that I can also give you my preliminary thoughts on it .
Like you , Mr President , we , the Commission , are also deeply concerned about the unrest and the violence in Tibet .
We are concerned about the reports of many people killed and wounded , of looting and burning .
While there are divergent figures - as our Council President just said - on the number of victims , one thing is clear : the number of those killed or wounded seems to go into the hundreds .
We therefore convey our sympathy and condolences to all the victims and their families .
Violence is never acceptable and will not contribute to finding a lasting solution .
We therefore call on the Chinese authorities to exert the maximum restraint when dealing with protesters and in particular not to use force against those involved in peaceful demonstrations .
The Commission urges the Chinese Government to allow independent media access .
I am encouraged by the fact that the Chinese Government has informed the Commission that it is now organising a foreign press trip , including European correspondents , to Tibet for coverage from 26 to 28 March .
This is an important element , as independent verification of the facts is crucial for the understanding of the situation .
I hope that foreign media will be able to do their work without restrictions .
We will continue to monitor developments closely .
The European Union firmly supports peaceful reconciliation between the Chinese authorities and the Dalai Lama and his representatives .
A lasting solution can , as we all conclude , only be achieved by peaceful means and by a sincere and honest dialogue .
We strongly encourage the Chinese Government and the Dalai Lama to enter into such a constructive and substantive dialogue - there has been a lot of dialogue but no substantive dialogue - with a view to reaching a sustainable solution , acceptable to all , that will fully respect the Tibetan culture , religion and identity .
The European Union has always supported the sovereignty and territorial integrity of China , including Tibet .
But this does not imply that the human rights situation in Tibet and in China in general is purely an internal affair .
They are legitimate concerns of the international community , a fact which is underlined by the existence of instruments of international law for the protection of human rights for over half a century .
We attach high importance to the right of expression , including the right of peaceful demonstration without restraint .
We therefore also call on the demonstrators to desist from violence .
We are going to take up these issues with the Chinese side , also in our regular human rights dialogues .
Within the context of the forthcoming human rights dialogue , it has also been proposed that the next field visit in China should go to Tibet .
The recent developments have made this suggestion even more relevant .
I am aware of the protests last week in front of Chinese diplomatic missions , some of which have turned violent and where some material damage was caused and some missions blocked by protesters .
This is of course regrettable .
I understand that the situation has now calmed down and I am confident that the relevant EU Member States ' authorities will protect the Chinese missions in accordance with the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations .
Let me finally say a word on the question of the Olympic Games .
We believe that the Olympic Games are not a political event .
But they should be held in an environment commensurate with the message of peace inherent in the Olympic spirit and in an atmosphere of freedom of speech and freedom of media .
Of course , we will all see and closely follow how things will unfold in the coming days and weeks .
For now , I think the most pressing question is how we as the European Union can work together to deliver a strong and coherent message to the Chinese authorities and to the Tibetan demonstrators : a message which will help bring the violence to an end and the two sides together in a really substantive dialogue .
on behalf of the PPE-DE group . - ( HU ) Ladies and gentlemen , the Olympic Games are a symbol of peace and reconciliation .
We , the citizens of Europe , must stand firmly by our common values : respect for human dignity , liberty and human rights .
We , my friends , cannot simply stand by in silence while a government murders its own citizens .
We cannot tolerate wholesale trampling on human and minority rights .
This is why the group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) demands that the Chinese authorities call a halt to the violence and the intimidation of their citizens and the Dalai Lama , and we call upon them to initiate peaceful dialogue on reconciliation and autonomy in Tibet .
We consider His Holiness the Dalai Lama to be our friend and a figure of unquestionable moral authority , and we welcome the responsible stance he has taken regarding the current situation .
I welcome the responsible statement made by the President of this Parliament , Hans-Gert Pöttering , that we should deploy every possible means at our disposal to urge the reluctant Chinese authorities to halt the violence and respect human and minority rights .
Ladies and gentlemen , as I mentioned earlier , the Olympic Games are a symbol of peace and reconciliation , and this is what they must continue to represent .
The Olympic Games are a symbol of human achievement and of the values that bind human beings together , and this is what they must continue to represent .
Do the Chinese authorities seriously think , indeed do we seriously think that it is possible for the world 's sportspeople to come together and compete happily and harmoniously while the government that is hosting the Games is simultaneously murdering its own citizens ?
Do the Chinese authorities seriously think ( ... )
( Loud applause )
Do we seriously think , ladies and gentlemen , that we freedom-loving people will be able to shake hands with leaders who are holding a machine gun in their other hand ?
Ladies and gentlemen , the time is not yet ripe to call for a boycott ; the Olympic Games are still five months away .
We must , however , state our opinion with absolute clarity , namely that we call upon the Chinese authorities immediately to halt their power-crazed behaviour on the issue of Tibet , which is jeopardising this great world sporting event .
They must end the bloodshed , they must end the violation of civil liberties - of press freedom , freedom of association and religious freedom - and they must stop intimidating this man of peace , the Dalai Lama .
Stop the massacre , stop the violation of civil liberties , stop the intimidation of the Dalai Lama !
( Applause )
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I hope it will be useful for the European Parliament to make its voice heard on the tragic events in Tibet , prior to the meeting of the European Foreign Ministers .
It is important , first of all , to act on the request of the Dalai Lama for an independent commission to go to Tibet so as to let the world know the truth and the true scope of this tragedy .
Then there is the situation of numerous prisoners , and reports of disappearances , reports of recourse to torture : we must shed light on all of this .
Secondly , the appalling crisis of the last few days should make the international community strive to find a negotiated solution which - with due respect for the UN resolutions that do exist even though no one refers to them any more - enables the Tibetan people to see their culture , their language and their religion being respected .
For this purpose among others , the political role of the Dalai Lama is irreplaceable : indeed , he is the guarantor of a balance which does not push the Tibetan question all the way to independence , but consequently he is nonetheless intransigent on the question of his people 's rights .
While there is still time , it is vital to defuse the tension between Chinese nationalism and the Tibetan independence movement .
The words which the Dalai Lama addressed to his people , even threatening to resign , testify to the risks .
That is why , if the Chinese authorities really want peace , they must accept the political role of the Dalai Lama and enter into direct negotiations with him .
The brutal repression of the past few days could indicate that the Chinese have made their decision , and if that decision is taken to extremes it will end in tragedy .
Finally , on the Olympic Games , I wish to say the following to Europe 's governments : please do not make us watch this spectacle about who is and who is not going .
The Dalai Lama has maintained with some justification that to isolate China would help neither the Tibetan cause nor the more general cause of human rights .
I think it is wrong to say that the Dalai Lama cannot do otherwise , because that implies the man is insincere , whereas he has demonstrated that he is not ; such statements can only weaken him .
The message we wish to send to the Council is this : shoulder your responsibilities , present a united front ; what we need is not a gesture but a coherent long-term policy .
Then we shall start to look at China without the schizophrenia which has led multinational companies , including European ones , to oppose progress in the field of trade union rights , and we shall send a clear message to the Chinese authorities , namely that a major economic and commercial power has obligations on both the domestic and international fronts ; this applies before , after and even during the Olympics .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , 70 years ago - I have not been able to count the days - Europe , the Europe of nation states , declared that it could not and would not die for Danzig , that cowardly Europe , that anti-liberal - although formally antifascist - Europe , in its entirety , was jointly responsible for one of the two most horrific wars ever , those scars on the face of humanity .
Today , in different ways , we do not wish to die for Darfur , we did not wish to die for Yugoslavia and we do not wish to die for Tibet .
This Europe really is the Europe of nation states .
Take a fresh look at Spinelli and read the Ventotene Manifesto , listen to the words of the Dalai Lama and you will see that the choice of autonomy , the ' free Tibet for a free China ' stance , represents everything that constitutes the Europe we are now losing : our European homeland , which we are sadly now once again turning into a Europe of nation states .
I therefore believe it has to be said that Mr Solana should have remained silent ; he has already proclaimed ' I am going to the opening ceremony ' .
Another important point is the realism shown by the Dalai Lama and by Karma Chophel , which suggests to us that we should not be raising the apocalyptic problem of non-participation in the Olympics , but taking action in the form of not endorsing the opening ceremony .
We should be saying , through Mr Solana , ' sic stantibus rebus ' , we are not going , rather than continuing to present this shameful spectacle .
For free China , for free Europe , free Tibet !
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think we were all hopeful that , in view of the Olympic Games , China would demonstrate that its development was not merely that of a major economic and trading power but also that of a nation capable of embarking on a new era based on the observance of human rights which have all too often been violated , and hence a nation prepared to recognise those individual liberties still being denied today .
Several times in recent years the Chinese Congress has spoken of the need to create a harmonious society , but those words have remained a dead letter .
As far as Tibet is concerned , nothing has come of the autonomy guaranteed by an agreement between the parties on freedom of expression and religious worship .
Rather , there has been an upsurge in repression , hundreds of people have died , hundreds have been wounded , and monks and citizens alike have disappeared .
The European Union , in roundly condemning what has happened , must respond with appropriate political initiatives .
If the Chinese authorities refuse to enter into a constructive dialogue with the Tibetans and to shed light immediately on the people who have disappeared , it will be necessary to review the economic and cooperation agreements between the EU and China .
The attendance of political dignitaries at the opening ceremony of the Olympic Games should take place only if , before then , human rights are guaranteed , trafficking in the organs of people put to death is investigated , the Tibetan monks and citizens are released , and dialogue with the Dalai Lama is initiated .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , for 10 years Europe 's leaders have taken part in the Olympic Games of Indifference : running the fastest after contracts , jumping as high as possible over human rights and flying as fast as possible over the oppression in Tibet .
That has been going on for 10 years !
Olympic Games in a dictatorship are a political act , whether we like it or not , whether the law likes it or not .
What do we do in this situation ?
When the Olympics were held in Germany in 1936 , that was a political act that we all regret .
What do we do in this situation ?
Firstly , the European Union and all its leaders must in this situation refuse to attend the opening of the Olympic Games .
That is a political sign , a political act that we must support .
( Applause )
Secondly , these Olympic Games are going to take place .
Forty years ago , African Americans gave the clenched-fist salute and if today an African American is perhaps going to become the President of the United States it is partly thanks to these actions at the Olympic Games .
That has to be recognised .
( Applause )
I therefore say ' yes ' to civic sportsmen and sportswomen : they should be allowed to say what they want at the Olympic Games .
I say ' yes ' to civic journalists : they should watch the athletes jumping , running , swimming , but also , with white , red , black and any other banners , they should make Tiananmen Square a place of freedom , where people can say what they choose .
Thirdly , the spectators must be civic spectators : they must go to the Olympic Games to watch their countries ' athletes running , jumping and swimming , but at the same time without wanting to see gold medals hanging round their necks and blood on their shoes .
That is the reality of Beijing today !
Today it is Tibet 's turn and not just human rights activists , but also environmental activists .
Tomorrow or the day after there will be the ruling on Hu Jia , and who knows what sentence he will receive .
Why ?
Because he was a human rights activist and an environmental activist .
Because order reigns in Beijing .
There are hundreds and hundreds of arrests there .
As Greens , what we want is for everyone who goes to Beijing - I am saying this as it was said 40 years ago - to create havoc there , to speak , to say ' yes ' to the Olympics but also ' yes ' to freedom , and to say that the Chinese must understand or they will regret ever wanting to host the Olympics .
If order reigns in Beijing , if everyone stays silent , if the whole world acts like the International Olympic Committees , that will be a victory for the dictatorship in Beijing and in Tibet .
If the people speak , if we allow uncensored access to the Internet , I can tell you that it will be a great moment for the Olympic Games , for sport and for democracy , because sport and democracy must go hand in hand ; otherwise , there is no point jumping , running or swimming .
( Applause )
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the safeguarding of human rights in China does not begin and end with the Olympics .
We did not await the Olympics to express our firm condemnation of the Chinese Government for failing to respect human rights and democratic guarantees .
I would recall that we recently voted in this House against the proposal from the right and the conservatives to annul the embargo on arms sales to China .
Then too , the background to that request was the desire of many Western governments not to compromise their dealings with Beijing .
The same motive recently prompted President Bush to remove China from the list of countries committing the most severe human rights violations .
Unfortunately , we have to realise that the old Latin proverb ' pecunia non olet ' ( ' money does not smell ' ) is still extremely popular with our governments .
The only point in boycotting the Olympics would be if the West really were prepared to give observance of human rights pride of place in international relations , but in that case the European Union would not only have opposed the idea of holding the Olympics in China ; it would long since have included a democratic ' observance of human rights ' clause as a binding condition in trade agreements with that country .
None of this has happened , and the aim is still to protect the interests of large Western multinationals .
Indeed , the value of trade between the United States and China amounts to $ 167 billion , and that between the European Union and China to $ 190 billion ; 24 million Chinese workers are employed by foreign franchisees .
That is why the earth 's major powers believe they should rely on China as a safety raft for their economies and tolerate its infringements of fundamental rights .
Chinese capitalism was convinced that years of rapid economic growth would dampen separatist demands , but this has not been the case , primarily because the Chinese have never bothered to ask the Tibetans what model of economic growth they would like .
However , Tibet is by no means the sole example of China 's failure to respect human rights .
We are witnessing on a daily basis the closure of numerous popular newspapers and international websites , increasing discrimination against migrant workers from rural areas , thousands of whom are , for example , excluded from health insurance , and thousands of members of Protestant , Catholic and unofficial churches being imprisoned and tortured , not to mention the repression of the Uyghur community , the forced labour camps and the death penalty , which is still widely applied to punish about 68 non-violent economic crimes .
Symbolic acts are all very well , of course , but by themselves they serve only to allay our consciences .
We are convinced that the months between now and the Olympics represent a unique opportunity for the international community , and in particular the European Union , to oblige the Beijing Government - not only diplomatically , but also through specific trade-related initiatives - to release all those who have been arrested , guarantee the independent media access to Tibet , and open negotiations with both the Tibetan Parliament-in-exile and the political movements leading the protests on the ground , in order to reach a peaceful , diplomatic , agreed solution that is respectful of the rights and choices of the Tibetan people .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , for some hours the official Chinese propaganda has been saying that the situation in Tibet is under control again .
These statements , as we know , conceal a bloody repression .
The reaction of the European authorities is doubly appalling .
Firstly , although we must welcome the fact that President Sarkozy is becoming increasingly vocal and is not excluding boycotting the Olympic Games , the attitude of his Foreign Affairs Minister is more than questionable .
Bernard Kouchner has on several occasions used the expression ' our Chinese friends ' .
Does he know that this bloody dictatorship is trampling over human rights and threatening the Tibetan national identity ?
Does he know how many political prisoners there are , the youngest in the world being the Panchen Lama ?
We have to wonder : is it still right for him to talk about human rights on behalf of the country ?
Since the Han Dynasty , the Chinese have believed that they are superior to the rest of the world .
The Communist regime has only served to exacerbate this attitude by advocating an ideology that suppresses all individual and social demands and , in particular , all national demands .
In Asia as in Europe , empires and ethnicism are the enemies of the nation .
That is the second reason why I am appalled .
The European leaders are guilty of a wait-and see attitude in relation to the Tibetan crisis : they who without even thinking recognised Kosovo 's independence a few weeks ago .
By imposing the pure , simple and immediate independence of this Serbian province , home of Serbia 's historical and spiritual cradle , Europeans and Americans have risked provoking serious reactions and developing an inconsistent international policy .
The policies on Kosovo and Tibet give the impression of unacceptable ' double standards ' , which destroy public faith in diplomatic action .
In conclusion , if we do not take account of national heritage and traditions , if we do not ensure fair treatment of people 's rights , we run the risk of seeing our proclamations on human rights being mere incantations devoid of any meaning .
I therefore say : long live the Europe of free nations , long live the free Tibet and long live a world of free nations !
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , 113 years ago the famous French Socialist Jean Jaurès wrote that capitalism contains within it the seeds of war , as clouds foresee a tempest .
I personally would say that communism brings with it oppression as surely as clouds bring the rain .
Since Mao , China has thus been a slave for 60 years to one of the most terrible dictatorships in the history of mankind , and yet Mao was worshipped and acclaimed enthusiastically by much of the European intelligentsia , including the then sorcerer 's apprentices who are now the current French Minister Bernard Kouchner , the philosopher André Glucksmann and many other Maoists , which should have been enough to discredit the revolutionary undertakings of 1968 .
Yes , Mr Cohn-Bendit , there were not very many of us in the 1960s and 1970s who opposed your friends at that time and their revolutionary thinking and rejected the Asian people 's enslavement to the Marxism so extolled by your friends .
Today the net has tightened somewhat from an economic point of view and the progress made in a short space of time by the Chinese , one of the most intelligent and industrious races in the world , has helped to mask the political reality , which is that it is still a dictatorship : no freedom , no real elections that are representative of the population , no independent judicial system , persecution , imprisonment , execution of political , intellectual or religious dissidents .
Like the Mongols of Outer Mongolia , the Uyghurs or the Turkmen people of Xinjiang , Tibet is suffering this oppression that seeks to destroy its identity .
However , everything distinguishes that identity from China 's : the people , language , writing , traditions , spirituality .
In the case of Tibet unfortunately , there is only military occupation and political repression ; there is also immigration .
You objected earlier when Kosovo was mentioned , but questions as diverse as Kosovo and Tibet have something in common : they are the consequences of the immigration policy on the indigenous people .
These consequences are terrible , but what is even worse is that , not content with pretending this reality did not exist , we allowed this process to begin in many parts of our own territory .
Mr President , the recent brutal suppression of the Tibetan protestors is hardly surprising , given the People 's Republic of China 's long track record of totally ignoring human rights and democratic freedoms .
We here , of course , are all calling on the Beijing authorities to exercise maximum restraint and to respect the cultural autonomy and unique way of life of the Tibetan people , and to stop demonising the Dalai Lama .
China has a lamentable history of executing more people than anywhere else in the world , including for so-called ' economic crimes ' .
It represses unregistered religious minorities and believes in state censorship , including that of the internet which , to its shame , Google has colluded with .
Nevertheless , the economic might and global importance of China in security terms means that EU leaders , such as UK Prime Minister Brown on his recent visit to Beijing , are reluctant to raise these issues with the authorities for craven fear of jeopardising foreign investments .
Nevertheless , many - in this House and elsewhere - are , understandably , now calling for a boycott of the opening ceremony of the Beijing Olympic Games , if not for a total boycott of the Games themselves .
What is more surprising , in my view , is the double standards of the West .
Last month , many EU States and the USA - ignoring international law and citing humanitarian interventionism - unilaterally recognised the independence of Kosovo , dismembering Serbia .
However , we in the West remain unquestioningly committed to the ' One China ' policy , ignoring the rights of self-determination of democratic Taiwan to be allowed to even join the UN , even though Taiwan is an independent country de facto and has never been ruled by the PRC .
Speaking personally , and not for my group or my national party : surely , for the EU , re-examining the ' One China ' policy would be a far more effective way of signalling our displeasure for the Chinese brutal Communist dictatorship .
Mr President , since 10 March , unprecedented demonstrations have taken place in Tibet and at least three Chinese provinces , and in Beijing .
The Chinese Government claims that 18 civilians and one policeman were killed and a total of 623 people injured during the protests in Lhasa on 12 March .
Tibetan exile groups have reported that at least 800 people died during the protests .
The Economist correspondent who was in Lhasa as the riots broke out reported on the scale of destruction and violence .
First of all , the European Parliament should call on the Chinese Government - as Human Rights Watch rightly demands - to lift its lockdown of all Tibetan areas , including full media access ; account for the missing and dead from this month 's protests ; publish the names of all individuals and their places of detention ; and give immediate access to independent monitors , who can investigate whether detainees are being tortured or mistreated .
Secondly , we urge the Chinese Government to enter into constructive dialogue with the Dalai Lama .
The Tibetan community and the Dalai Lama himself also need to think about the security and feasible future of the Han Chinese in Tibet .
My last point is that there is now a great responsibility on all international actors in the current situation - particularly the sponsors of the Olympic torch , such as Coca Cola , Samsung and Lenovo - not to associate themselves with the highly repressive situation in the region .
( NL ) You have quite rightly pointed out , Mr President , Commissioner , that human rights have never been a purely domestic issue .
Wherever human rights are violated , we in the European Parliament must object to such violations and bring charges in every case .
It is , therefore , a good thing that we have good relations , economic as well as political , with the Chinese authorities .
Now we must use these relations , through you , Mr President , and through every delegation that goes there , every parliamentary committee or delegation such as mine , which maintains relations with China .
We must use them first of all to ensure that press can do its job and provide us with reliable information from Tibet .
I also want to ask you , Commissioner , to send people from our delegation in Beijing to Tibet as quickly as possible , to submit a request to send a delegation of people there , today if possible .
They need to go to Lhasa to see what things are like there , what happens to people who have been arrested and what is happening at the blockaded monasteries .
You have people available in Beijing .
Please make that request and let us know what happens so that we can find out what is going on in situ .
( PL ) Mr President , Tibet is just one small part of a much greater plan .
Currently , China is deliberately supporting each and every one of the authoritarian regimes in the world , from Burma through to Belarus and Sudan .
Chinese ideologues have made no secret of the fact that they wish to offer the world an alternative to the liberal and democratic road to development .
The fact that China has become the epicentre of authoritarianism is not a simply a regional problem for Tibet , Taiwan or the Uyghur people .
This epicentre of authoritarianism is making its presence felt ever more strongly in the world , at the expense of Europe itself and of the United States .
This is therefore the last opportunity to depart from a passive policy .
All European governments should act in unison and boycott the opening ceremony of the Olympic Games .
These Games must lead to the downfall of Chinese policy , otherwise they will lead to the downfall of the entire free world .
( DE ) Mr President , the brutal action taken by the Chinese military against Tibetan demonstrators has resulted in more than 1 000 people being injured and , it is thought , some 100 deaths among the Tibetans .
Shocking images have come to light despite the news blackouts and the expulsion of journalists .
It is quite obvious that China is miles away from any kind of suitability as an Olympic host .
The fact is that one of the criteria for the choice of Beijing as the venue for the Games - respect for human and minority rights - has not been fulfilled .
Yet again , however , IOC President Jacques Rogge has omitted to voice any criticism of this situation .
At the lighting of the Olympic flame in Athens - just like a year ago in his speech at Tiananmen Square - Mr Rogge has once again failed to make any reference whatsoever to the current situation .
Of course the athletes have been preparing for the Games , and their efforts should not be for nothing .
President Pöttering was quite right to describe a boycott as the last resort if the Chinese fail to effect major changes by August .
As President of the European Parliament 's Tibet Intergroup , I fully endorse this position .
I would like to express my gratitude for the solidarity that we are seeing very clearly today .
I hope , too , that our athletes , who are responsible adults , will not shy away from speaking out at any time and will utilise the presence of some 20 000 journalists .
Of course the Olympic Games offer political options .
Perhaps all the athletes could wear a black ribbon as a sign of mourning .
The Chinese have miscalculated : we Europeans will not look away .
The European Parliament , as the champion of human rights , spoke out immediately .
The Slovenian Presidency voiced its protest yesterday , in fact , at the UN Human Rights Council in Geneva .
Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , I would like to see the European Commission convene a special session within the framework of the EU-China dialogue .
EU observers must be sent to Tibet without delay in order to obtain an objective impression of the situation there .
In China , there are not only hardliners and not only nationalists .
I place my hopes in the reasonable people who are well aware that there is no moving forward without the cultural and religious identity of the Tibetans .
There is no alternative to the Dalai Lama 's peaceful path .
Only then can an Olympic spirit develop at all .
( Applause )
Mr President , the core issue in the current crisis in Tibet is not only about oppression , it is also about secession .
The violence in Tibet today is not only about human rights but also about power-sharing .
The lack of transparency is deplorable , as much as the provocative measures are manoeuvres .
Certainly we must ask the Chinese authorities to deal with these events in compliance with respect for human rights in a civilised , transparent and proportionate way .
At the same time , we must also recognise the right of China and the right of any state to take appropriate measures to protect the lives , freedoms and fortunes of its citizens as well as the public good .
Undoubtedly , China is not organised in accordance with European principles and values of democracy and human rights .
However , one cannot deny the opening-up of China in a Chinese evolution convergent with some of our values .
It is our right and duty to encourage that process and to insist on respect for human rights , including cultural rights and the protection of cultural identity everywhere in China , not only in Tibet .
Likewise , we should support democratic freedoms against both autocracy and theocracy .
However , in doing that , we must bear in mind that excessive pressure is more likely to slow down the reforms rather than to speed them up .
In this period , we should ask all those concerned not to make human rights the hostage of geostrategic agendas or to make the Olympic Games the hostage of political ambitions .
The Olympic Games should be a well-used opportunity for us to speak about peace , freedom and human dignity all over the world , in China first and foremost .
( FR ) Mr President , the crime in Tibet is equivalent to a crime against the European spirit and ideas .
Silence is a crime in certain situations .
I am pleased , Mr President , that your words today have broken the European Union 's silence and that enables me to address you , Mr President .
The people of Poland have experience not only of fighting for freedom but also of the round table , which became the instrument of that fight .
I ask you , Mr President , to launch an initiative for a round table that would bring together , around you , the winners of the Nobel Peace Prize , the representatives of Tibet and Tibet 's spiritual leader , the Dalai Lama ; you could invite the President of the Chinese Congress and the Chinese authorities .
This would be a goodwill gesture that could launch the necessary dialogue and debate .
I believe , Mr President , that this House is grateful to you for your words here today .
It would also be grateful to you for a new initiative , an initiative for dialogue and peace .
( Applause )
Thank you , Mr Geremek .
I will raise this issue with the Bureau and the Conference of Presidents .
It is not something that I can decide on my own , so I will put it to them .
( PL ) Mr President , we are today debating the next stage of the extermination of the Tibetan nation .
Tibet has never been part of China on a permanent basis .
The Tibetan people lived in isolation from the rest of the world and essentially enjoyed independence throughout the course of history .
I have to say that the statements by the representatives of the Council and of the Commission urging both sides to engage in dialogue are regrettable , because they confuse the victim with the perpetrator , as has become quite fashionable of late .
Mr President , I welcome your suggestion to arrange a boycott of the opening ceremony , and I call on others to act according to your example .
I should like to point out that Point 5 of the Preamble to the Olympic Charter states that any form of discrimination is incompatible with belonging to the Olympic Movement .
Accordingly , as we are unable to expel China from the International Olympic Movement , we should make our position clear through a boycott .
Mr President , the Olympic flame may have been lit last weekend , but the Olympic spirit died in the streets of Tibet .
It was killed by the most repressive regime on earth .
China sponsors genocide in Darfur , genocide against religious groups in China , and now genocide in Tibet .
For politicians of principle it is no longer a question of whether there should be a boycott of the Olympics , but what sort of boycott .
After my last visit to China in May 2006 , all whom I had contact with - ex-prisoners , reformists and so-on - were arrested , imprisoned and , in some cases , tortured .
I am thinking of Gao Zhisheng , of Hu Jia , of Sao Dong and others .
This is the real China .
That is why I called then for a debate in the EU about a boycott of the Olympics .
This debate shows that the free world , as colleagues have made clear , cannot and should not shake hands with murderers .
It is not just , as the President of this House has courageously said , a question of not attending the opening Olympic ceremony .
There are wider questions to be answered about the nature of the Olympics themselves .
The Olympic Charter , in Article 1 , talks about universal , fundamental , ethical principles .
The Chinese , in 2001 when they accepted the Olympic Games in 2008 , made commitments to reform .
Nothing has been done .
This Parliament asked , in a resolution in December - unanimously - that the IOC should make an assessment of China 's progress to reform .
Nothing has been done .
The IOC must speak up .
Parliament has begun a debate which will echo around the world , and I thank the President for initiating it .
We will come to ' catch the eye ' in a moment , but Minister Lenarčič has to leave , so I will ask him to take the floor once again briefly .
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) Thank you very much , Mr President , for allowing me to speak at this moment .
I would also like to thank the Members of Parliament for their opinions , suggestions and initiatives put forward in this debate .
As Mrs Napoletano and others mentioned , the Foreign Ministers will be meeting informally at the end of this week .
That will be an opportunity to exchange opinions on Tibet , which was the topic of today 's debate in this House , and your opinions , suggestions and initiatives will be very useful .
The opinions and positions of Members of Parliament will be taken into account as far as possible .
I should stress that the Council will strive to speak with one voice .
The Presidency will endeavour to make the Council 's statement clear .
The Council will be clear in its stance on the respect of human rights , the rejection of violence wherever it comes from , and support for the freedom of expression , including the right to peaceful demonstration .
As I said in my introduction , we will work in favour of dialogue between the Chinese authorities and the Dalai Lama or his representatives .
We will continue to maintain contacts with our Chinese counterparts regarding permission for international journalists to visit Tibet .
I have already mentioned the statements of the Ministers for Sport regarding the Olympic Games .
They said nothing about the opening ceremony .
Perhaps other Ministers will address that issue in due course .
I would like to reiterate that the Olympic Games in China should be viewed as an opportunity to promote human rights .
Thank you , Minister .
Please have the courage to convey to the Foreign Ministers a strong message about the situation as reflected in our debate and the mood here in the European Parliament .
Thank you for your participation today .
( PL ) Mr President , the centuries-old Olympic tradition goes hand in hand with the notions of peace and non-violence .
It is therefore shameful that in the country that is to host the Olympics in a few months ' time , people are being shot at and those who wish to express publicly their aspirations as citizens are being killed .
It was good that this state of affairs was roundly condemned in the House today during the debate , which is now drawing to a close .
In particular , I should like to congratulate the President of the European Parliament for his very strong statement .
At the same time , I should like to draw attention to the fact that in a country that is our immediate neighbour , namely Belarus , force is also being used to break up peaceful demonstrations and participants in the latter are being arrested .
Fortunately no weapons have been used there .
I believe that we should make it abundantly clear that we condemn events in Minsk just as strongly as we condemn events in Tibet .
( NL ) The recent violence in Tibet has again drawn our attention to the position of the Tibetan people .
The situation there regarding missing persons and the dead or wounded is very unclear .
China must clarify this and allow international organisations and the media to enter the area .
This summer the Olympic Games will be held in China .
The Games stand for peace and respect .
The Games are an outstanding opportunity for the Chinese people to come into contact with sporting and cultural values from the rest of the world .
Athletes have a crucial role to play in this .
Governments ought not to interfere at this time in their athletes ' participation in the Games .
Athletes can and must decide that for themselves .
On the other hand , politicians can distance themselves from the opening festivities .
I support the President of the European Parliament 's idea of possibly boycotting the opening ceremony .
It is crucial that the Member States act collectively with regard to this matter .
The European Parliament must take the initiative in this respect .
Mr President , I cannot say I was planning a trip to China this summer , but now I certainly will not be going .
Furthermore , I would suggest to my fellow Europeans , including our visitors in the gallery and all of my colleagues here , that we spread the word that it would be better to spend this summer in Europe .
( PT ) I , too , welcome the debate and comments on this issue .
I believe that we should not hold back on a single accusation or a single demand for respect for fundamental freedoms and human rights .
I must also therefore express my solidarity with Tibet , with the Tibetan people and with the Dalai Lama , whose words once again point to the right way forward .
In addition , I must express my solidarity with the Chinese people who are fighting for freedom everyday , with the sons and daughters of Tiananmen .
However , having said this , I am not in favour of a boycott of the Olympic Games .
I would prefer a clearer and firmer policy at trade level and in our political relations , because that is where we must act , not at the cost of sport and relations between people who are trying to promote human rights and freedom .
That is what we want .
I favour political measures , for example the absence of political leaders from the opening ceremony .
However , I believe that we must continue to fight for and put pressure on China to open up , rather than encourage it to shut itself off .
I believe that these Olympic Games will raise global awareness and will advance the causes of human rights , Tibet , Darfur and all those fighting for freedom and peace in the world .
( DE ) Mr President , China has been violating human rights on a massive scale in Tibet for years .
Whenever a communist dictatorship runs out of ideas , it sends in the tanks and troops .
I learned this harsh lesson myself 40 years ago in Prague , and now we are seeing the same thing happen in Lhasa .
The struggle for freedom and democracy in Tibet , in China , in Burma and elsewhere continues .
We must consider using all the instruments at our disposal , perhaps even a phased boycott of the Olympic Games .
We also urge the Council to appoint an EU Special Envoy for Tibet at last .
Long live free Tibet !
Mr President , the way the Chinese authorities are addressing the crisis in Tibet is proof that Beijing is unwilling to change its ruthless policies towards minorities .
It is cowardly and dishonest to claim the Dalai Lama is inspiring the riots .
I am proud of you , Mr President , for courageously taking a clear moral stand on the Tibetan issue and today declaring our unconditional solidarity with the Tibetan people .
Speaking about the Olympic Games , I think it is opportune to recall that seven years ago , in July 2001 , this Parliament concluded that China ' clearly fails to uphold universal human , civil and political rights ' and ' that this negative record and the repression in Tibet ... make it inappropriate ' for China to become the host of the 2008 Olympic Games .
Sadly , real life has proved the correctness of this conclusion .
I call upon the Commission and Council to demonstrate the same measure of solidarity with Tibet as has been demonstrated today in this Chamber .
Mr President , we cannot be silent before the killings in Tibet and the Chinese attempts to hide their extent .
Nor can we , of course , condone the anti-Han and anti-Hui racist violence which erupted in Tibet and neighbouring Chinese provinces , as much as we do not condone the racist slurs against Tibetans echoed in China .
But we all , including the Chinese people , should understand why Tibetans reacted violently , despite the Dalai Lama 's peaceful stance .
That outburst is due to the long-standing humiliations , pain and gross human rights violations endured by the Tibetans in Tibet , where they are becoming a minority as a result of the aggressive policies of Beijing .
We call for human rights and freedoms in Tibet as much as in China , where so many are jailed just for daring to express their views - like Hu Jia , just after he spoke to us here in Parliament last November .
Because I care , I do not support calls for a boycott of the Olympic Games in Beijing .
It would just be too convenient for those who continue to count on world indifference to go on oppressing the Chinese and the Tibetans .
Instead , it is a task for us all , as citizens of this world , to make these Games in Beijing become a true Olympiad for human rights , for freedom in Tibet , and for freedom in China .
( PL ) On the same day as the first partially free elections were taking place in Poland , namely 4 June 1989 , tanks were running down student demonstrators in Tiananmen Square .
The regime responsible for those events trades with its own citizens ' organs .
It is currently murdering Tibetans .
I cannot understand how China was ever allowed to organise the Olympic Games .
I support the request to organise an observation mission to Tibet .
Mr President , the recent events in Tibet have been atrocious , despicable and we all condemn them , as we should condemn many other acts of inhumanity by the totalitarian regime in China .
But , at the same time as we condemn them , we still trade in billions of euros with China .
Nobody in this House today has said that we should take action to hurt the Chinese totalitarian regime where it will feel the pain most , which is in economic terms .
The Commissioner here has in the past defended in this House the position that we should not take any embargo economic action against China .
So let us not kill the Olympic spirit .
Let us not destroy it , but let us try to destroy the dictatorship in Beijing and let all of us stop buying Chinese if we want to do something practical .
( CS ) I have been pointing out for several years now that we must not close our eyes to a gross breach of human rights in China , regardless of our economic goals .
Tibet is the tip of the Chinese iceberg .
I fully support the belief of the President of Parliament , Mr Hans-Gert Pöttering , that if China continues with its cultural genocide against the Tibetan people , boycotting the Olympic Games would be justified .
European politicians should express their disapproval with Chinese politics through non-attendance at the opening ceremony .
Politics is about symbols and gestures , and this would be a fitting gesture for European politicians , presidents and prime ministers .
Not only for me personally but for many Europeans this will be a test showing whether the European Union treats human rights as a transnational issue and a matter that touches us all , or whether it is going to take selective approach in the case of China .
I am very much in favour of the idea of sending our own observers to Tibet .
Allow me to make one more small comment : I do not like the fact that these days we can neither freely fly the Tibetan flag nor bring it along to any action with links to the Olympics .
The Olympic idea is based on the purity of a sporting spirit and this spirit most certainly does not go together with the silence of other countries during the Olympics about the fact that the organising country brutally suppresses the rights of the Tibetan people .
( FI ) Mr President , the 2008 Olympics are a unique opportunity for Europe to initiate a debate on the events in Tibet and the universal humanitarian values agreed by the United Nations .
Pressure must be put on China to keep the promises it has made in exchange for hosting the Olympic Games .
China must allow the UN High Commissioner of Human Rights into Tibet to carry out a thorough and impartial investigation into the events there to date .
The actors involved in development cooperation as well as the international press have to be guaranteed access to Tibet .
China 's civil rights activists must be allowed to act without the threat of arrest .
Now there is also an opportunity to support the worthy non-violent struggle on the part of the Tibetan leader and their exiled spiritual leader to achieve autonomous status .
China will be more inclined to listen to us right now than ever before or after the Olympics .
We should not exclude the option of a boycott if it helps to achieve results .
( DE ) Mr President , may I say that the Olympic Games are always a major sporting event , but always a political event as well , both for the IOC , and in this case also for China , because of the pledges that were made by the Chinese in connection with the Games , namely that they would respect human rights and ensure better protection of the environment .
In my view , they have yet to honour either of these pledges .
In fact , the human rights situation has seriously deteriorated and we need to react to that .
For that reason , I , too , believe that Europe should not be sending its Heads of State or Government to the opening ceremony .
However , we need to go further than that .
We need to have a genuinely European policy on China .
A strategic partnership is impossible to implement in full while these massive human rights violations are occurring , and so I would ask that we continue the dialogue but confront the Chinese with what they are doing and not allow any hypocrisy .
That means that when Angela Merkel , for example , meets the Dalai Lama , Sarkozy should not then be travelling to China to sell the TGV and nuclear power plants without once mentioning the word ' human rights ' .
The yardstick by which we , as Europeans , must be gauging our own performance is our human rights dimension , including in our dealings with China .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that we must help the Dalai Lama not only to say ' no ' , where he has clearly done so , but also to say ' yes ' where he has done so .
He has said ' no ' to independence ; he has said ' yes ' to autonomy , and it is with this proposal that he should be given help .
He has said ' no ' to violence ; he has said ' yes ' to non-violence , which means being proactive and may entail collective action : it is a policy which calls for knowledge , for an independent international inquiry to find out what really happened and is happening in Tibet .
He has said ' no ' to a boycott of the Olympics , but ' yes ' to whatever can be done to use this as an opportunity for the international community to make its political voice heard in favour of human rights .
Chairman Karma Chophel , who is about to speak to us in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , has also spoken of the need for everyone to take this opportunity to show support for the Tibetan people and for all oppressed peoples in China : the Uyghurs , the Mongols and others .
Therefore , Mr Solana was undoubtedly too quick off the mark - as the Council has also said - in taking a stance , in signalling his intention to attend , without having a mandate from the Council and without having heard the opinion of the European Parliament .
Mr President , I had the good fortune to be present as a spectator at the Munich Olympic Games the day before the tragic assassinations of athletes took place .
I know how hard Germany tried - and was successful - in effacing the memory of the Berlin Olympic Games .
I remember as well , of course , the Olympic Games in America , where some of the American athletes who were victorious on the podium rose with black gloves on their hands and wearing black socks .
In other words , the Olympic Games in its modern manifestation has always found it very difficult to avoid political events imposing themselves on what is meant to be a celebration of sport and of peace .
It might be that the Olympic Committee - and we have colleagues here in this House who sit on that committee - might consider that the flying of national flags is actually not in the Olympic spirit , and that it should be the Olympic flag which is flown .
As far as the Chinese authorities are concerned , I wholly agree with your words .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe one measure that can be adopted is for the European Union to ask the UN to ensure immunity from arrest for athletes of Tibetan nationality wishing to participate in the Olympic Games under their own flag and on behalf of their nation .
It is shameful that a country with which the entire world , including European nations , trades and does business should take the liberty of upholding its right to host the Olympic Games and obtaining the attendance of Heads of State and Government at the opening ceremony , while it is drenching in blood the freedom of its citizens , of an oppressed nation under military occupation and suffering bloody persecution .
The Tibetan people have a right to freedom and independence .
( HU ) Mr President , your excellent statement and the present debate show that the European Parliament does not want to remain silent , that it does not want to collude with a dictatorship 's oppression of a minority .
We know that it is very difficult to exert pressure on a country like China that carries great weight in global politics , and it is better to persuade them to negotiate with the Dalai Lama on Tibet 's situation .
The Chinese had the wisdom to find a solution in the case of Hong Kong and Macao based on the principle of ' one country , two systems ' .
This might be one way of resolving the present situation too : for Tibet to be part of China , but having very wide-ranging autonomy under the leadership of the Dalai Lama , because the current level of autonomy falls short of what the Tibetan people want .
Mr Geremek has provided a framework for this , and I would like to put forward an idea : let us try to persuade the Chinese that there is indeed a feasible solution that would maintain China 's territorial integrity while at the same time providing the Tibetan people with the autonomy they deserve .
Mr President , I am proud of you as the President of this Parliament .
( SK ) Thank you , Mr President .
I have some quite fresh impressions from my visit to China last week .
Our European Parliament delegation mentioned Tibet at every opportunity , at every meeting with the Chinese , in the Chinese Congress , at the Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs .
The Chinese were very nervous and did not allow any discussion about this issue .
I could see how preparations for the Olympic Games are progressing , how they have become a part of life of every Chinese citizen .
That is why it is so regrettable that the Chinese Government has not grasped the main mission of the Olympic Games .
Had it understood , it would not have sent convoys of Chinese army vehicles with thousands of soldiers to Tibet and neighbouring provinces .
The Tibetan people are devoted Buddhists whose religion is continuously oppressed by the government .
I consider the Chinese official policy towards Tibet to be genocide : an effort to destroy Tibetan culture and religion .
I am happy that we are hearing today in this democratic House a strong call for support for Tibet , a clear call for protection of the sanctity of the wonderful values of the Olympic Games and for a boycott of the opening ceremony . Thank you .
Mr President , in my view the European Union should have three objectives regarding Tibet and China .
The first is the immediate objective to end the violence , murders and especially torture happening in Tibet .
Torture is at present a much bigger problem than murders because for 50 years it has furthered the oppression in Tibet .
The second more mid-term objective is of course linked to the Olympic Games .
We still have five months to make sure that China fulfils its commitments .
Five months is a lot of time and it is now a very good time to make sure that the Olympic Games ' political goals - which were the reason why China got the Olympic Games - are really fulfilled .
Finally , the most important thing is that the high-level talks between the Dalai Lama 's representatives and the Chinese Government really can continue .
Since the talks began there has been very little progress .
I think that the European Union could give more support to the Dalai Lama to reach , in these peaceful talks , a really sustainable future for an autonomous Tibet .

Mr President , following Mr Kelam 's remarks about Parliament 's warning seven years ago , we have to consider what , if anything , has changed in China as regards Tibet since that time , and whether Parliament 's position has changed .
If nothing has changed , then what was said seven years ago should be reiterated now : ' It is inappropriate ' .
We therefore call on the Member States to behave properly .
I do not think that Parliament is any less the voice of Europe now than it was then .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , in conclusion , I would firstly like to say that this discussion has clearly shown that you have very strongly understood the frustration of the Tibetan people .
This has been a very passionate discussion .
I will certainly take back to the Council of Foreign Ministers the sentiments expressed in this discussion today .
As I said , the Council has to have a debate on this issue .
The core of this item for me is how to achieve concrete improvements in the situation in Tibet .
I understand the Chinese sensitivities on sovereignty but it is also fair to ask for respect for Tibetan culture and traditions .
We have reminded the Chinese time and again that its role as an emerging power and host of the Olympic Games also entails responsibility .
My message therefore is : firstly , stop the violence .
Violence has never , as I said before , achieved long-lasting results .
Secondly , engage in a substantive and constructive dialogue which addresses core issues such as what can be done to preserve the Tibetan language , culture , religion and traditions ; what steps need to be undertaken so that Tibetans may enjoy equal opportunities in education , in working life , the economy and society ; what must be done or not done so that Tibetans can still feel at home in their own region .
If these questions are answered , then the ghost of separatism might disappear and the right solution might be found .
No one can have an interest in the situation heating up further or people being radicalised and a lasting solution becoming less and less likely .
I think all sides should aim to strengthen the moderate elements , and I therefore strongly recommend addressing these questions together , in order to find a sustainable solution acceptable to all .
What we have been doing - and what we can do - is to have a human rights dialogue , as I said .
In this dialogue , by the way , the question of torture is always clearly put on the table .
Here again , as I have mentioned , we will ask for a special field mission .
We think this is important .
Secondly , I will take up the question that has been asked before : for our own delegation also to request a visit to Tibet .
I hope there is a chance , because - as I said earlier - there are journalists who have been admitted now , so hopefully our European Community will be there .
That is what I can tell you .
Thank you very much . I think it was a very important debate .
Many thanks , Commissioner .
Ladies and gentlemen , I think this has been one of the European Parliament 's finest hours , for we have championed the most important cause of all , namely human rights .
I think we can be grateful not only that we have come together for this debate - although for procedural reasons we cannot formally vote on a resolution ; that is something we will be doing in April - but also that we have signalled very clearly that we are on the side of the Tibetan people .
My appeal to you , and my advice - and I am confident that this will happen - is that we continue to observe what is happening in China and Tibet with our eyes open , and continue to raise our voices against the violation of human rights in Tibet and , indeed , elsewhere in the world .
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to all of you for your contribution to what has been one of the European Parliament 's finest hours .
Every Member who signalled under ' catch the eye ' that they wished to speak has been able to do so .
I think it is important , in such a passionate and important debate , that anyone who wishes to voice their opinion should be able to do so .
My heartfelt thanks go out to you for that reason too .
I hope our debate meets with favourable resonance in the European Union and beyond .
Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner , I am sure you will convey to the Council of Foreign Ministers the mood of this debate as well as our passion and commitment to the cause of human rights .
I wish you every success as you do so , and trust that the Council of Foreign Ministers will also draw tangible conclusions , just as we have done from this debate .
I now declare the debate closed .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( HU ) The Tibetan crisis fills all of us with alarm and we sympathise with the victims .
The Chinese government must protect human rights and not resort to violence .
The Dalai Lama is asking for autonomy for 