Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session suspended on Thursday 29 March 2007 .
Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Statements by the President
Last week , in the Turkish town of Malatya , three people working for Zirve , a Christian publishing house , were murdered in a particularly cruel manner .
This was a dreadful deed , one that I condemn in the strongest terms , and I would encourage the Turkish authorities to continue in their efforts to shed light on every aspect of this crime .
The Turkish Government has strongly denounced these attacks , and I would urge them most emphatically to bring those responsible to account for their actions .
The protection of religious minorities and of their rights is an important function of the rule of law in any democratic state , and this House condemns all crimes committed by political or religious fanatics against those whose opinions and convictions differ from their own .
I have to inform the House that the news has just reached us of the death of Boris Yeltsin , the former - and first - President of Russia .
We wish to express our sympathies to the Russian people .
Documents received : see Minutes
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Decisions concerning certain documents : see Minutes
Oral questions and written statements ( tabling ) : see Minutes
Written statements ( Rule 116 ) : see Minutes
Action taken on Parliament 's resolutions : see Minutes
Membership of Parliament : see Minutes
Membership of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Signature of acts adopted under codecision : see Minutes
Order of business
The final draft of the agenda for this sitting , as agreed by the Conference of Presidents meeting on Thursday , 19 April 2007 , in accordance with Rules 130 and 131 of the Rules of Procedure , has been circulated .
It has been requested that the draft be amended as follows :
Monday :
The Socialist Group in the European Parliament has asked that the vote on Mr Sánchez Presedo 's report on the Green Paper on damages actions for breach of the EC antitrust rules be deferred to Wednesday at 11.30 a.m.

rapporteur . - ( ES ) This report is the result of the enhanced cooperation between the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and the Committee on Legal Affairs .
It is going to be debated late tonight and there are certain amendments that we would like to consider in order to try to achieve the maximum consensus for the report .
This is why I would ask for the vote to be postponed until Wednesday , Mr President .
( Parliament adopted the motion . )
Wednesday :
( DE ) The Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe has moved that the vote on Mrs Bowles ' report on basic information on Purchasing Power Parities be deferred until Thursday at noon .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I can be very brief .
This is just because we received a legal opinion from Parliament 's Legal Service very late on Friday and we need to make a few comparisons with the text agreed with the Council .
( Parliament adopted the motion . )
( DE ) The Socialist Group in the European Parliament has moved that it should be possible to submit motions for a resolution following the Commission statement on the strengthening of European legislation in the field of information and consultation of workers , with the intention that the texts be voted on at the next part-session .
Mr President , we are delighted that there will be a statement on Wednesday evening from Commissioner Špidla on information and consultation .
We would certainly like an opportunity to table a motion for a resolution to recall the often-repeated position of this Parliament : we think that the European Works Council Directive needs to be reviewed .
We understand the position of our Liberal colleagues , however .
They would prefer to hear what the Commissioner has to say before pinning themselves down to a resolution .
We therefore request that the motion for a resolution be attached to the statement , but not voted on until the next mini-session in Brussels .
Mr President , we are against the motion for a resolution and whether we should link it to the Brussels part-session , because we take the view that important issues should be dealt with in committee .
We have committees in order to make the decisions of Parliament strong , important and reliable and therefore we stick to that .
An important issue should be dealt with in committee .
That is why we have committees in this Parliament .
( Parliament adopted the motion . )
( The agenda was therefore adopted . )
Declaration of financial interests : see Minutes
Advanced therapy medicinal products ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Mikolášik on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on advanced therapy medicinal products and amending Directive 2001 / 83 / EC and Regulation ( EC ) No 726 / 2004 C6-0401 / 2005 .

Mr President , honourable Members , I am very glad that we are able today to talk about the regulation on medicinal products for advanced therapies , which has been long awaited , and is of enormous importance to innumerable sick people in Europe , to many of whom these new therapies offer hope of new and life-saving treatment .
I am not talking here about the common cold , but about such conditions as cancer , Parkinson 's disease , AIDS , and other dreadful scourges .
So far , no single legal framework has been put in place , with the consequence that many patients are not in a position to benefit from the treatments that are available , or they end up being prescribed medications that are not safe .
By means of this regulation , we are preparing the way for easier and safer access to the ones that will save their lives .
The proposal is also of great importance for Europe as a centre for research .
With things as they stand at present , European researchers and manufacturers - who are often small and medium-sized enterprises - can neither grow nor hold their own in international competition .
Let me now say something about the legislative process .
While it is self-evidently a matter for your House as to how the procedure is handled , I would , however , ask you to bear with me as I appeal to you to come to a decision and to refrain from dragging the process out any longer , in view of the need to create unambiguous conditions for these innovative therapies , for which people have been waiting for so long , and it is for that reason that I am all the more pleased that three groups have put forward a comprehensive compromise package that will make a speedy agreement of that sort possible .
I am able to say , on behalf of the Commission , that we are able to endorse this package as a whole without any changes needing to be made , and I believe that the Council Presidency , too - although we have yet to hear it say so - is persuaded that the Council will be able to adopt the package as it stands .
I am perfectly well aware that we are dealing here with a particularly tricky topic , and we must be especially sensitive when considering ethical issues as important as this one , and so let me once again make it clear that our sole intention , with this regulation , is to ensure that patients get safe and effective medicines .
There is no other objective in mind .
The fact is that the regulation does not actually lay down whether or not medicines are ethically acceptable , and in this respect , we are abiding strictly by the subsidiarity principle , for ethical matters are reserved to the Member States , and we , in the European Union , cannot end up in a situation in which one of them can impose its ethical convictions on another ; that is not on .
The only thing that is workable is that we leave the ethical issues to the Member States , for that is what we have always done .
There is nothing new about it ; that is a policy that has been clearly established for many years , and there are many examples of it .


It follows , then , that the proposal neither compels the licensing of ethically problematic technologies at national level nor prohibits them from being used throughout Europe ; the proposal goes no further than respecting decisions taken at national level .
The important principle that donations of organs and tissue must be voluntary and unpaid applies as a matter of course , and is already enshrined in other legal acts .
Reiterating it in this proposal would therefore be superfluous .
What we should do , whatever happens , is lay down common safety standards for such products .
I do not think there is any argument by which we might justify acceptance of a standard of protection that varied from one Member State to another , which - among other things - would result only in patients and their various diseases travelling the length and breadth of Europe .
Despite the amendments proposed by the Committee on Legal Affairs , then , we should not remove ethically problematic products - those derived from embryonic stem cells , for example - from the scope of the regulation .
Let me say once more - and I do so in all seriousness - that today presents us with a unique political opportunity to adopt a regulation for which sick people in Europe , and the European medicines industry , have been waiting for a long time .
It is because this is an opportunity that we cannot allow ourselves to miss that I ask all the Members of the European Parliament to endorse the compromise package submitted by Mrs Roth-Behrendt , Mrs Ries and Mr Adamo on behalf of their groups , and to reject other motions .
If this regulation is adopted , it will promote innovation , make our research and industry more competitive , and , above all , help to save lives and deliver people from grave suffering ; all these things you can bring to pass by endorsing this package .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I should like to address you today as the rapporteur on the proposal for a regulation on advanced therapy medicinal products .
Furthermore , as a medical doctor , I should like to address the progress in medicine of highly specific medicinal products emerging onto the European market to treat patients with the diseases enumerated by the Commissioner .
I should like to seize this opportunity to thank the Commission for its proposal .
The time has come to treat patients with products which are safe , efficient and based on non-controversial grounds .
Since the beginning of 2006 , the European Parliament has been working hard on this proposal with the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy and the Committee on Legal Affairs .
The final report was adopted by a large majority .
There is a broad consensus within Parliament that the report by the Committee on the Environment , as presented for the vote in this House , is excellent .
All stakeholders , representatives of both the bioindustry and of patient groups welcomed it after its adoption last January .
Last week three Members of Parliament , on behalf of their political groups - Socialists , Liberals and GUE - tabled a number of amendments presented as a so-called compromise with the Council and the Commission .
This individual action was undertaken without the knowledge of the rapporteur .
I would like to underline that no agreement was reached with the other two institutions at the end of the informal trialogue that took place last month .
Ninety per cent of these amendments are a copy-and-paste of the committee report with cosmetic changes .
The most relevant are the 10 % .
These amendments concerning the more sensitive political issues are the result of an individual initiative of three of our colleagues .
As they mentioned in their letter last week , the interinstitutional agreement has not been finalised .
Furthermore , many of the amendments presented in the package do not have the support of the committee responsible , the other two committees nor of the rapporteur .
Therefore , I should like to urge all my colleagues to support the responsible report by the Committee on the Environment in the vote on Wednesday .
In order to speed up the legislative procedure , the informal trialogue with the Council and the Commission took place last month .
The three meetings showed discrepancies .
From a substantial point of view , several politically sensitive questions have not been solved .
From the point of view of procedure , the question was raised of the two amendments tabled by the Committee on Legal Affairs which were directly incorporated into the report under the enhanced cooperation procedure .
As the main rapporteur , I have tried to underline that the remit of that committee should be respected .
In spite of the clear provisions in the Rules of Procedure on enhanced cooperation between parliamentary committees , colleagues from the two other institutions and some shadow rapporteurs refused to consider these amendments in the light of the first reading agreement .
Apparently , enhanced cooperation is respected only when it suits certain colleagues .
It is welcomed in files such as REACH , but as far as advanced therapies are concerned .
Some go even further and misuse the voice of patients ' groups , declaring that the enhanced cooperation procedure is undemocratic .
I would like to raise one aspect of the proposal which still worries me : the principle of subsidiarity .
In its fully harmonising proposal , the Commission introduces an op-out for Member States to apply their restrictive national legislation concerning certain contentious products .
In practice , this would mean that certain products would not have access to the market of all Member States .
Following the opinion of our Legal Service , this provision presents serious problems of incompatibility with the legal bases and could therefore be annulled by the European Court of Justice .
If this is the case , this regulation would become a fully-harmonising measure for all products including those prohibited in some Member States .
Here , the two amendments from the Committee on Legal Affairs bring legal certainty by excluding from the scope products containing or derived from embryonic stem cells .
As rapporteur , I have to respect the diversity of 27 sets of legislation relating to embryonic stem cell research , from the complete freedom of research to the prohibition of killing embryos for research purposes .
If we do not support the amendments from the Committee on Legal Affairs , this regulation would de facto promote the development of products derived from embryonic stem cells , although this might be considered as ethically unacceptable by citizens and Member States .
As an elected representative of this House , I have the responsibility to listen to all opinions , to marry positions and to propose to our citizens a text which can be considered as modern , progressive and respecting universal principles and values such as human dignity .
I welcome the tone of the recent Berlin Declaration regarding European values , as well as the programme of the President of the European Parliament , who stated that the question of human dignity is at the core of his and of our approach when voting on European legislation .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy . - Mr President , Commissioner , first of all I should like to thank the Commissioner for his remarks about this proposal and report .
I warmly support them .
I should also like to state quite clearly that my committee , the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , supports this proposal and hopes that it will go forward smoothly .
So we share that objective .
Next I would like to remind colleagues that the interest groups - the patient groups who are most likely to be affected by this measure and to benefit from it - strongly support the measure .
I regularly see reports in the press of exciting new therapies and developments in this field , but usually they are in the USA and not in Europe , which is to our loss .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur for his work , but I have to respectfully disagree with him with regard to the two amendments from the Committee on Legal Affairs which seemed to me , and to many on my committee , to be pushing in exactly the opposite , retrogressive direction to that of this proposal .
So I join in supporting the compromise package which has been put forward , particularly by my distinguished colleague Mrs Roth-Behrendt , not least because independent observers tell me that this package is in line with the ITRE Committee 's position .
So naturally I support it .
( Interjection from Mrs Breyer : ' Are you speaking for the committee or on your own behalf ? ' )
I am speaking for the committee , Madam ; I am speaking in my turn , and you should wait for yours .
I would like to remind everybody that the world around us is changing technologically , socially ( although manners may not be changing ) , scientifically , and , as we can see in this report , biomedically .
We must not deny the patients of the future the therapies of tomorrow .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market . - ( DE ) Mr President , before I speak for the committee , I should like to point out an error to Commissioner Verheugen .
I think it is improper that he should give the impression that those who tabled the compromise had made sure it would make rapid progress ; the very opposite was the case , for it was those individuals who put forward the compromise who voted ' no ' in the first vote in the committee .
Now , though , for what I have to say on behalf of the committee .
The Rules of Procedure give the committee a most prominent role in the treatment of ethical issues , and I trust that everyone here accepts that - not just the Council and the Commission , but also many Members of this House , none of whom , I hope , are seeking to deny the members of the Committee on Legal Affairs their authority in matters of law .
We have considered this report in very great depth and adopted a multitude of amendments , two of which in particular - I am referring to Amendments 3 and 17 - were referred directly to the plenary in accordance with the enhanced procedure and are extremely important .


The committee calls for the reference to embryonic stem cells to be deleted , but why ?
As you know , the Court of Justice 's interpretation of Article 95 is that a fully harmonised measure must not allow derogations for Member States , so , it being a matter of doubt as to whether the article would stand up to the Court 's scrutiny , the committee has therefore proposed a precise wording supplementary to Article 28 ; that alone makes for legal certainty and clarity and is , most important of all , capable of standing up in the European Court of Justice .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , as the Commissioner has said , it is an exciting time in medical research .
We are on the verge of new breakthroughs , and the root for these is the development of advanced therapies , using gene and cell therapies and tissue engineering .
Gene therapy and somatic cell therapy products are already being clinically tested .
Some of the tissue engineering products are already with us .
This proposal is there to ensure that we deal with a complex issue in a sensible and universal way , through central authorisation so that we can pool scarce expertise at Community level , ensure the highest standards of patient safety across the EU and enable access to the European market and thus to all patients .
That is what it is all about and on that basis , I welcome my honourable friend 's report and congratulate him on the work that he did , not only in bringing the report through our Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety but in the subsequent work he has done negotiating with the Presidency in the trialogue .
We needed to look at various issues : the hospital issue , the small and medium enterprise issue , the medical devices issue .
Of course , with this comes a number of ethical issues and those are important .
However , my belief is that the EU 's job is to guarantee safety and efficacy , and Member States should take the ethical decisions .
I believe that is where we will conclude on this important measure .
We now have to look very carefully at the options before us in the votes on Wednesday to make sure that we take something through which has the wholehearted support of this House .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I shall say just two sentences about the substance of the matter in hand - with which all of us present here are familiar - and would then like to say something about the procedure .
Thousands of patients right across the European Union are waiting in desperation for new kinds of therapy that might alleviate their suffering or even save their lives .
To all those who think certain categories of therapy have to be excluded , in whatever country and with whatever laws being in force , I say , once more , here and now , what I said in the committee , and yes , I do mean it : you are cynical , you are irresponsible , and you should be ashamed of yourselves ; now take your ideas and put them to the patients - face to face .
Mrs Breyer is not squeamish either , so you can say it to her as well .
I should now like to say something about the procedure .
I will do this in English so that Mr Mikolášik will understand me directly .
Mr Mikolášik spoke about tabling amendments without the knowledge of the rapporteur .
It is not necessarily usual that one clears it with the rapporteur , Mr Mikolášik .
I would have loved to do that with you , but you stopped cooperating at an early stage in the trialogues .
I want to read out what we - Mrs Ries , Mr Adamou and others here - did , so that everybody is clear .
We tabled a package of 75 amendments .
32 are exactly identical to the amendments from the committee ; 18 amendments are slight linguistic changes ; 10 amendments are working on a compromise which you and I already agreed on before you stopped cooperating , and 15 amendments are linguistic or legal concerns .
That is the situation we are in at the moment .
I now want to add something concerning what you said before on the interinstitutional agreement .
I think we should just have a result as soon as possible .
Mr Mikolášik , you also said that we should have a first-reading agreement .
I agree , because thousands of people are waiting for it .
I am very grateful to the Commission and to the Council , who really supported us in reaching a result .
From my point of view , they have come as close to Parliament 's positions as they could - going further than I have seen before and further than I expected them to go .
Naturally , Mr Mikolášik , we compromised , you compromised and I compromised .
In fact I made a compromise as regards your group 's position on hospital exemptions and other things , because I thought , as some of you think , we should have a strong , safe regulation which makes sure that patients get the best scientific support and the best therapies in safe surroundings .
As regards the so-called ' ethical ' amendments , yes , Member States who want to ban the use of foetal stem cells should be allowed to do so , and , Mrs Breyer , everybody who says that the Court of Justice would deny that and would put it under Article 95 is either not knowledgeable - which you are not - and then giving the wrong impression , I am afraid .
If you read Article 30 of the Treaty , you are exactly sure that it says that public morality is always a reason to make sure that a Member State can ban something .
And that is what happened in the past .
That is what is happening at the moment in the European Union . We have always said that those Member States who allow research on it could continue .
However , the patients also deserve the right to have the safest , best products available , and that is why I tabled an amendment on subsidiarity , to make sure of that again .
That amendment is in the package .
It says that every Member State which thinks a product should not even be produced there , nor marketed , should be allowed to ban it .
In other Member States , the patients should have the freedom to obtain it .
That is what we are here for .
Mr President , Commissioner , Secretary of State , given that the rapporteur has already done so at length , I do not wish to launch into a detailed description of advanced therapies .
I shall merely reiterate the point that this is an extremely promising area of research and medicine , offering real solutions for people with third-degree burns , patients suffering from venous ulcers , diabetes , hereditary diseases and cardiovascular diseases , offering hope , too , for Parkinson 's disease and Alzheimer 's disease , and offering a solution finally , one day perhaps , to the tragic shortage of organs , which results in the deaths each year in Europe of thousands of patients awaiting donations .
In other words , there are countless numbers of patients - millions of them - who are awaiting this regulation .
It is not just patients who are awaiting it , but businesses in this sector , too , for , quite apart from the quality , safety and effectiveness of the products , quite apart from the need to make them accessible to everyone , without discrimination , the idea here , with this text , as the Commissioner pointed out , is also that we stimulate research and innovation .
Well , on three occasions already , those seeking to impose on us their vision of ethics and morality - and the rapporteur is one of them - have delayed and are still delaying the adoption of this regulation : in committee , in the informal trialogue - as my fellow Member , Mrs Roth-Behrendt pointed out just now - and perhaps again on Wednesday , I fear , with a request for referral of the report .
At the heart of the controversy and the deadlock are medicines made from embryonic or foetal stem cells , which the rapporteur wants to exclude from the centralised procedure and thus leave outside the scope of this legislation .
Things must be made clear , as clear as our Amendment 62 , which is in the package , and validated by the legal services of the three institutions , I should also like to point out : the Member States and they alone will decide which research and which products will be available on their territory .
Nothing will be imposed on them that contravenes their national legislation on ethical matters .
That is indeed , I believe , the definition of subsidiarity , and those who intend , in the name of subsidiarity - it is quite a feat , after all - to ban these products throughout Europe and prevent countries that want them from making progress , puzzle me .
For that reason , I formally reject Amendments 3 and 17 tabled by the Committee on Legal Affairs , together with the package of amendments endorsed by Mr Gargani and others .
Ladies and gentlemen , the choice is simple , after all .
Our credibility is at stake here , as is , I would say in passing , the consistency of our work and of our decisions .
I would remind you that , last June , we were authorising the funding of research into embryonic stem cells in the seventh framework programme for research .
I urge you today to support this compromise package tabled by the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe and the Confederal Group of the European United Left / European United Left .
Something that has not yet been said is that this package also has the support of a number of MEPs from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats and , contrary to what was explained by the rapporteur , it is accepted by the Commission and by the Council .
This package solves all of the technical issues ; it is a compromise that makes it clear that it is not Europe 's role to legislate on ethics , because , ladies and gentlemen , if the next few years are to be characterised by all manner of revolutions , it is up to us to give meaning to them , and to offer hope , not destroy it .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , despite the tremendous efforts made by Mr Mikolášik , the rapporteur , there may be significant weaknesses in our position on advanced therapies .
If the ethical amendments package is not supported , adequate guarantees will not be provided for countries that do not wish to destroy human life for therapeutic purposes .
Guarantees for human dignity may also be lacking .
Human dignity is currently under threat from the commercialisation of the human body , interference with the individual 's genetic heritage and the possibility of creating animal-human hybrids .
Europe is right to set human rights standards for the world , even though this sometimes seems a hopeless task .
The question arises as to why we adopt such a passive stance with regard to biotechnology and advanced therapies ?
We may be forced to give in twice .
Without a clear ban on the commercialisation of the human body we risk being forced to give in to the market , which will handle trade in cells .
Without a clear ban on interfering with an individual 's genetic heritage we risk being forced to give in to a cruel , eugenic and inhuman philosophy .
Such a philosophy always gives precedence to the quality of life over its inalienable value and dignity .
We should be ashamed that Asia is now setting standards for the European Union in this area .
The legislation in question cannot be endorsed without the ethical amendments package .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , the vote , the day after tomorrow , will put to the test how seriously we take the Berlin Declaration , which had a lot to say about values , and of whether we are willing to express those values in European law , or whether they are only empty words and a waste of paper .
There are three principles that we see as indispensable .

One is that the human body should not be exploited for commercial gain , and I have to tell Commissioner Verheugen that this is not laid down elsewhere ; nowhere , in fact , is this principle laid down and made binding in law .
I am amazed at the aggressiveness with which some seek to prevent it from being so .
Secondly , we do not want any interference in human beings ' genetic identity : we do not want tailor-made human beings .
Not only is that laid down in the Charter of Fundamental Rights , but it is also present in the bio-patent directive .
We do not want the choice of treatment to be determined by people 's wallets any more than we want , in the future , modifications of genetic material that would no longer be reversible .
Nor do we want monsters and hybrids ; what we want is for these things to be quite explicitly banned .
Were this House to unite against these three ethical principles , it would send a devastating message and would , indeed , in moral terms , represent a breach in the dam .
Since it is intolerable that naïve hopes and false promise of cures for conditions with which embryo therapies have next to nothing to do should be used as a means of sending this House down slippery ethical slopes , we must instead send out a clear signal for European values and ensure that ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , Commissioner , I too should like to take my turn in emphasising that the purpose of this proposal is not to harmonise questions of ethics or morals ; it is for the national competence of the Member States to be respected as regards whether or not sensitive products are used .
Such decisions must be taken on the basis of the principle of subsidiarity and must remain within the national competence of each Member State .
The personal , moral and ethical views of each of us must not conflict with this approach , especially as each Member State will be responsible for deciding which type of products it will allow to be imported and which not .
The crucial question is whether or not we agree that Europe should decide which products we shall market and which we must ban .
My answer is no .
Let me now remind you of the package of amendments - Amendments 82 to 156 - which also reflects the six months of consultations and attempts to reach a compromise with the Council and the European Commission .
Our objective is to reach a compromise at first reading , which is what is wanted by most of the associations of patients whose lives , in many cases , depend on a leading edge medicinal product .
In short , the immediate application of the regulation would mean easier , faster and safer therapies for European patients .
Europe needs this regulation and it needs it now .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , imagine someone who is in financial difficulty and who is racking their brains to find a way of making ends meet .
They decide to sell tissue and cells of their body for payment in order to eke out a living .
This situation is conceivable if we exclude the ban on the commercialisation of the human body from the scope of this regulation .
I would argue in favour of backing the amendment in this respect , not least to remain in line with the Oviedo Treaty and the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights .
I am also extremely anxious about the technical scope in the area of medicinal products modifying the human germ line as well as those derived from human-animal hybrids , as these techniques greatly affect human dignity .
Moreover , there are major differences in opinion among the various Member States .
I therefore hope that we can keep these products outside the scope of this regulation out of continued respect for the dignity of the human body and for the choices of the individual Member States .
We would , in my view , also reinforce the principle of subsidiarity by keeping these products outside of the regulation 's scope .
Since the regulation 's legal basis is Article 95 , which deals with the internal market , it appears possible , as the proposal is worded at the moment , for legal entities to bring charges before the Court against a national ban on medicinal products that are authorised at European level and to win their case .
This is something that must be avoided .
( FR ) Mr President , this evening we are debating a particularly important advance , which should enable future generations to benefit from high-technology medical treatments .
European patients therefore need to be able to have access to these revolutionary products , on a non-discriminatory basis , because of the potential that they offer .
It is also important to guarantee that these products are safe and effective .
The fact is that , without Community legislation , the situation varies from one country to another and is unfair for patients : some have access to products , when others have to go without .
As you yourself said , Commissioner , in a situation such as this , there will be medical tourism .
Therefore , if we are to overcome these obstacles , we need a clear , strict , framework encouraging investment and the growth of the biotech industry in Europe .
The technical section is therefore totally pointless in this context since , on account of subsidiarity , each Member State has the freedom to decide whether or not to ban this type of cell technology on its national market .
I particularly support the technical package that Mrs Roth-Behrendt has tabled in the form of amendments and that takes up all of the points of agreement that were reached during the various informal trialogues with the Council and the Commission .
I truly hope that we vote in favour of this technical package because , by doing so , we will be able to reach an agreement at first reading and to fulfil patients ' expectations quicker .
I absolutely regret Amendments 3 and 17 tabled by the Committee on Legal Affairs .
They simply prohibit any form of centralised authorisation for advanced therapy medicinal products derived from embryonic stem cells .
I should like to point out that the aim of this text is to guarantee the safety of new therapies , while facilitating research and development and the authorisation of products derived from these advanced therapies .
Amendments 3 and 17 put patients ' safety in real danger by excluding certain products from the very strict public heath requirements laid down by the regulation .
When patients ' safety is at stake , any form of discrimination is unacceptable .
The implementation of a European technical framework , which patients and the industry have been awaiting for several years now , must not serve as a pretext for imposing any particular ideological point of view .
Mr President , I would like to thank those Members who participated in the detailed processing of this regulation .
It is extremely important that issues as sensitive and complex as this are dealt with under the codecision procedure .
It reassures our citizens , whose national parliaments cannot vary a regulation , to see their MEPs engaged in preparing balanced and effective legislation which seeks to enhance their lives .
The therapies which this regulation seeks to deal with have great potential for treating cancer , Alzheimer 's and Parkinson 's disease .
Regrettably , and not unexpectedly , some reactionary elements are falsely claiming that this proposal overrides Member States ' rights on ethical issues .
They want to exclude products derived from embryonic stem cells from the scope of this regulation .
The effect of doing so would be to leave such products unregulated in many parts of Europe as regards their safety , quality and efficacy .
Contrary to these wild claims , the regulation does not circumscribe a Member State 's right to refuse to countenance embryo , stem-cell-based therapies .
Indeed I would deplore such a ban by any Member State .
This regulation is about saving life and about enhancing the quality of life , not its destruction - as is being claimed by some in this House tonight .
We owe it to tens of thousands of patients and their families to do everything we can to encourage and make available the most advanced treatments for some of the most intractable illnesses facing our societies today .
We also need to guarantee insofar as we can that they are safe and of the highest quality and that they actually work .
This is what this regulation seeks to do .
I fully support the PSE Group 's position and call on all Members - and indeed I would particularly call on all my Irish colleagues - to support this regulation .
Mr President , the regulation of tissue engineering products is both a necessity and an inevitability in the present era of rapid biotechnological advances .
Such advances offer a potential cure for hitherto incurable diseases .
But , as on many occasions in the past , one of the main obstacles to medical progress is not scientific limitations , but pseudo-ethical dogma born out of religious misunderstandings of God 's real wishes for mankind .
Such misconceptions have sadly changed very little since the Dark Ages ' comprehension of the physical world .
Accordingly , in these legislative discussions , we have again heard heated ethical disagreements and calls for the prohibition of anything to do with human embryonic stem cells , hybrid chimeras and payment for human tissue .
I ask you , colleagues , what is ethically wrong in using an animal ovary into which human genetic material is inserted in order to produce a certain human chemical and save someone 's life ?
What is ethically wrong with a unique human tissue being obtained from a donor in return for payment in order to use it in the treatment of a child 's cancer ?
After all , what is less ethical : to use embryonic stem cells or hybrid chimeras and to allow payment , or to let a child to die ?
( PL ) ( text missing ) and advances in biotechnology and biomedicine lead to the development of therapies described as advanced , including gene therapy , somatic cell therapy and genetic engineering , all of which should aim at preventing disease and improving the state of human health .
What has happened , however , is that experimental technology has been used to create animal-human hybrids and chimeras .
It has also been applied in cloning and in experiments to change the genetic heritage of individuals .
Techniques of this nature infringe ethical principles , and they are also problematic from a medical point of view .
They can cause side effects as they have a negative impact on health and they lead to the commercialisation of the human body .
The situation is aggravated by the intense competition between medical and pharmaceutical concerns .
It is not the first time this has led to the production of medicines or the use of D therapies with dramatic side effects .
Rejection of the amendments banning immoral practices reveals the irresponsibility of people who endanger the health and even the life of those they should be helping by condoning disregard for human dignity .
At the same time , solutions at European level can be a way of forcing acceptance by those who do not agree with infringing moral principles .
This amounts to a distortion of values and to putting the brakes on scientific research that complies with the principles of respect for human dignity .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , we should be clear in our own minds about the fact that all those who have given their attention to this regulation want to help patients ; Mr Mikolášik is a doctor , and so am I. Even though we may take a different line on some amendments , you should not take that as indicating any opposition to helping the sick .
Speaking personally , I do agree with Mr Mikolášik and with the amendments from the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market that have now been brought back in by Mr Gargani , Mr Morillon , Mrs Auken and others , which - and this is something you need to know , too - represent the position taken by the overwhelming majority of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , as determined by a vote we took last Wednesday .





I would like to turn to a subject that has not featured in this debate so far , but is very important if we want to know how we can create the right conditions for the companies that want to help patients .
There is at present a whole array of small and medium-sized enterprises that are already carrying out treatments in hospitals , whether the people treated are in-patients or outpatients .
Quite some time ago , these firms came to me and told me that , if the regulation goes through unamended and without easier arrangements for small and medium-sized businesses under national licensing schemes , they would no longer be able to offer those services .
That , rather than this or that promise of miracle cures , is what we need to bear in mind - the real live businesses that are there today helping patients and who say that the proposal for a Commission regulation is not as good as it is made out to be .
Nor does the so-called compromise package offer the small and medium-sized businesses a proper solution for their problem .
Amendment 127 provides for SMEs working in tandem with a hospital to be exempted from the requirement for a European license .
SMEs working outside hospitals , though , and facing fewer risks , are obliged to go to London to get their licences , incurring many charges and having a complicated process to go through .
As one Member of this House always says , there are times when consensus becomes nonsensical , and this is one of them , thanks to those who cobbled together this so-called compromise .
Commissioner Verheugen said that we are not talking about ethics .
He went on to say that the principle that the human body must not become a commodity has been complied with .
What now , then ?
Are we going to talk about it or are we not ?
If the principle has been taken into account , then a European regulation on the subject exists , and , that being so , we have to examine whether or not it is any good .
Having been a rapporteur on this , I know that this House wanted more stringent regulation , but , back then , the Commission said no , citing the legal basis .
The legal basis has now changed , and so you ought at the least to think up a proper justification , rather than simply saying that the matter has been taken care of .
We need this regulation ; I am all for us getting it , and have been so for the past five years .
For three of them , it was on ice in the Commission - not , admittedly , on Commissioner Verheugen 's watch , but the Commission does nevertheless bear responsibility for this three-year delay .
Mrs Roth-Behrendt , Mrs Ries and others bear responsibility for another six months ' delay , having rejected the report back in September .
Now you are giving us another month in which this House has to talk the matter through in proper parliamentary fashion .
( The President cut off the speaker )

( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , the regulation we are discussing today is indeed urgent and of particular importance , dealing as it does with advanced therapies , across-the-board quality standards , the more rapid availability of high-quality products , and , ultimately , the competitiveness of European businesses .

I therefore want to congratulate those Members who had a hand in putting together the compromises ; that was the right thing to do , and it was done at the right time .
I , too , find this or that part of it indigestible , particularly those that have to do with small and medium-sized enterprises , which the compromise package rather tends to disregard , but this is one of those times when we all have to make a superhuman effort for the sake of coherence , in order that we might achieve uniformity of regulation , and , not least with the Seventh Research Framework Programme in mind .
To be sure , this does have to do with ethics , but it is also about the way in which different ethical standards collide and the challenge that that presents us with .
At the end of the day , though , it is about people , and they should come first .

What we are fighting about is the prevention of suffering , and that is why I should like to congratulate the Presidency of the Council , for I know , Mr Schroeder , that you too have done the seemingly impossible , and that is why I find so much of the hysteria , indulged in by the Greens in particular , quite incomprehensible .
Mr President , last month the Ukrainian Prime Minister came to the European Parliament .
In a discussion in committee , I asked him about the trade in human body parts , especially of infants before and after birth .
The Prime Minister acknowledged this gruesome trade and called it painful .
He reminded me that it also included embryos .
He said the problem was not only Ukrainian sellers but also the wealthy international buyers
He asked for our help to end this form of human trafficking .
Our help .
Tomorrow 's vote will determine whether we have any help to give .
If we uphold the ban on commercialisation and if we exclude human embryos from the scope of this directive , then we will be able to do something about the wealthy buyers within the EU .
If , however , we give the green light to commercialisation and destruction of embryos , not only will we be unable to help Ukraine with the buyers who keep the trade alive , but we will also cause the same painful situation in the EU , whereby those who are desperate for money are exploited for their body parts to benefit those who are rich enough to pay for them .
( EL ) Mr President , this regulation is needed and it is needed quickly , because medicine has advanced , progress is being made and there are also high hopes of innovative therapies .
I do not think that anything should be exempted .
Everything must be included in this regulation and the reason is very simple and very practical : does anyone believe that , if in the European Union we ban the licensing of certain innovative therapies which have been approved elsewhere , the citizens of Europe will not go and find these therapies ?
I , of course , much prefer central licensing .
The only thing that I personally am calling for at the moment - and I think that the regulation covers this - is a strict scientific evaluation of these innovative therapies and full safety .
Apart from that , if we fragment and stop licensing by each Member State , just imagine what will happen in the European Union .
We shall have Member States which will have allowed it and Member States which will not have allowed it .
Moreover , as many speakers said , no one is prohibiting any Member State from allowing or banning something which has been licensed .
Consequently , I do not understand why there is all this debate , when the world is waiting for new therapies , when there are chronic illnesses and when patients ' hopes are very high .
I do not think that we should be the obstacle to a future cure for Parkinson 's disease , diabetes , certain types of cancer and so on .
I therefore think that we should go ahead and vote for the regulation , as tabled by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety and , of course , I am against the two amendments by the Committee on Legal Affairs .
( HU ) Every time we begin talking about advanced therapy medicinal products , stem cell or embryonic cell therapies , or embryo research or organ transplantation , vehement debate inevitably ensues .
Our points of view differ widely , regardless of age , sex , nationality or political convictions , a sure sign of the complexity of the question .
It is no small undertaking to have decided to draw up a piece of legislation that seeks to provide a unified regulation of this border area between ethics and science .
For these therapies and medicines increasingly represent life and death .
By using , or by not using them , either way we are making decisions about human lives .
Advanced therapy means life for many thousands of European citizens .
It is the last ray of hope offering the prospect of a healthier , fuller life .
In the developing world , however , it can mean death , since the illegal trade in organs is already causing the maiming and death of thousands of people .
At the same time , our goal cannot be to stop the development of technology .
What can , however , be our goal is to find answers to the moral and ethical questions raised by technical advances .
We need the current legislation to point the way , to help ensure that technical development means an affirmation of life .
This is not a question of the struggle between good and evil , but of what is technically possible and yet ethically permissible .
I owe Mr Mikolašik and my other colleagues gratitude for the fine compromise they have prepared , and trust that the legislation to be brought into effect by our votes will be on the side of life .
Mr President , there are many European families with members suffering from serious diseases .
There are also many medical researchers and therapists with the means to help those patients , and they are all waiting for this important piece of legislation .
It will provide the common legislative framework which will make these innovative therapies more readily , more widely and more safely available .
It is urgently required , it will be of great benefit and there is no reason for delaying its implementation by loading it with unnecessary ethical provisos and carve-outs that are impossible to agree with the Council .
It has been firmly established that ethical restrictions are properly within the power of individual Member States if they wish to limit or forbid . Subsidiarity is the essential rule .
But there is every reason to have a European standard for regulating the safe use of such therapies where they are used .
So I ask my colleagues , and particularly my good friend the rapporteur , to let this vitally important piece of legislation proceed this week , so that agreement with the Council can be reached .
Many of our less fortunate fellow Europeans will thank us when this legislation comes into effect , but they will have great difficulty understanding if it is further delayed , emasculated or stopped altogether by this Parliament .
This is one of those occasions when it is really important for us to exercise our powers carefully and responsibly and let this matter be finalised .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I can say that I agree with the rapporteur and therefore am also in favour of the two points included in Amendments 3 and 17 , in line with the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs , as well as all the amendments proposed by that committee .
Someone said that they did not understand why this debate was so heated .
It is heated because it has to answer two important questions .
The first one is , ' Does the end justify the means ? '
I recall that in Article 2 of the Oviedo Convention on bioethics we wrote that the interests and welfare of the human being shall prevail over the sole interest of society or science .
The first question is therefore as follows : ' In view of the fact that science is capable of crossing new boundaries , should we always do what science tells us ?
Does the fact that something can be done make it right , or is there an ethical rule to say whether it is right ? '
The second question is as follows : ' The human being takes precedence , but what is a human being ? '
We can no longer ignore this question , which is of momentous , planetary importance , because the whole human rights doctrine , from which everyone claims to draw inspiration , turns on this one point : ' What is a human being ? '
When we talk about embryos , we need to answer the question of whether an embryo is a human being or not .
This is not merely an ethical question , but rather a legal and political one , even more than it is an ethical one .
It is not a quibble , either , but a serious question , and it should at least make us hesitate for a moment when we come to vote .
Since we have already decided that the Member States can do as they see fit , I do not see why a different view of things should be imposed on them through a European regulation .
At any rate , I hope my speech will make my fellow Members think carefully about a complex issue that involves human beings - not just those human beings who are hoping for new kinds of treatment , but also those whose bodies and very lives might be sacrificed for the sake of others .
( PL ) Mr President , essentially , the draft we are debating concerns the introduction of a centralised procedure whereby the European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products could issue authorisation for the marketing of advanced therapy medicinal products .
The European Commission also wishes to ensure financial support for the firms manufacturing these products .
These proposals are worthy of support , or rather , they would be worthy of support if it were not for the fact that products that could be developed using controversial technologies have been included amongst advanced therapy products .
I refer to products created using human embryos , or developed from animal-human hybrids or chimeras , and also to pharmaceuticals that change the genetic heritage of human beings .
Several European Union Member States such as Germany do not allow products developed using unethical methods onto their markets .
The Commission 's proposal contains an exclusion which would allow these states to opt out of the principle of a common market in the case of these controversial products .
It is now being stated that there is a legal error affecting both the draft currently under debate and the 2001 directive .
Supporters of that view argue that pursuant to Article 95 of the Treaty , which aims at full harmonisation of the market , citing it as a legal basis for a draft regulation on advanced therapy products implies creating an open European market for these products .
The European Parliament therefore found itself in a situation in which it had to choose between going along with the European Commission 's draft or exercising caution and not condoning controversial experiments .
Members of Parliament 's Committee on Legal Affairs were opposed to the idea of including unethical products in the regulation , arguing that regardless of Member States ' rights and despite rapid progress in certain areas no compromises concerning human rights can be permitted .
They maintained that the principles banning the use of the human body for commercial purposes must be upheld , and that creating animal-human hybrids or chimeras amounts to an infringement of the principle of human integrity and an affront to human dignity .

Mr President , honourable Members , you will , on Wednesday , be voting on the regulation on medicinal products for advanced therapies , which has since early 2006 been promoted initially by the Austrian Presidency of the Council and then by its Finnish counterparts , and we have , since the beginning of this year , done everything in our power to bring about agreement without delay .
The regulation aims , in the highly-innovative and extremely important area of medicine production , to protect all the patients who need those medical products , and to do so by means of quality standards that are uniform across Europe .
The need for high-quality products for everyone in Europe means that it is true to say , as some of you have , that what is on the agenda today is in fact life itself , improved quality of life and the chance of new life .
What is also on the agenda , and not least in importance , is the competitiveness of the European biotechnology sector .
In negotiations on the regulation in the Council working party , aimed not least at achieving agreement with your House , it has proved possible , over recent weeks , to make decisive progress , and it is on these negotiations , which take into consideration a very large number of amendments drafted by experts and submitted by the lead committees , that the prospects for a good compromise , and also a rapid agreement between the Council and Parliament , depended , and still do depend ; as the negotiations currently stand , agreement is possible on the basis of that which is to be the subject of Wednesday 's vote .
The rapporteur has submitted a parcel of amendments , and the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , and the Group of the European United Left have drafted their own sets of them .
Both packages draw to the fullest possible extent on the debate in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety and on the amendments drafted by it , and are therefore close to one another , although it is clear that it is the package produced by the shadow rapporteurs of the named groups on which agreement is possible at Council level .
However great our differences in debate , it strikes me as essential that it be stressed that what this is all , primarily , about is the quality and safety of these new and advanced therapeutic products .
Clear though it is that ethical considerations have a part to play in these deliberations , there has , ever since the cells and tissues directive was resolved upon , been agreement to the effect that we in Europe see ethics as subject to subsidiarity and hence as something for which the Member States bear responsibility , and it is for this reason that two ethically-motivated amendments proposed by your House 's Committee on Legal Affairs could not be agreed to by the Council working party and would represent a definite obstacle to agreement between the Council and your House .
The German Presidency strongly asks you to bear this in mind when the time comes for you to vote .
Application of the subsidiarity principle ensures that national legislation - and I would draw Mrs Breyer 's attention to the example of stem cells - is not touched by the regulation .
It is not we who have stated that , but rather the Committee on Legal Affairs of your own House that has made that clear , so that , for example , my own country 's legislation on stem cells is not affected , while , on the other hand , the regulation gives all the others the highest possible degree of certainty .
Certain among you have - and quite rightly - had comments to make on the ethical framework , with warnings as to what might come to pass .
I certainly share your misgivings , and I am quite sure that the Member States are taking them into account already ; moreover , I know of no doctors in this Europe of ours who would do the things that some of you have so graphically described today .
In view of the importance of the document you have to vote on , which touches upon the future of many patients in this Europe of ours , the German Presidency has a great interest in concluding this legislative process as successfully and speedily as possible .
We have a great opportunity to show the public how we are , in a very important field , capable of being very purposeful and consistent in working towards adding European value , and our sense of ethical responsibility leaves us no alternative to a rapid and necessary decision that will be a basis for quality products of high value .
We therefore strongly urge you , whatever misgivings some of you may have , to perhaps put these to the backs of your minds in view of the vital and higher objective of getting this regulation in place without delay .
For that , we - and in that I include the citizens of Europe and the patients - would owe you the utmost gratitude .

Mr President , honourable Members , if , if in a community of twenty-seven states , there is no consensus on an ethical issue - such as is the case in this instance - then the only way in which civilised people can deal with this state of affairs is with tolerance and respect , for we have to tolerate and respect the views of others .
I might add that it is also a fact of life for all of us that , while we do well to pay attention to what our consciences tell us , we cannot make that a yardstick for the conduct of others .
On this issue , for example , my conscience tells me that I could not take upon myself the responsibility not only for leaving this new medical sector in a legal no-man 's land , but also for putting it in a situation in which - in certain parts of Europe at any rate - everything would be possible , with no legal bounds set and no stipulations as to quality .
That , then , is why my conscience tells me that we need this regulation .
My conscience also tells me that I could not take upon myself the responsibility for saying , to a sick person at death 's door , ' here is a medicine that could help you , but there were some ideological objections to it , and so we are not allowed to use it . '
My conscience tells me that I do not have the right to do that , and that is why I say to you that the only way in which we can handle this issue is to do as is suggested here , that is to say , to allow those with ethical objections to act accordingly and to allow those without them to do whatever they want to do within the bounds of that which will be permitted by the regulation , which - heaven knows - will not allow everything .
Let me now say something about some of the arguments that have been adduced today .
As regards the principle that the human body should not be exploited for commercial gain , I would say , yes , that is indispensable , and you will find nobody who is more in agreement with that than I am .
This principle is already firmly enshrined in the directive on human tissues and cells .
The anonymity of donors and recipients , and the altruism of donors , are European principles that must be adhered to , and that is certainly true in this context and is something about which nobody can be in any doubt .
It has been said that the Commission proposal is ambiguous , that it is , so to speak , not watertight when it comes to the issue of national prohibitions and their remaining in place , but the representative of the Presidency has already given the answer that needed to be given to that , and all I can do is confirm it .


The changes needed in order to take account of the objections raised by your House 's legal service are contained in the compromise package , which , as I have already said , the Commission supports , and I want to repeat what Mr Schroeder said , namely that your House 's legal service has explicitly stated that these amendments resolve the problem , and that it welcomes that .
I would like to make it plain that it is a misreading of the Treaty to say that Article 95 - the internal market article , that is - would not guarantee that no products would be licensed that a Member State did not want to see licensed .
On this point , the internal market rules are as clear as daylight : every Member State has , at all times , the right to refuse to allow a specific product onto its market on ethical grounds or by reason of public morals ; about that there is no doubt .
Since we can be certain about the case law , about its practical implications , and about the legal basis afforded by the Treaty on European Union , you really do not have anything to worry about on this score .
Finally , the technical package has been described as inadequate , and to that I have to say that the Council and the Commission really have been extremely willing to make compromises in order to get this dossier wrapped up early .
We did indeed accept the great majority of your House 's amendments , particularly as regards small and medium-sized enterprises , in the form , for example , of reductions in charges and derogations from central licensing ; all that is in there .
That which is in this proposal for legislation goes well beyond what we did earlier , for the Commission has already enacted its own regulation allowing small and medium-sized businesses going through the approval process a reduction in costs of up to 90 % , and here too , or so I believe , everything that could be done has been .

So , then , let me ask you again to consider whether it is not indeed really high time that this debate were brought to a proper end , with a good outcome for those researching in this field , because they want to help people , and a good outcome for those who depend on these medicines for dear life .
( Applause )
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 12 noon .
Written statement ( Article 142 )
in writing . - ( SK ) We live today in a world of incredible technical progress .
But despite the advances that medicine has made , modern diseases still inspire fear .
The use of progressive treatments , including gene- and cell-based therapies as well as tissue engineering , are innovative developments that give great hope to patients .
There is no doubt about the huge potential of advanced medical therapies when it comes to providing revolutionary cures for serious conditions such as cancer , Parkinson 's disease and skin burns , and therefore I welcome the regulation of the European Commission aimed at harmonising procedures in this field across the EU , and ensuring that sufferers have safe cures for these serious ailments .
The elimination of barriers on the European market will give patients greater access to existing cures through the Europe-wide licensing of these products .
However , in order to maintain the underlying principles of the internal market and in the interest of its proper functioning , as well as to secure the legal bases , this regulation should apply only to cell-based products that may in the near future be actually introduced on the market and which do not arouse controversy .
For this reason it is quite unacceptable to ignore the position of the Committee on Legal Affairs , which is the main body responsible for ethical issues in new technologies in the European Parliament .
Finally I would like to congratulate rapporteur Mikolášik and thank him for his principled position on ethical matters and for his personal integrity based on the Oviedo Agreement and the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Enforcement of intellectual property rights ( criminal measures ) ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Zingaretti , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs , on the amended proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on criminal measures aimed at ensuring the enforcement of intellectual property rights - C6-0233 / 2005 -
Mr President , honourable Members , infringements of intellectual property rights are on a continuing upward curve and now constitute a really serious threat to the European economy and to European society .
The differences in sanctions applicable from one country to another not only interfere with the smooth functioning of the internal market but also make it more difficult to combat the counterfeiting and piracy of products .
It is vital that the holders of rights should enjoy equal protection throughout the Community .
Problems of consumer protection also arise in connection with health and safety issues .
The Internet helps counterfeiters , who can use it to market faked or imitation products around the world without any loss of time ; it is evident that their schemes are increasingly tied in with organised crime , and I have to say that the number of products that have had to be taken off the internal market has recently increased to a disturbing degree , being , as a rule , faked versions of other products , so action to address the problem of counterfeit goods is of the utmost importance to the Community , and the vote here in your House is an important step in getting it underway .


The Commission is glad that your House accepts and endorses the general principle underlying this amended proposal for a directive , and I should like to take this opportunity to express my thanks to the rapporteur , Mr Zingaretti .

As long ago as 2006 , when - on 7 September that year - it adopted a resolution on the need for immediate action against counterfeit medical products , your House has been supportive of the Commission in its view that the sanctions available under criminal law need to be standardised as soon as possible .
The Commission is also glad to note that the committee 's report envisages the same level of penalties as are already applied to serious crimes .
The Commission is , however , unhappy about a number of points that have emerged from the debate , firstly about Parliament 's desire to limit the scope of the directive solely to the ambit of the Community 's powers , and I have to say that that will result in serious difficulties when it comes to transposing the directive .
It also has to be said that the definition of the concept of ' right to intellectual property ' does not appear to be adequate , since a whole array of aspects of it have been left unclear .
The definitions of the terms ' infringement on a commercial scale ' and ' deliberate infringement of a right to intellectual property ' do not ultimately bring any additional benefit ; they are capable of being misunderstood and of undermining legal certainty .
In the interests of consumer safety and of our economy 's competitiveness , I urge you to vote in favour of the Commission 's proposal .
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank the Commissioner for his kind words about this report .
This important directive is at last coming to the end of its legislative process , and I should first of all like to thank all those who have devoted their energies in recent months to a passionate and , in my view , extremely useful debate , starting with the shadow rapporteurs and all the staff , without whom it would not have been possible to address such complex subjects .
Much has been said about this directive ; some of the comments have been well founded while others have missed the point , not least because these are highly complex subjects .
I believe , therefore , that it is important to make it clear what we are talking about .
This is a directive against organised crime and in the end , I must emphasise , against organised crime in both its traditional form and the form that it has recently been adopting .
It is , then , a directive against the damage that crime does to Europe through the counterfeiting of goods and the infringement of intellectual property rights .
During these months , many Members have asked me why we have to harmonise .
My answer is that organised crime has long been a global activity that knows no borders and that can count on vast resources .
The law , in contrast , is fragmented into many , sometimes contradictory legal systems , and is therefore the weaker for it .
It has been calculated that over the last 10 years the volume of counterfeit goods has risen by 1 600 % , and I believe that Europe needs to do something , because we are talking about a vast market and very real , material things , such as toys , clothes , shoes , food , cosmetics , chemicals , gastronomic products with false designations of origin , spectacles , compact discs , DVDs and other things , in other words all goods that European consumers buy every day .
As I have said , this activity causes enormous damage .
It damages Europe 's industries , because of course counterfeiting changes all the most basic rules of the market and competition , and it harms workers , because of course those who produce counterfeit goods do so with complete disregard for the laws that protect the rights of the people making them , and because the counterfeit markets resulting from these criminal activities cause recession and unemployment .
Counterfeiting is said to have put 125 000 people out of work in Europe over the last ten years .
As a result , it damages the economy because of tax evasion , and it harms consumers , because here in Parliament we spend many hours writing regulations to protect European citizens but not fighting effectively against counterfeiting , and we have no means of enforcing these regulations .
One form that I regard as particularly serious is the counterfeiting of brands of generic medicines , which are often marketed in developing countries , and I am delighted that the executive secretary of the World Health Organization 's anti-counterfeiting task force has spoken out in favour of the report , since it specifically refers to the health risks and rates the counterfeiting of medicines as being extremely serious .
I therefore believe that we have to go ahead with this .
I think the text of the directive introduces some important new points even compared with the Commission 's text , and that we have reached a positive compromise .
I think it is important that the scope of the directive has been made clearer and also restricted , by excluding patents , for example , for which civil law remains the most suitable instrument for resolving disputes .
Although this is a highly controversial text , my view is that we must not stop and that we cannot escape from the reality of these arguments .
By harmonising our criminal measures we are taking a leap forwards in really developing the European single market , which is certainly helped by rules , but also by provisions like these which prevent the rules from being disregarded all the time .
Acting at this level therefore aids and strengthens Europe as a political entity , but most of all it strengthens the idea of a Europe that is useful to its citizens .
We are coming to this parliamentary vote in the comforting position of having received very substantial support for the directive at the vote in the Committee on Legal Affairs .
That is why I hope that a large majority will support this compromise , because powerful interests and lobbies are now hoping that the European Parliament will not do anything .
I believe , however , that it would harm our image and damage us politically if Parliament were to throw up its hands at such a devastating crime as counterfeiting and say that Europe could not do anything to fight it .
In the past , Parliament has been in the forefront in developing the single market and political Europe , and I am convinced that it will be there again this time .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy . - ( ES ) The text on which we are going to vote , the Commission 's text , bears no relation to the opinion of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy and bears no relation to the legitimate fight against the fraud and piracy that affects the health and safety of persons .
That is something on which we all agree .
However , this amended proposal on intellectual property rights is intended to criminalise the exchange of information and culture .
By voting in favour of the amended proposal on intellectual property rights , Parliament would be treating mafias in the same way as ordinary citizens .
Neither the issue of the intention to make profits nor the degree of criminality are clarified .
The scope of this Directive is indiscriminate and it lumps everything in the criminal field , though the civil is generally working well .
Furthermore , great legal uncertainty is created , leading to a hysterical witch hunt which flies off in all directions , frightens the citizens and paralyses the innovation of thousands of small and large businesses which should not be living in fear of going to prison , and we have already seen a massive negative reaction to this Directive on the Internet .
We cannot act in that way , contrary to the flow of information and culture .

draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs . - ( DE ) Mr President , the lead committee on this report is that on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , to which I in fact belong , and which concerns itself primarily with the rights to intellectual property , but I am now the draftsman of the opinion on this matter of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , and propose to limit myself to considering it from that angle .
Commissioner Verheugen discussed our need for this piece of legislation , and it is indeed true that we do , but we should be doing more than merely constantly tinkering with the minimum penalty .
At the end of the day , adding or subtracting a whole year or six months to or from the minimum or maximum penalty helps nobody .
I am firmly persuaded - and the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs has come round to this view - that we have to make a start on working on the principle of precision .
We have put the case for this directive ultimately to include - irrespective of whether patents are included , which is , in the first instance , irrelevant - a positive list of its scope , so that the public - for whom the legislation is intended - do not get to read of some vague concept , but can see a list showing where and in what ways they can expose themselves to penalties .
In so doing , we are - as the Commissioner said - entering the realm of definitions .
If we now start , in civil law , to put together what is termed a toolbox , then we are also on the threshold of laying down similar definitions in the sphere of criminal law too .
There is no use fiddling with the legal consequences unless we also work on the definitions ; that is what we must do , that is why this directive is a first step , and that is why I do not quite see the point of the criticism .
One starting point is the attempt at defining what is meant by ' commercial ' .
We are trying to define the term ' intention ' , but please can we do this not only with reference to this area of applicability , but ...
( The President cut off the speaker . )

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , speaking as a shadow rapporteur and on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs , I would like to thank Mr Zingaretti for his successful report , and , above all , for his outstanding cooperation .
I should like to emphasise that our intention with this report should not be to make criminals of the EU 's citizens when what we want to do is to punish the criminal gangs , organised criminals , and professional counterfeiters .
I myself see it as being of the utmost importance that there should be a derogation for private users motivated by personal reasons rather than by the desire for profit .


The compromise achieved in the Committee on Legal Affairs on definitions is , quite simply , a practicable solution , and , like my colleague Mr Wieland , I welcome the definition of ' infringement on a commercial scale ' and of ' deliberate infringement of a right to intellectual property ' , as well as the positive list from which patents are excluded .
It also proved possible to arrive at a satisfactory solution to Article 3 's description of the characteristics of offences , so that , firstly , every deliberate infringement on a commercial scale , thirdly , any attempt at such infringement of the law , and thirdly , aiding and inciting the committal of the act are considered as offences .
Since the oral amendment relating to incitement to the act originated from me , I should like once more to make it clear that the translations are problematic and that some of them are positively wrong .
It is intended that the fines should avoid causing disruption to national criminal law systems in their applicability to bodies with legal personality , and it is for the Member States themselves to decide whether they want to make such bodies liable to the sanctions of the criminal law or only to fines .
These are European rules , and every Member State may tighten them up , as some indeed already do , and we want to leave responsibility for that with the Member States .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , the report by Mr Zingaretti on the amended proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on criminal measures aimed at ensuring the enforcement of intellectual property rights is a very balanced proposal that has obtained broad support in the Committee on Legal Affairs and also , to a certain extent , in the other committees that have dealt with the issue .

As Mr Zingaretti has pointed out , intellectual property deserves protection and I believe that what the Committee on Legal Affairs has done by means of the various amendments that it has presented is perhaps to tone down some of the terms favoured by Mr Mayer , who has just spoken on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats .
Specifically , for example , it makes no sense to extend criminal protection to patents - to intellectual property - which in reality is protected in the civil field , given the complications that that may cause .
Neither does it make sense to criminalise a series of activities - those of critics , journalists , intellectuals or teachers , who , as a result of simple meeting , may end up ' behind bars ' - or that of an innocent user of the broadcast media that Internet technology provides us with these days , as a result of which , by pressing a key at a particular time , one may find oneself accused of a criminal infringement .
I believe that it is important that we strengthen the criminal protection of intellectual property but that it should be done in accordance with certain principles so that criminal protection is not taken any further than is strictly necessary .
Criminal protection is always protection of an exceptional nature , since there are other legislative means for achieving that protection .

I believe that Mr Zingaretti 's proposals - the proposal taken up in the report by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the amendments that in the end have been presented jointly with Mr Mayer - enable us to restrict the scope of this criminal protection and that this plenary should therefore approve this report and support the appropriate amendments in the corresponding vote .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , I should like to thank Mr Zingaretti for his cooperation .
We have spent many hours discussing this issue , which is , after all , a sensitive one .
According to the OECD , counterfeit goods account for an annual amount of approximately EUR 600 billion worldwide , and it is mainly criminal organisations , operating on a worldwide scale , who are responsible for this .
Counterfeiting represents a major drain on tax revenue in government tax departments , because legitimate businesses do , after all , among other things , pay taxes and employ staff , and governments put those taxes to very good use .
Levels of employment are good , and we seem to lack the courage to intervene sufficiently in imposing real criminal sanctions and tackling the problem head on .
These criminal sanctions , however , should also , of course , be backed up by the raising of public awareness .
Customs should be able , in future , to put better and more effective controls in place , thus preventing sea-going vessels , such as the one in Hamburg that was loaded with three million pairs of shoes - all counterfeits from China - from slipping through customs without anyone noticing .
I think we should do something about this .

By the same token , the consumer must gain considerably more awareness , and this is why I have tabled an amendment to introduce the concept of the intentional handling of counterfeit products , which means that if a consumer deliberately buys products that are too cheap , they should know that they are buying counterfeit products and by doing so , prevent our society from working properly , and also hamper our economy .
It is unfortunate that we wish to spare consumers too much , because the funny thing is that in France and Italy , handling and buying counterfeit goods is a punishable offence and is counselled against on huge billboards .
Regrettably , we did not dare go this far .
It is also unfortunate , to my mind , that intellectual property in Europe is still being insufficiently protected , that there is insufficient awareness , because at this rate , we will never achieve the Lisbon objectives to become the world 's most competitive , knowledge-based economy ; I hope that we will carry on supporting customs and improving legislation .
In this respect , I would argue in favour of identical definitions worldwide .
If this is achieved , I will be satisfied ; if it is not , we in Europe will become isolated , to the detriment of our economy and employment .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is true that the mass importation of counterfeit products does a great deal of damage to the European economy , particularly to the production of quality goods , and I am indeed in favour of doing something to address this .
What is needed most of all is that it should be made possible for the big criminal organisations to which reference was made earlier to be better punished or brought to justice by means of European law .
On that much we all agree ; it is on how this is to be accomplished that we have our differences .


I would like to extend warm thanks to Mr Zingaretti for having worked very hard to bring about agreement , but we all need to bring particular precision to bear on this question , not least because we are standing , legally speaking , on really thin ice .
Further progress on this point was achieved by drawing on an environmental protection provision in criminal law , but that means that we bear a responsibility for approaching the matter with particular care and precision .
The idea behind European law is that through it we should deal with matters that the Member States cannot accomplish on their own , particularly in relation to criminal law , which means in this case the handling of the big criminal organisations .
For that we need a precise definition of what the scope of this regulation is .
If we leave it open - which is what some of us want - or if we include the consumers in it , we will end up taking a sledgehammer to crack a nut without being able to have any real impact on the big organisations that are doing European businesses so much serious damage , for the fact is that , in the absence of any precise definition , small-time entrepreneurs - who often do not know whose goods they are selling or from whence those goods come - can end up being clobbered by criminal sanctions .
It will be young people who are most affected by this .
Most young people in Europe cannot tell the difference between what may be downloaded from the Internet and what may not , and we certainly do not want to criminalise the end users .
We want to concentrate on those things that European law is meant to address , with everything else being left to national law .
To Mr Manders , who wants to raise consumers ' awareness , I should like to say that , if you get your hands on a Gucci bag for ten euros , any consumer might realise what is going on , but that does not apply in the case of many other products .
I do not want European law to be over-zealously applied where it does not make sense to apply it at all ; particularly in the commercial sphere , the areas of application must ...
( The President cut off the speaker )

on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too should like to start by thanking the rapporteur , Mr Zingaretti , for his cooperation and for somehow having tried to mediate on this directive , which applies criminal law to counterfeiting .
What it lacks , however , is a frame of reference consisting of the rules defining what counterfeiting is , and so it actually lumps together trademark , patent and copyright infringements .
Confusing counterfeiting and piracy with infringements of intellectual property is likely to make the fight against criminal falsification less effective .
Instead , it would have been more useful to limit the scope of the directive just to copyright infringements concerning the commercial production of counterfeit multimedia products , an area in which organised crime operates .
Extending it unduly to all copyright issues , however , may have a serious impact on the privacy of consumers of multimedia products .
Moreover , on copyright matters the directive abandons the concept of commercial scale and is liable to criminalise private , not-for-profit use by people who use the Internet for peer-to-peer file sharing , video streaming and so forth .
The directive forces Member States to start criminal proceedings even without a complaint by the injured party and actually gives private individuals a direct role in the investigations , which goes beyond providing the authorities with technical support and ends up becoming a driving , guiding role .
Lastly , the directive lacks any economic or social analysis .
Imposing tougher penalties in Italy has not had any effect .
That is why our group proposes that this directive be rejected .
Mr President , I speak to record my opposition to the EU 's meddling in the criminal law of Member States to the monstrous extent of demanding new offences and dictating the level of penalties to be enforced in the United Kingdom and other states .
The nefarious Court of Justice decision of September 2005 gives rise to this intolerable infringement of national sovereignty .
Now we are seeing a programme of rampant expansionism of power by the Commission .
This directive is even more objectionable from the UK perspective because , for the first time , it would make breach of patent a criminal offence punishable by four years ' imprisonment or more ; not because the elected House of Commons thinks that it is necessary or wise but because the unelected EU Commission dictates it .
I object , I reject this intolerable EU interference and I therefore reject this directive .

( FR ) Mr President , we all want to make progress and successfully clamp down on counterfeiting , which is economically , socially and culturally unacceptable , and Mr Zingaretti has worked hard to come up with this compromise proposal .
However , I am struck , in this debate , by the great confusion among those who , in defending consumers , scorn the rights of creators and performers and those who , at the same time , defend Community competence and want the national judiciaries to remain sovereign entities .
I believe that there are some real problems there that deserve to be looked at in more depth .
I have clear ideas about one point , anyway , and that is the cultural impact of this text .
I am referring to the amendments to Articles 2 and 3 that were adopted by the Committee on Legal Affairs .
They propose definitions of intellectual property rights .
That is not the aim of the directive .
They propose a restrictive wording of intentional infringement and commercial scale .
This goes against the discretion of the national courts and , above all , in fact , it falls short of making peer-to-peer file sharing a criminal act .
The result is that the provisions , on the one hand , go against the acquis communautaire , particularly the 2001 Directive on copyright , and , on the other hand , present a considerable risk for creation and cultural diversity , by undermining the national laws that curb such behaviour , prejudicing as it does the rights of authors and performers .
That is why , in this instance , I support the wording of the original proposal by the Commission and , in any case , in our debate , Amendment 30 tabled by Mrs Bowles .
We are on very serious ground as far as cultural diversity is concerned .
( PL ) Mr President , the directive on criminal measures to be applied in order to protect intellectual property represents a change to the Commission 's stance to date on criminal law .
The proposed document reflects the interpretation of the European Court of Justice 's ruling of 12 September 2005 adopted by the European Commission , and allowing the use of criminal measures at Community level , if they are necessary for the successful implementation of Union provisions .
In view of the increasing problem of infringement of intellectual property rights the world over , the Commission 's proposed approach seems not only appropriate but also necessary .
Every year , the European Union 's GDP loses approximately EUR 8 billion because of counterfeit goods .
Individual companies lose approximately EUR 45 to 65 billion each year for the same reason .
The scale of the problem is so great that it is estimated that about 40 % of computer software in the world originates from illegal sources , along with 36 % of the music on compact discs and cassettes .
Accordingly , we should welcome the fact that the maximum penalty for serious crimes committed as part of criminal organisations may be as high as EUR 300 000 and / or a 4-year custodial sentence .
It should be noted , however , that pursuant to Parliament 's proposal criminal measures will only be applied to individuals and entities who knowingly infringe the law for commercial purposes .
The exclusion whereby the directive does not apply to infringement of the aforementioned intellectual property rights by private users who are not motivated by commercial gain is very important .
In addition , it seems justified to exclude patent rights from the scope of the proposed directive , as this will make it possible to avoid determining the content of future provisions in this regard and will restrict the scope of the directive in question to intellectual property only .
As I conclude , I should like to thank Mr Zingaretti , the rapporteur , for a very well-prepared document .
Mr President , I understand the purpose of this directive and the message that you wish to send out to other countries .
However , extension of criminality beyond that envisaged in TRIPS , that is significantly beyond counterfeiting and piracy , is a step too far , at least at this stage , and not one that any speaker has justified .
Many colleagues appreciate that infringement of a patent that has been assessed as invalid is a normal commercial activity .
However , this is not unique to patents : it applies to designs and trademarks as well .
I say this as someone who accumulated over 25 years as a patent and trademark attorney before becoming an MEP .
There are amendments that attempt to address this problem .
My own Amendment 31 restricts the scope to the TRIPS criteria - counterfeiting and piracy - or to when there is organised crime or a risk to health and safety .
Amendment 33 takes account of assessment of invalidity .
I can tell Mr Toubon that there will be separate votes on the individual parts of Amendment 30 , which is there for a purpose other than the one for which it perhaps appears to be there .
To the Commission , I say that this is an issue that is too serious to get wrong .
I am afraid it is too serious to settle with ' there or thereabouts ' compromises .
Therefore , I cannot vote for the proposal without the restrictions I have mentioned .
( SV ) Mr President , there is a parallel proposal concerning serious environmental crimes - clearly defined crimes that do serious harm to people and cause death .
In spite of the clear objective , the proposal is controversial because the EU is entering the area of criminal law .
What we have here is a legislative proposal aimed at protecting commercial interests without risk to consumers and the environment .
In spite of that , this definition is much broader and creates legal uncertainty .
In its present form , the proposal is not about combating organised crime .
On the contrary , this law is in itself organised crime .
It is a crime against human freedoms and human rights and an attack on ordinary communication between consumers and companies .
Take the example of Betamax .
MP3 players can now be used for copying .
Is it , then , necessary to prove , before they go on sale , that MP3 players cannot be used to break the law ?
Once the players are sold , will consumers be hit by technical restrictions and technical obstacles when they want to use the products , music and films they have bought ?
The proposal is an absurd attack on consumers ' rights and should be rejected in its entirety .
- ( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am among those MEPs who fundamentally disagree with the report on the proposed directive concerning the use of criminal measures to enforce intellectual property rights .
I have three fundamental objections .
The first is the fact that the legal basis of this directive has not been clearly defined .
As everybody knows , we are still missing the long-awaited opinion of the Court of Justice , which should clarify the judgment of 13 September 2005 .
The second serious problem concerns the fact that in its definition of intellectual property for the purposes of the directive , the report does not include patents and types , which are an essential component of intellectual property law , and without which the directive would not incorporate the systematic approach that is required for this issue .
The third reason is closely linked to the previous one .
The criminal justice aspects of the directive ought to complement existing Directive 2004 / 48 / EC on the enforcement of intellectual property rights , which deals with civil liability and administrative matters , and which applies to the entire body of intellectual property law , including patents and types .
There is room for wide-ranging discussion on the factors that led to the proposal to exclude technical solutions from criminal protection .
I fear , however , that pressure from influential interest groups unfortunately played a part in this .
Thank you for your attention .
( PL ) Mr President , despite what has been said by other Members in this House , the proposed directive came about as a response to the increasingly widespread theft of intellectual property .
We know full well that current Union legislation does not provide for a Community policy on penalties to combat piracy and counterfeiting of goods .
In addition , there are considerable differences between the systems applied by the various Member States , as the Commission has rightly pointed out .
This obviously hinders effective protection of intellectual property , which in turn has a direct negative effect on the value of investment in innovation .
I firmly believe that it is essential to counter these practices at the Community level .
If we also take into account that the counterfeiting of completely new products such as medicines or toys can be dangerous to life and health , the problem becomes even graver .
Clearly , counterfeiting products of all kinds also involves producing packaging and employing a range of individuals such as graphic artists and distributors .
There is too much for a single person to handle . Well-organised criminal gangs are involved , and it is precisely their activity that the directive aims to hit hard .
The measures proposed in the proposed directive should be deemed beneficial .
Infringement of intellectual property rights is a crime that must be punished .
There is , however , scope for argument about the limits of responsibility , and especially about who is to be held responsible .
Those who produce counterfeit goods and place them on the market must certainly be punished .
On the other hand , it would be unacceptable to punish those who purchased or used goods or services unaware of their illegal origin .
The Commission 's proposal does not define deliberate action in the context of infringement of intellectual property rights sufficiently clearly , and that should be remedied .
To summarise , adoption of the text of this directive is essential , and we must only regret that we are not in a position today to take the next vital step forward .
After all , it is possible to identify groups of crimes that it is particularly difficult to combat in today 's globalised world , on the basis of dozens of different legal systems .
I believe that greater harmonisation of criminal law in the European Union would go a long way towards improving effectiveness , as today 's debate confirms .
Mr President , it is 2007 , so you can address me as ' Miss ' !
I would also like to congratulate my colleague Mr Zingaretti , although he knows that we agree to disagree on this issue .
The legal base of the proposal derives from the Court of Justice .
The Commission interprets this ruling to be applicable beyond the case , and sees this ruling as a legal base for the harmonisation of certain criminal sanctions in measures aimed at protecting the internal market .
The reason I consider rejection of this directive as a whole is not because I do not believe in expanding the powers of the EU to include criminal sanctions .
I do believe in that .
However , I have serious doubts about the process leading to this increase of power , because a legal base is not the same as a political mandate .
Fundamental steps like this demand a thorough political debate and a clear choice on the matter in question .
Instead , we are about to take a great leap forward as a by-product of a single policy measure in a highly specialised and limited field .
I do not think this is the best way of pushing integration forward .
It also enforces the popular opinion held by many who see the European Union as an organisation which caters mainly for the interests of big businesses , which is not the case .
( ES ) Commissioner , we should not play around with criminal law .
The Union can now exercise - and it is right that it should exercise - a new power that has been recognised by the Court of Justice : to take on the criminal dimension of competences that it has the right to exercise .
I believe that that makes complete sense and we should all support it .
But it must be done prudently , wisely and with legal skill .
And the text that we are discussing here has none of those three qualities . It lacks prudence , it lacks wisdom and it lacks legal quality .
I say that with the greatest of respect for all of those who have been directly involved in drawing it up .
There is very little of it in this report .
The scope is excessive .
In an area as crucial as criminal law , the scope is entirely confused .
Notions of scopes are used that are not harmonised in the European Union .
Combating piracy , yes , of course , and under criminal law .
In that regard , we can support it . Combating piracy in the criminal field .
To extend that to issues that have never been outside of the civil field in the Member States , however , makes no sense , especially when concepts are not harmonised and words do not mean the same thing , not even in the field of piracy .
It makes no sense to send out the message that the citizen is the criminal even when they are not acting for commercial purposes and their activities are not of any scale .
We must press forward , otherwise we will be guilty of fine words but no actions , Commissioner .
( ES ) Following a long process , the European Parliament will finally approve its position on the adoption of criminal measures intended to ensure the enforcement of intellectual property rights , measures that I believe to be entirely necessary .
I would like to make a few comments from a cultural perspective .
With a view to promoting the development of knowledge in general and of culture in particular , we must recognise the dual economic and cultural value of creativity as a motor for the development of the arts , of science , of cultural diversity and of research .
Furthermore , in this era of increasing digitalisation and commercial liberalisation - of cultural goods and services as well - it is important to achieve an appropriate and fair balance between the rights of authors and the rights of users or consumers with a view to ensuring effective access to this progress in the field of culture and knowledge , at the same time combating piracy and counterfeiting within a context of greater Community harmonisation .
In this regard , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on his work , particularly on the compromise reached on excluding violations for personal and non-profit-making reasons , since they do not deserve to be treated in the same way as a deliberate infringement of an intellectual property right committed on a commercial scale , which I do believe should be punishable in the appropriate manner .

Mr President , honourable Members , I am grateful to you for the many valuable and important comments and suggestions made in this debate , and I would like to say something about a few of them .
The Commission 's view on the limitation of the directive 's scope solely to matters over which the Community has power is that this is essential if cases are to be covered both by Community law and by the laws of the Member States , for , if that were not to happen , the transposition of the directive could well meet with considerable difficulties in this area in which Community and domestic law are closely enmeshed , and the danger might arise of the public not knowing which law actually applied , thus compromising the rule of law .


The Commission takes the view that all types of intellectual property rights merit the protection of the criminal law , and so it is in favour of patents being included , without , however , any intention that this should present any political obstacle to the transposition of the directive .

While the Commission can accept the removal of patents from the scope of the directive , it does reject any amendment along the lines of Amendment 1 that might revive the debate about Community power over criminal law measures relating to patents .
With the exception of that of legal personality , the Commission has dispensed with definitions on the grounds of their superfluity or of their potential for legal uncertainty , and therefore prefers to give the Member States a free hand , allowing them to take decisions in accordance with their own laws and in the light of the measures they have already taken .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 12 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
( FR ) Faced with the increase in piracy and counterfeiting , it is essential that we work effectively to ensure that intellectual property rights are complied with .
Such protection must be accompanied by sanctions , because counterfeiting is unacceptable as much from an economic as from a social or cultural point of view .
Thus , by introducing criminal sanctions for all intentional infringements of an intellectual property right committed on a commercial scale , the European Commission proposal is in line with the recommendations voted for in 2005 on the future of the textile and clothing sector after 2005 .
We can only pay tribute to the desire shown to fight to enforce intellectual property rights , which safeguard the competitiveness of our economies and the growth of industry and which drive the creative world .
Nevertheless , by proposing definitions of intellectual property rights , and by introducing a restrictive definition of ' commercial scale ' and ' intentional infringement ' , the European Parliament 's Committee on Legal Affairs is undermining the principle of subsidiarity in criminal matters and is challenging the acquis communautaire on this matter .
The act of strengthening intellectual property rights within the European Union must preserve the national courts ' freedom to interpret the two aforementioned elements .
We should therefore support the wording proposed by the European Commission .
( HU ) The protection of intellectual property rights is a pre-eminent goal , especially since this sector contributes 5-7 % of Europe 's GDP .
Counterfeiting , piracy and infringements of intellectual property in general are part of an increasing phenomenon today , one that has taken on an international dimension and represents a serious threat to states and to national economies .
Differences between the various penal systems of different countries render the struggle against counterfeiting and piracy more difficult .
Beyond the latter 's economic and social consequences , counterfeiting and piracy also cause problems with regard to consumer protection , especially where health and safety are concerned .
The growth in the use of the Internet makes it possible to see the immediate and global spread of pirated products .
Finally , this phenomenon is increasingly linked to organised crime .
The struggle against these violations is therefore of key importance for the Community .
There does indeed seem , therefore , to be grounds for a joint response at European level in the area of criminal law , so that perpetrators should not be able to take advantage of differences among the different national legal systems .
Generally and fundamentally I agree that the fight against the ever increasing and ever more serious acts in violation of intellectual property should make use of the instruments of criminal law .
I also agree that a possible harmonisation of these criminal law instruments , which are to be used as a last resort , is an especially important application of the principle of subsidiarity .
I consider it absolutely essential , however , that harmonisation at Community level of the criminal measures which may be used as a very last resort should be underpinned by thorough impact studies carried out by the Commission .
The Commission 's annual strategic priorities ( Budget 2008 ) ( debate )
The next item is the report by Kyösti Virrankoski , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the Commission 's annual policy strategy for the 2008 budget procedure , Section III - Commission .
rapporteur . - ( FI ) Mr President , firstly I wish to thank the German Presidency and in particular Dalia Grybauskaitfor their excellent levels of cooperation , as well as the Chairman of the Committee on Budgets and all the coordinators and shadow rapporteurs from the political groups .
The Commission communication on the annual policy strategy is the first step in drafting the new budget .
Parliament 's response will be its initial position .
Firstly I want to speak about the communication 's structure .
The Commission employs its own system of classification to define policy areas : prosperity , solidarity , security , freedom and the strengthening of Europe 's position in global policy .
This division is difficult to follow because it does not correspond to the structure of the multiannual financial framework strategy any more than it does the budget .
For the sake of transparency this classification should be reconsidered in the future .
The Commission presents a strategy which concerns , for example , climate change and action in the energy sector .
The Lisbon Strategy is still important , as are the control of immigration and measures which make the Union a stronger global actor , but these are just some of Parliament 's priorities .
Parliament 's main objectives also include the successful completion of approved programmes , less bureaucracy and better , more effective and appropriate administration .
In connection with this year 's budget it was agreed to review the deployment of staff .
This screening operation is supposed to be completed this month .
Parliament thinks it is very important .
Activity-based budgeting and management is the key to better administration .
It began to be developed after the resignation of the Santer Commission .
Parliament wants to emphasise how important it is to continue this development .
Only in that way can we boost efficiency , lessen bureaucracy and clarify responsibilities .
The annual reports submitted by the Directors-General are an important part of this .
Administration became central to this report because the Commission once again proposed several decentralised agencies : two executive agencies and another , the European Institute of Technology , for research .
In addition , the intention is to increase the funding of several agencies at the expense of operational appropriations .
Decentralised agencies are problematic because they are funded out of different budget headings and even programmes .
Their administrative expenditure therefore does not normally come under heading 5 , which makes for a lack of clarity .
Secondly , the staff employed in such agencies will not necessarily show up in the EU budget .
For this reason , it is important to monitor total staff numbers in the EU .
Thirdly , the agencies ' areas of responsibility may be unclear .
It needs to be made fully clear to the public who is responsible for what decisions .
It is this very facelessness of decision-making which emerges as an enormous barrier when it comes to evaluating the confidence the public has in the European Union .
Fourthly , we have to ask how a hierarchical administration can benefit execution , if it does at all .
Thus , Parliament will be examining very closely the establishment of the new decentralised agencies and other administrative expenditure .
For all these reasons , Parliament and the Council in the trilogue agreed on a resolution to give attention to these matters and urge the Commission to introduce certain further measures .
Another problem is delays in programmes that have already been agreed upon .
The Commission has built a policy strategy for next year largely to delay programmes that have already been decided upon .
This kind of frontloading and backloading are uncalled-for , as the multiannual financial framework has only been in effect for a few months .
Programmes which have been decided must go ahead according to plan .
Moreover , taking funding from margins is a way to reduce further Parliament 's opportunities , for example , to invest in pilot projects and preparatory actions , especially under headings 1a and 3 .
Another danger is the continued growth in unspent commitments , RALs , which makes it harder later on to achieve policy objectives .
Parliament 's policy objectives concern , as I mentioned before , the Lisbon Strategy , sustainable climate and energy policy , the swift implementation of structural and cohesion policy , firm immigration control , a proper information and communication policy , and a jointly agreed foreign and security policy .
We hope that the Preliminary Draft Budget will establish a fruitful basis for drafting next year 's budget .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , the Annual Policy Strategy is structured according to the four strategic priorities of the Barroso Commission , which we agreed at the very beginning .
However , the changes compared to the previous financial year are presented by policy area in accordance with activity-based budgeting .
The Annual Policy Strategy serves as a consistent reference framework in the preparation of our preliminary draft budget and our legislative and work programme .
Of course it does not prejudge the final outcome , which will take into account the priorities of the European Parliament and Council .
The second element we would like to reflect is our screening exercise , which , at the request of Parliament , the Commission has just finalised .
It will be adopted in the Commission 's meeting tomorrow .
However , I can already announce that the outcome of this profound and serious exercise is quite satisfactory , especially because we confirmed the needs for enlargement , which correlate exactly to the same amounts we and Parliament agreed in 2002 .
The additional 1600 posts needed for new priorities of the Council , Parliament and the Commission will be covered only by internal redeployment .
That is a very good result of the exercise which we performed at the request of Parliament .
We will also take into account the concerns of both Parliament and the Council regarding the financing of the 25 decentralised agencies and , accordingly , we will adapt our approach in that PDB , which I will present to you next week .
Concerning the executive agencies - of which we have four and are proposing two more - the Commission , as always , will fulfil the conditions of cost-effectiveness and transparency before creating any such agency .
The Commission is open to discussing the issue with the European Parliament , including , as we said during the trialogue , any further improvements in the arrangements between Commission and the European Parliament concerning those executive agencies .
The rapporteur 's report calls for a ' budget for results ' , and I fully share this opinion and approach of Mr Virrankoski .
Therefore , next Wednesday , as agreed at the Committee of Budgetary Control meeting , I will present the Preliminary Draft Budget , in which I will try to pursue and take into account and reflect as much as possible the views expressed in today 's discussions .
I hope we have a successful start for our new procedure for the new budget year .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs . - ( DE ) Mr President , one of the headings of the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs states that we need to provide sufficient funding for the increasing number of common foreign and security policy ( CFSP ) activities .
I am hopeful that the Commissioner will apply the plans she has just announced for the coming week to the CFSP , too .
We have emphasised a number of policies in particular , for example the neighbourhood policy towards eastern and southern countries , a policy that must also serve to promote democracy and human rights there .
We have said that we regard the policy towards the Western Balkans as a priority .
In Kosovo , in that region , we are likely to have to make a significant financial effort in 2008 to support the civilian ESDP mission and the office of the International Civilian Representative .
We call for a clarification , as soon as possible , of the implications of that mission for the sustainability of the present CFSP budget .
A further topic is external energy policy . We call for the gradual building of a common external energy policy .
On the subject of Afghanistan , parallel to improving the security situation , we need to provide adequate funding for the civilian reconstruction effort - this is the only way to win the hearts and minds of the people there in the long term .
Regarding Africa , the major EU-Africa Summit is due to be held in Lisbon in December 2007 , and it is likely that the decisions we take there will have to be followed by action - which is very important also in terms of helping African forces settle African conflicts using African means .
We must also send out political signals in this spirit .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , this report on the Commission 's annual policy statements gives the members of this House the opportunity to remind the Commission of a number of points which we set out in the financial perspective .
Firstly , we remind the Commission that achieving Lisbon Strategy objectives is , and must remain , the major priority .
I believe that by stimulating job creation , by supporting economic growth and by encouraging global competitiveness , the European Union has the potential to make itself most relevant to the lives of the European citizens of today .
Secondly , we must impress on the Commission the importance of ensuring that the budget delivers value for money .
I stress our anxieties regarding the establishment of agencies : we have great concerns regarding the accountability of those bodies , as we do over the efficient and effective deployment of human resources throughout the institutions .
Thirdly , in my view , as a matter of utmost importance , the Commission must apply far greater urgency in its efforts to achieve a positive statement of assurance .
In this report , Parliament is calling for greater transparency and the Commission needs to do far more to strengthen the link between its legislative work programme and the budget procedure .
Finally , regarding the European Institute of Technology , I welcome the Commission 's determination to achieve its Lisbon goals and I admire its vision and initiative .
However , there are two major anxieties which I wish to express .
Firstly , this proposal was introduced after the Commission had set out its spending plans in the financial perspective and therefore , inevitably , the introduction of such a major project will have a significant knock-on effect on other priorities .
Also , while I acknowledge that proposals are evolving all the time , it seems to me that as a coordinating body for best practice , there is a danger of duplicating the efforts of other coordinating bodies and thereby failing to make a sufficiently positive contribution .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like firstly to congratulate our rapporteur on his work and on the content of his report on the annual strategic priorities .
This report is the start of our budgetary procedure , and we share the bulk of the concerns and , often , the priorities , expressed therein .
I am going to dwell on two specific points .
This year , like every year , Parliament is outlining the priorities that it would like the European Commission to execute .
Among the objectives that Parliament plans to assign to the budgetary procedure this year is the idea of a budget focused on results , which in our view means clear objectives to enable these priorities to be executed meticulously .
I subscribe to this idea .
It is important that we show our desire for the Union 's expenditure programmes to help achieve the political objectives that they are supposed to achieve , and this for several reasons : the achievement of these political objectives is crucial in terms of making the Union appear legitimate in the eyes of the citizens ; we must support the Commission 's plan to develop the ' Better Lawmaking ' principle in its new initiatives and working methods ; and lastly , I am firmly convinced that an effective administrative system for the Union must be provided with the necessary resources .
I must , however , express some doubts about the way in which the results of this exercise are used , and here I am addressing the Council , which is sadly absent .
I agree that more attention should be paid to the objectives and to assessing the results of the policies carried out .
I also believe that this assessment must go beyond the stage of simply providing information on the administrative process as it was previously , when part of the PDB .
Nevertheless , my group will strongly oppose the possibility of this assessment being used to underpin budget cuts in administrative decisions or human resources .
Personal accountability for the Union 's operations is an important element of the activity-based budget approach .
However , if this accountability is to be transformed into initiative , the European Commission must be given the resources to act .
Finally , I should like to remind you of the importance that my group attaches to communication problems .
It should be remembered that the key aspect of the communication and information policy is to inform every EU citizen about the work of the institutions .
I therefore endorse the Commission proposal , which aims at launching campaigns on the Union 's political priorities .
These campaigns will be able to be launched as soon as Parliament has voted on these priorities .
Nevertheless , we expect many things to come out of the hearing organised by the Committee on Budgets .
Its conclusions must underpin the drafting of a new communication policy .
Democracy is a difficult exercise , and information is one pillar of it .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DA ) Mr President , I too should like to thank our rapporteur , Mr Virrankoski , for a report that outlines very clearly some of the problems that we , in this House , see in the run-up to the Commission 's presentation of the draft budget for 2008 .
We in the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe agree that , via the budget , the EU should maintain its focus on the Lisbon Process in order also to be able to respond quickly when new topics such as energy and climate change crop up .
However , we must , of course , all flatly acknowledge that the budget framework is very narrow and inflexible .
That makes it difficult to have all our wishes fulfilled .
That is why I would most sincerely call on the Commission to take an interest in Parliament 's priorities .
The Commission is happy to lean quite heavily on Parliament when it is short of employees and money . When , however , it is Parliament 's priorities that are in question , matters immediately become more difficult .
That applies in the case of both large and small matters .
A few years ago , for example , Parliament undertook a pilot project designed to prevent attacks on professional drivers and to guarantee them decent conditions when they take rests .
What is the Commission doing about this matter , the progress of which is being followed carefully by hauliers and professional drivers and their families ?
The answer is : very little , indeed too little .
It is insufficiently responsive to the public and it is too arrogant .
If I have to go out and explain to my electorate that the Commission needs more employees , it will help quite a lot if I can also say that these employees will be genuinely interested in voters ' concerns and wishes .
Tell that to your colleagues , Commissioner , when you come and ask for more employees .
I look forward to the forthcoming survey of staff needs .
We should also look into whether personnel policy is sufficiently flexible to allow political priorities to be implemented .
May I address one last matter ? The Commission has now already proposed a change to the financial programming for the period 2007-2013 .
Appropriations designed to stimulate growth - and relating , for example , to buildings , bridges and railways - are to be channelled to agency personnel .
Legal policy appropriations are also to go to agencies .
The framework is tight , and a mid-term review of the financial perspective is needed .
That is already clear .

on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , as I take the floor on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group in this debate on the Annual Policy Strategy for budgeting for 2008 , I should like to highlight three points .
Firstly , the rapporteur has adopted the right approach .
He suggests that the European Commission should prepare a ' budget for results ' for 2008 , thus ensuring optimum use of the limited financial resources available .
Secondly , the rapporteur is also right to draw attention to the fact that doing away with decentralised agencies and setting up new ones is certain to reduce the available margins in certain chapters of the multi-annual financial frameworks , thus reducing the operational funds in the framework of resources for individual programmes .
As a result , the budget could become less flexible and implementation of certain operational programmes could be restricted .
My third and final point is that it seems the rapporteur 's expectations of the planned review of budgetary expenditure between 2008 and 2009 are rather too high .
The idea that it will be possible to query the effectiveness of expenditure on the common agricultural policy on the basis of the review is quite unacceptable .
After all , the common agricultural policy guarantees food security for individual Member States of the European Union and for the Community as a whole .
It therefore ensures the most important form of security from each individual 's point of view .
It would be difficult to query expenditure for this purpose , because one cannot put a price tag on the provision of this kind of security .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , the annual strategy proposed by the European Commission for the 2008 budgetary procedure must strictly execute the decisions of the legislature .
It must not tone them down .
Despite current events being dominated by climate change - I am referring to the Stern report and the IPCC conclusions - the Commission proposal waters down the concept of sustainable development .
It merely mentions the prosperity , solidarity , security and external influence headings , the content of which remains arbitrary .
One may recall at this point , Commissioner , our struggle to obtain , at the time of the financial perspective , a EUR 100 million boost for the protection of the environment , which the Commission immediately halved .
Whereas it was so difficult to obtain funds for the environmental programme , I note how easy it was to release additional resources to fund the Frontex agency as an instrument for combating illegal immigration .
These budget signals illustrate the extent to which our flexibility is limited by the financial perspective and demonstrate , once again , that the environment budget is being whittled away .
Despite the urgency and importance of the environment for our fellow citizens , this is a cruelly limited budget for tackling the challenges of the fight against climate change and the erosion of biodiversity .
Let us not forget that the Natura 2000 network should receive EUR 6 billion each year in order to function properly .
Despite these shortcomings , I should like to express my interest in the new European Commission initiatives under the ' external influence ' heading .
The fund for renewable energy and energy efficiency and the global alliance on climate change must help the ACP countries , and Africa in particular , to embark on a form of development that integrates the environmental pillar and the social pillar more boldly than we have done , and thus to promote the concept of sustainable development .
Turning to a different subject , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance is looking forward to the Commission report on medium-term staffing requirements .
Commissioner , our group has always been in favour of having a satisfactory and steady supply of human resources .
In the case of the executive agencies , we need to examine on a case-by-case basis whether programmes are carried out better with an executive agency , or whether we need to keep a centralised approach , as the European Parliament has demanded for LIFE + .

on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , the rapporteur , Mr Virrankoski , says that next year 's budget should produce good results .
It is a hard task to measure results , however ; in practice it is impossible .
In evaluating results one needs to work on the basis of what would have happened if the EU had not used its budget funds for those purposes it uses them in accordance with budgetary procedure , and of which we are unaware .
Measuring results might succeed in some individual policy areas with regard to one single programme , but in terms of the budget as a whole it is a very ambitious task .
In fact this became clear during the time of the previous general rapporteur , when Parliament 's demands for results gradually became less stringent the closer the date of the final drafting of the budget got .
A good start to improving results is the fact that last year there were fewer budget funds left unspent by the Commission than there had been for years .
The Commission seems to have improved the way it implements programmes .
It is to be hoped that this was not just a temporary improvement in the final year of the previous financial framework .
On behalf of my group I wish the draftsmen of a budget which is to focus on results the best of luck .
At the same time I would say that the grand total for the budget will probably be so small that the Union will not be able to take any significant steps forward as a new priority in energy policy as determined at the March summit .
Instead , money will be spent on the militarisation of the Union and europropaganda in the name of information and communications as before .
( DE ) Mr President , when so few people gather together so late in the evening and everyone actually knows everyone else 's arguments quite well already , I think one of us could take the liberty of giving a word of encouragement .
I believe that things are already starting to happen in the Commission 's quarters - although we should like to see a little more .
I agree with the previous speaker that result orientation is a nice idea , but it is possible to be much more modest and yet almost revolutionary as far as you are concerned .
More specifically : it is still very hard for citizens to understand who in the Commission is doing what with how much money .
Which bodies are actually working for whom ?
Just try to do a quick search on the Internet for the net contribution made by Germany last year or in 2005 , for example .
It will take you a long time to find any information on this anywhere . This also goes for information on , for example , what projects where are receiving what support .
I click on the country in an attempt to see what is receiving support in my region , but find no information .
This is unthinkable !
I am convinced that , if the relevant transparency were already a reality , whether good or bad , we would see a significantly better , higher-quality debate than we are seeing now .
I hope , of course , that we succeed in making a start , if this is prescribed at European level in the field of agricultural subsidies , for example .
There , too , however , there will be problems with practical implementation .
For the rest , I would refer to those after me who are going to speak about the agencies - this is another area in which we could show by example how to put transparency into practice .
( ES ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , I would like to pay tribute to the mastery of financial management that the Directorate-General for Budgets has achieved at this stage in 2007 .
Year after year , financial perspective after financial perspective , the Council puts the European Commission in a position that is very difficult to overcome .
Every year , the European Commission is obliged to cover increasingly ambitious objectives with fewer and fewer resources .
It seems that the Member States see the European Union as a perfect stage from which to satisfy their national public opinion , very cheaply , of course .
When the Member States discover concern amongst the citizens - about growth or about employment - they launch the Lisbon Strategy and tell the European Commission to look for the funding .
When they discover that the European public is worried about immigration or energy or global warming , they ask the Commission to look for funding for these spectacular measures .
The problem is that commitments remain and yesterday 's priorities do not disappear just because other priorities are put before them .
At some point , sooner rather than later , the European Commission - despite its General Committee on Budgets - will stretch itself too far and all of this wonderful financial engineering involving ' back-loading ' and ' front-loading ' will not be sufficient to deal with so many priorities .
That will perhaps be the time for big financial decisions and let us hope that , when that day comes , the European Commission 's political skill is a match for the financial skill it has shown today .
( SV ) Commissioner , Mr President , the Commission 's annual political strategy shows that we face major , and to some extent new , challenges .
I am thinking of the climate issue , which demands efforts in the fields of research , the environment and energy .
I am thinking of research and innovation , in which it is a question of creating a Europe that , in the spirit of Lisbon , can become as attractive to researchers as the United States and offer equally big opportunities for converting research results into jobs and production .
Creating the Competitiveness and Innovation Programme ( CIP ) and a top-class European Institute of Technology are key issues .
I am thinking of the Balkans .
We have a candidate country , Croatia , which wishes to join the EU soon and which still has major security needs in Bosnia , and we have completely new countries , including Montenegro and perhaps Kosovo , which will require considerable efforts on the part of the EU .
I am thinking of democracy and communication , which require broader democratic cooperation between individuals , parties and non-governmental organisations .
In view of , for example , the elections to the European Parliament and the debate on a new treaty , 2008 must become a breakthrough year in terms of resources for the EU 's new communication strategy .
The picture of what the EU does and wants must become clearer , especially in the Member States .
These challenges require the EU to be able to take political decisions , allocate budget resources and engage in activity whereby we can make advances .
To be honest , we still have a fair way to go , however .
The EU 's budget is still inflexible .
It is difficult to change priorities and , above all , to implement new priorities , even if the principle of reassigning personnel to new political priorities is in the process of having an effect .
In the long run - and perhaps by no later than the mid-term review - we need greater opportunities vigorously to invest in new areas and correspondingly to cut back on others .
In today 's world , there are increasing demands on everyone to adapt - and not only on companies , individuals and regions , but also on the EU .
Seven years , which is the period covered by our long-term budget , is plenty of time .
We must obtain better links between legislative work and the budget .
I believe that the European Institute of Technology ( EIT ) would be an example of such a link .
The institute is an excellent idea , but one that will become problematic if other research efforts have to be reduced .
I think that the regulations are still often both bureaucratic and cumbersome .
The obsession with form-filling and the degree of detail required for audits cannot be characterised as modern management , and the same applies to the administration .
There were many who took a keen ongoing interest in Commissioner Kinnock 's ambitions in terms of flatter organisation , better personnel policy and increased gender equality .
We must now continue the reforms in the same spirit .
The Commission 's annual political strategy pinpoints the right areas , but it is now a question of being proactive and implementing changes in these areas .
We must , then , dare to do more , and that is a role that Parliament might perhaps be allowed to take on .

( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too should like to support the speech by our rapporteur on the budget , Mr Virrankoski , and also sincerely to thank him for the quality of his work and for the unwavering commitment to dialogue that he has demonstrated .
I shall confine myself , this evening , to four brief remarks .
Firstly , I should like the Commission to pay even greater attention to the budget reform rules in order to create an annual budget by activities that gives greater responsibility to each directorate and division in charge of its implementation .
Secondly , with regard to the agencies , the European Commission cannot , in its current state , plan to create new decentralised bodies without first assessing the budgetary impact on the Union 's financial resources .
Thirdly , staff expenditure needs to be even more transparent and plans need to be made to deploy staff , with even greater attention focused on the legislative priorities of our Parliament .
I have a fourth and final remark with which to conclude . If we want to rise to the challenges of globalisation and turn it to the advantage of our economy where employment is concerned , we need to work even harder to promote research and innovation .
However , until the European Union has access to more substantial resources , the European Commission will have to focus its efforts on the political and budgetary priorities decided on by Parliament .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to start by extending the warmest of thanks to the rapporteur .
The Commissioner will have seen that the great majority of group spokespeople supports the course proposed by our general rapporteur for the 2008 budgetary procedure .
Besides the budgetary procedure , which starts with the preliminary draft budget of the Commission , we have indeed created many accompanying measures and complementary structures in recent years , such as the Annual Policy Strategy and the screening report that is to be presented next week .
We are also particularly obliged to the Commission for taking the initiative to present a biannual account of the actual implementation of the budget in public , including to this House , so that we all know where shortcomings lie , where improvements can be made and what the consequences are , including for the subsequent budgetary procedure .
This is extremely useful , and we should all make use of it .
Nevertheless , given the multitude of instruments , we must consider the possibility of further optimising their timing and interlinking with a view to making the best use of them .
We should work on this with great care .
I should have liked to see the Commission 's Annual Policy Strategy not only setting out the issue of the old and new priorities mostly correctly in advance , but also giving precedence to the issue of better lawmaking , in particular , as the core of day-to-day work .
Mr President , if I may reiterate , with particular regard to budgetary aspects , we have just held two trialogues - on 7 March and 18 April - further to which we shall hopefully be able to give the issue of the agencies , the executive agencies , the joint undertakings and all the new administration that has been created a common basis in legislation , agreements , financing , cost-benefit analyses and discharge over the coming months . After all , there are various contradictions here that should not be tolerated in the long term in the interest of good governance .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Virrankoski , ladies and gentlemen , we are coming to the end of a debate that has , in my view , been highly informative .
I should like to highlight a few of the most important points raised in the debate .
The first of these is the message that under no circumstances should we allow ourselves to be tempted to renationalise Europe by cutting human resources and the staff needed for the Commission to function .
This key concern , which was voiced here by Mrs Guy-Quint , is , to my mind , the most important consideration in the execution of the 2008 budget .
In this report , on which I should commend our rapporteur Mr Virrankoski , I wish to highlight point 8 , namely the importance given to clarity , consistency and transparency in the presentation of the budget , on the one hand , and the fact that , on the other , we have an activity-based budget ( ABB ) , which , with its financial nomenclature , is difficult for the reader to understand .
The EU 's budget must be presented in a way that is perfectly clear and coordinated , and in which all headings can be read in different ways without the reader losing track of the overall picture .
This is a vital task , highlighted very well in point 8 .
As regards the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , I should like to highlight point 12 on Iraq , which , rightly in my view , points out that European investment in the country lacks visibility .
It must become more visible by means of a development policy in places where it is possible to put such a policy into practice , namely in Iraqi Kurdistan . Moreover , in relation to the rest of Iraq and in relation to the great mass of Iraqi refugees , Europe must take immediate action , as António Guterres , High Commissioner for Refugees , said last week in Geneva .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur for the good , in-depth start to our annual procedure .
I agree with the chairman of the Committee on Budgets , especially on the strategic approach .
One thing is the annual budget procedure , which we are starting now for 2008 , but at the same time we can also take more strategic approaches , for example looking at how to improve the annual budget procedure in general as well as relations between both institutions , because there are things which deserve improvement .
We need to make it faster and less bureaucratic , and we need to be more realistic as regards time constraints and the number of papers we produce .
Between the lines of today 's discussions on the APS , as people involved in the budget we more or less have the same opinion , but we cannot rely solely on ourselves - things also depend on the environments in which we work together .
So we can improve , and I think we will achieve a great deal of mutual understanding , as we have in recent years .
I hope we obtain the best possible outcome for our 2008 budgetary procedures , but we can also try to attain some more strategy goals together .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday at 12 noon .
Quota system in relation to the production of potato starch ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Wojciechowski , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1868 / 94 establishing a quota system in relation to the production of potato starch C6-0046 / 2007 .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Wojciechowski , and members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development for the work that has been carried out on this report .
I shall start by placing this proposal in its context .
Since the potato starch production quotas were introduced back in 1995 , we have been trying to define a strategy that could secure , enhance and promote the development of this important sector .
However , over the last decade the European Union 's agricultural policies have changed dramatically , becoming more market-oriented with the decoupling of most aid payments , and reforms of the market organisations in almost all sectors .
In spite of the existence of quotas , potato starch production exceeds demand on the European market with the result that we have to export about 40 % of our production into the world market , usually with the benefit of export refunds .
Concerning the proposals that we are discussing today , it is of vital importance to preserve the stability of this very fragile sector while at the same time taking the fundamental changes due to the reform of the common agricultural policy into account .
The main objectives of the proposals are firstly to roll over the quotas for another two years , which will allow us to review the potato starch system in the framework of the health check .
An extension of four years , as you propose in your report , would not allow us to take the opportunity to go into details with this important sector in the health check , and therefore you will understand that we cannot accept this amendment .
The second main objective is to roll over the existing quotas , which have actually provided a relatively stable market for potato starch in the European Union .
I am aware that there have been repeated requests from some Member States for an increase in their quotas , and I have not forgotten the declaration made by the Council .
However , an analysis of the current market situation has shown that an increase of the potato starch production quotas should be avoided at the moment .
If we increase the quotas in a situation where we have over-production within the European Union , this would put even heavier pressure on the prices .
We should take the opportunity to take another two years as suggested , and then , in the health check , go into details to see what a viable future for our potato starch production could look like .
rapporteur . - ( PL ) Mr President , this is the fifth time the European Parliament is considering the regulation on potato starch production quotas .
I am proud to present the report on this regulation for the second time .
It was my pleasure to do so previously in 2005 .
In practice , decisions are called for on two issues .
Firstly , on how long the system of limiting the production of potato starch should be extended for , and secondly on whether the production quotas allocated to individual countries should remain unchanged or be amended .
The European Commission has proposed maintaining the quota system for a further two years , leaving the quotas unchanged .
Many members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development pointed out , however , that two years is far too short a time period to allow for sensible planning .
As a result , the Commission agreed to a four-year period .
As rapporteur , I supported that proposal .
It is a sensible one , because farmers and starch manufacturers should not have swift and immediate changes imposed on them at short notice .
Starch production quota amounts are a more difficult matter .
Two new Member States , Poland and Lithuania , pointed out as they already had them two years earlier , that the quotas allocated to them are too low in relation to their potential and needs .
Lithuania 's quota is approximately 1 200 tonnes .
This is not enough to maintain even one plant , and as a result Lithuania has ceased to manufacture starch , although it needs to manufacture around 4 700 thousand tonnes and wishes to do so .
Poland is the largest producer of potatoes in Europe , or more precisely , in the European Union , but it has been allocated a quota of 144 000 tonnes .
This is several times less that the highest French , German and Dutch quotas .
In my capacity as rapporteur , I proposed increasing the quota for Poland and Lithuania .
Taken together , the proposed increase amounted to just under 40 000 tonnes , which is less than 2 % of the total quota amount of 1 948 000 tonnes .
By a small majority the committee voted against this proposal , however .
Twenty members voted against it and 17 in favour .
As rapporteur , I am required to present the arguments of the majority , even though it is only a small one .
I am also bound to mention the arguments adduced by the minority that tabled its amendments .
There was widespread concern in the committee that increasing quotas could destabilise the market .
I believe these concerns are unfounded , for the following reasons .
Firstly , this is not a large increase , as it amounts to barely 2 % of the total quota .
Secondly , the market has changed .
Although the quality of potato starch is higher , it is being supplanted by poorer quality cereal starch .
The share of potato starch in total production has decreased from 25 % to 20 % over the last three years .
This means there is actually a shortage of potato starch .
Thirdly , there is an imbalance in the relationship between the old and new Member States .
Ninety per cent of the quota goes to the old Member States , and only 10 % to the new ones , even though the latter account for over 25 % of the Union 's human capital .
Fourthly , the quotas allocated are often underused .
As much as several dozen percentage points are not taken up at times .
If the crop fails , a shortage of starch on the market ensues .
This is not compensated for in subsequent years , at least not beyond the permitted compensation of approximately 5 % of the quota .
Fifthly , the Commission itself has recognised the damage inflicted on Poland and Lithuania by the quota system .
Commissioner Fisher Boel is present in the House today , and two years ago she herself promised that account would be taken of the special circumstances of those two countries , but this did not happen .
Lastly , Europe must demonstrate solidarity not selfishness in response to the perceived needs of these two Member States that have suffered so obviously under the current system .
Certain issues were closed five years ago during accession negotiations , but this does not mean that we should remain bound by those agreements forever and ignore the economic changes that have taken place since then .
Ladies and gentlemen , as I conclude , I should like to draw your attention to Amendment 8 , which could be the basis of a good compromise .
What it proposes is that if certain quotas are not used in a particular year , then the next year interested Member States , but only new ones , would be able to apply to the Commission asking to be allocated additional quotas up to the amount unused the previous year .
In this way , actual manufacture computed over several years would not exceed the maximum limit of 1 948 000 tonnes , and the new Member States would be able to request higher quotas .
I urge you to consider adopting this amendment , as it could lead to a sensible compromise .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , having taken the oath this afternoon , I intend , in my maiden speech , to address the issue of potatoes , starch potatoes to be precise .
This might almost have been foreordained , since I grew up with a father who used to like to read German children 's books to me - something which might be to Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf 's liking - and there would always be a story about ' Die Bedeuting der Kartoffel ' - the meaning of the potato .
I have no idea who the author was , but my father enjoyed reading it to me , and the fact that my maiden speech is about potatoes cannot be a coincidence .
Joking aside , this Commission proposal is , of course , of major importance to a number of regions in Europe , including the north-east of my own country where the potato starch industry has generated considerable employment and production .
This sector , and therefore the producers and their regions , stand to benefit from clarity and certainty where planning and management in their individual businesses is concerned , certainly following the sweeping CAP reforms in 2003 and given the uncertainties associated with WTO negotiations , which are still in progress .
As somebody has already pointed out , when the current potato starch system was last extended , this House would have preferred it to have been for a longer period .
Whilst the Commission is now suggesting once again to extend by two years , the rapporteur turned this into three years and the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development was the last one to pipe in with its suggestion of four years .
This is , as I see it , a clear message in the direction of the Commission and Council .
In principle , there is support for the proposed extension , but ideally for a slightly longer period of time , so that those involved know where they stand in the next few years .
Knowing where you stand also means , in my view , sticking with the existing quota for that period of time .
In this light , proposals to extend quotas in individual Member States do not in any event enjoy our support .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , this is the second debate in the House this term on the issue of potato starch production quotas .
The matter was debated previously in May 2005 .
Unfortunately , little progress has been made during these last two years with regard to increasing the potato starch production quotas for two new Member States , Poland and Lithuania .
Despite the European Commission 's statement in 2005 that the quotas would be checked and requests for increasing the quotas allocated to those countries considered , nothing has been achieved in that regard .
I shall therefore repeat what I said in my statement two years ago , namely that the potato starch production quotas allocated by the Commission are not in line with the production capacities of Polish and Lithuanian plants , their supply of raw material and the increasing demand for starch .
Concern has been expressed that increasing production quotas amounts to opening Pandora 's box , so that if Poland and Lithuania 's quotas were increased this would lead to similar requests by the remaining Member States regarding other agricultural products .
It is important , however , to bear in mind the fact that the market for starch products is constantly developing , and that demand for these products is rising .
In addition , it has been noted that ever since Poland joined the European Union imports of starch and starch products have been steadily increasing .
There has been a notable worsening of the trade deficit for starch , and this is due precisely to the restrictions on production .
The European Commission 's stance is that the World Trade Organisation negotiations are likely to lead to a reduction in the level of export refunds and a reduction of tariff protection for the import of tapioca starch , thus increasing the availability of starch on the Community market .
The Commission has not taken into account , however , that during the period when the quotas apply , that is to say for the next two marketing years , there is practically no chance of any of the provisions of a future agreement on agriculture within the World Trade Organisation being implemented .
The impact of multilateral agreements on the supply of imported starch on the Community market will therefore be negligible .
I trust Members of this House will endorse Mr Wojciechowski 's report and that the European Commission will grant the requests made by the governments of Poland and Lithuania to increase their quotas .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , first of all I want to thank the rapporteur , Mr Wojciechowski , for an excellent report .
I would say that the potato is quite a tricky crop to cultivate .
Its annual harvest varies quite considerably and its price also fluctuates greatly .
The potato is also very well suited to more challenging regions , including the northernmost part of the European Union , and in that sense it is a very valuable crop .
On many farms it is clearly a cash crop .
For example , in my country around a third of potato starch is produced domestically and two thirds is imported , because the forest industry uses the lion 's share of it .
Thus , when we examine quotas we would hope that this non-food use of the product will be taken better account of .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , this debate gives a pretty clear indication of the nature of the solidarity demonstrated by the old Fifteen in the context of enabling the new Member States to secure the production of potato starch , if only for domestic purposes .
Despite being a traditional producer of potato starch , Poland now has to import it .
A similar situation has arisen with regard to milk quotas for which the limits set by the European Commission are also less than domestic consumption .
The House recently debated the issue of soft fruits .
It became obvious in the Chamber how little the Commission cares about helping the new Member States to protect their markets .
The Commission is forever referring back to the accession treaties , which were negotiated under immense pressure and weighted against the new Member States where many quotas are concerned .
This makes it impossible for the new Members to compete on equal terms on the Community 's markets .
Much is said in this House about the need for the new Member States to catch up in terms of development .
Action such as the Commission 's insistence on maintaining production quotas which results in the closure of production facilities and in farms going out of business demonstrates that new Member States are not being treated as equal partners within the Union .
If Parliament rejects this symbolic amendment once again , it will prove that there are really two Unions .
All this also puts a question mark over the process of further enlargement of the European Union .
Perhaps it should be slowed down dramatically ?
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , the quotas for potato starch were not laid down arbitrarily by the Commission , but were negotiated and undersigned by the Polish Government in the course of its accession - so there is an agreement that must be kept to .
I believe that , just as other nations have their sensitivities , the Polish soul likes to complain .
In my estimation , this amendment and the balancing-out arrangement will be adopted tomorrow .
As you will remember , the amendment has been adopted once before , but the Commission invoked technical difficulties with implementation .
That was the case again just now in committee .
I would ask that , when it comes to tomorrow 's vote on the amendment - which does not concern an increase in the overall quota , but instead a balancing-out - you tell the people you have dealing with it not how it will not work but how it will work , and thus take a rather more positive approach .
This does not necessarily mean that the whole quantity to be balanced out will be made available ; but showing goodwill on this - and possibly doing so within an appropriate timeframe - would still represent a reasonable offer on the part of the Commission .
( PL ) Mr President , as we debate the potato starch production quota system we would do well to recall a couple of key factors concerning this market .
The arguments adduced by those opposed to increasing quotas , alleging potential difficulties for the market and the emergence of significant surpluses of potato starch bear no relation to reality .
In addition , the arguments relating to WTO negotiations are not very relevant .
One of the results of these negotiations is supposed to be the end of export refunds , probably after 2013 , whereas we are discussing quotas for the next two years 2007-2009 .
It seems to me that not everyone is aware of the wide and varied applications of potato starch .
I would remind the House that this starch is used in the food , feed , paper , pharmaceutical and textile industries .
It is even used in the steel industry too .
As the starch product market is growing , and the demand for many starch products increasing , I see no reason why the damaging low Polish and Lithuanian quotas should not be increased .
Incidentally , there are over 600 starch products
Mrs Fisher Boel , the quality of Polish starch products is high , and they can therefore compete on the external market .
Your declared aim is to make the Union 's agriculture competitive at global level , Commissioner , but how is this to be achieved if production is restricted through low quotas ?
If the signals from the market are that there is a growing need for this product , it would be appropriate to allow higher quotas for the countries requesting an increase .
In view of the fact that the 2003 reforms aimed to make the Union 's agricultural sector more market orientated , the quotas should be increased .
. - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to pay tribute to my fellow Member , Mr Wojciechowski , for his work as rapporteur on the quota system in relation to the production of potato starch .
I should like simply to focus my speech on the amendments aimed at increasing the production quotas for Lithuania and Poland .
Indeed , while I understand the basic principle of Amendments 5 and 6 and of Amendment 7 - which is the sum of the first two , since it concerns small producers - in terms of proposing to increase Lithuania 's quota from 1 211 to 4 855 tonnes - that is , to quadruple it - and Poland 's quota from 144 985 to 180 000 tonnes , I feel that , if adopted , these amendments would open up a can of worms and give other Member States the opportunity to ask for the quotas on their produce to be revised at the highest level .
I am thinking here of olive oil , milk , and an abundance of other products .
That is why , ladies and gentlemen , I shall do as I did in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and advocate the adoption of this excellent report , but without the amendments proposed for the part-session .
The way the schedule falls means that we are debating this evening , 23 April , in plenary , that we are voting tomorrow at 12 noon and that , between the two , we shall be holding a working group meeting within my group , on the subject of agriculture .
We shall discuss this issue further with our fellow Members in the meeting , because opinions are , all the same , relatively divided on these amendments - the shadow rapporteur , Mr Golik , would not contradict me on that .
No doubt , then , we will adopt our definitive position on these amendments tomorrow morning , before the vote .

( NL ) Mr President , I , too , should like to compliment the rapporteur , and , at the same time , congratulate my new Dutch fellow Member , Mrs de Lange , on her maiden speech .
I did not know that the topic of potatoes was so pertinent .
I would recommend a period of four years to the Commission .
Why four ?
I think that everyone wants some level of certainty , including farmers .
Four years is also a good block of time for assessing the sugar reforms , which at the moment , is anything but clear ; there is an unmistakable connection between isoglucose and potato starch .
I think we will not know where we stand until four years from now , and this is why I am very much in favour of these four years .
While a few speakers before me said that they regarded Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf 's amendment as ideal , I am not so sure about that .
How can you predict this year 's harvest on the basis of last year 's ?
Quotas cannot be transferred from one year to the next .
If this is done anyway , even if the quota is too low one year and too high the next , it is of limited use , because a farmer can never predict production .
In this light , I do not know if the amendment is technically viable .
( PL ) Mr President , the potato starch issue is being debated by Parliament once again , and it will go on appearing on our agenda until fair and responsible decisions are taken .
Potato starch will remain a problem as long as the largest producer of potatoes in the European Union , namely Poland , continues to suffer as a result of starch production quotas and as long as the Commission continues to disregard Parliament .
I would remind the House that two years ago the European Parliament almost unanimously supported the idea of reallocating quotas unused by the old Member States to the new Member States .
The Commission has failed to act on that recommendation .
Now it is saying no again .
This comes as no surprise to Polish Members of the House .
Commissioner Fisher Boel always says no when Poland is involved .
Her aversion to Poland and Polish farmers is pretty well common knowledge .
She does not show any mercy to little Lithuania either .
The refusal to grant Lithuania an additional allocation of barely 3.5 thousand tonnes of starch goes to show how the strong can get everything they want in this Union of ours whilst the weak are reduced to begging .
Nonetheless , there is a glimmer of hope .
Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf 's words today testify to the fact that some Members of this House are capable of thinking in terms of society as a whole and of understanding the underdog .
I am very grateful indeed to Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf for that .
( LT ) A situation has developed that I would call paradoxical .
Such things should not occur among partners .
Because of low starch quotas , factories in Lithuania are standing idle , and people are out of work .
The quota allotted to Lithuania is ten times smaller than what is needed in the country .
Therefore , starch has to be imported , while Lithuania 's production lines stand idle .
At the same time , there are countries where the starch quotas are excessive , and are not being used .
Should this be tolerated in a common domestic market ?
In relation to the time period under discussion , the quota of 1200 t of starch production allotted to Lithuania means that factories are only working at 9 % of their production capacity .
Therefore , EU institutions were asked to increase the production quota , which would have created conditions for economically worthwhile operation of the factories and a continuation of the potato-growing tradition in Lithuania .
A negative reply was received .
An increase in the quotas for Lithuania and Poland would in no way harm other Member States , and it would be very important for Lithuania 's economy .
It would also be a display of solidarity and shared interests .
( PL ) Mr President , today 's debate on the potato starch production quota system is a splendid example of the truth of the saying according to which the rich never understand the poor .
It is hard to understand why when production quotas remain unused in certain Member States they may not be reallocated to others states whose quota allocation is too small .
It is even harder to explain this to farmers .
Why should the misgivings of Union bureaucrats take precedence over the logic , needs , and solidarity of the Member States of the European Union ?
If farmers in Denmark , France , Italy or Germany were to be badly treated , their Polish colleagues would stand shoulder to shoulder with them .
The quota increase proposed by the rapporteur will not harm anyone and will not result in budgetary changes either .
Failure to implement it will make it abundantly clear , however , that the Union is governed by the principle according to which ' what is yours is mine and what is mine is untouchable ' .
Is this really what we all want ?
( PL ) Polish MEPs have been raising the issue of an increase in the potato starch production quotas for Poland and Lithuania with the Commissioner ever since Poland joined the European Union .
At the Council held on 30 May 2005 the Commission actually stated that it was prepared to consider Poland and Lithuania 's submission in this regard , but only after the two-year period of validity of the present production quotas .
This period is almost over .
We are now debating the Council regulation on the matter but neither the Council nor the Commission has any intention of abiding by earlier statements .
There are at least three reasons why starch production limits should be increased for the new Member States , notably Poland and Lithuania .
Firstly , in the framework of the current potato starch production quotas as much as 90 % of the quota is allocated to the Fifteen , and less than 10 % to the ten new Member States .
By contrast , where potato production is concerned , the old Member States account for only 70 % of production , and the new Member States for as much as 30 % .
Secondly , starch production in the new Member States takes place in small processing plants , which play an important role in the local economy and the development of rural areas .
Increasing production quotas would therefore make a significant contribution to reducing unemployment in those areas .
Thirdly , there have been major cutbacks in agricultural production in the new Member States , affecting both the plant and animal sectors .
These cutbacks impact negatively on the development of rural areas .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , this has been a very interesting debate , clearly showing that there are huge differences between different Members of the European Parliament as regards the possibility of modifying the starch quotas for two Member States : Poland and Lithuania .
It has already been mentioned today that these quotas were allocated to the new Member States on the basis of historical production .
They were accepted by all of the new Member States , including Poland and Lithuania .
We have to bear in mind that we have to be very careful to keep the market balanced .
I would not want to upset this balance , and nor would other starch-producing Member States .
I think that the proposal of a two year rollover allows us , as I said previously , to include the discussion on the future of quotas for starch in our health check .
It will also allow us to analyse the first effects of our sugar reform , where sweeteners , also based on cereal starch , will now face fierce competition from out-of-quota sugar in the chemical and fermentation industries .
I am quite sure that this might have a knock-on effect on the starch market , leading to additional pressure on the potato starch market .
Finally , I want to react briefly to the point raised by the rapporteur about the reallocation of unused quotas .
This has also been included in a new amendment .
It is obvious that this proposal will lead to an increase in overall potato starch production .
Therefore it has to be seen in connection with the supply situation of the potato starch market , where , as I said before , currently 40 % of production has to be exported .
It also raises the question of equal treatment , as quotas are fixed by the same method for all Member States .
I think that the Member States that have generated this shortfall want to benefit from the carry-over .
So the Commission will not support the idea of a four-year rollover .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday at 12 noon .
Written statement ( Article 142 )
in writing . - ( PL ) Mr President , can one expect to sort out the world 's problems without first putting one 's own house in order ?
In the European Union 's case this thought springs readily to mind , if we consider how the problems of the new Member States are dealt with .
We are today debating yet another problem experienced by the new Member States .
In this instance the difficulty relates to the potato starch market and only two countries are affected .
The figures clearly indicate that the current organisation of this market is artificial , unfair and fails to take account of the real situation .
Poland is the leading potato producer in the Union , yet it has become an importer of potato starch .
This is not because it is unable to manufacture starch , or that its starch is too expensive or of poor quality .
Poland is importing starch as a result of political decisions on the size of quota allocations .
We should be ashamed of these decisions , because they are irrational and nonsensical .
They have led to a situation in which poorer quality cereal starch is replacing better quality potato starch .
Should we really be making the Union a laughing stock and losing credibility at global level ?
It has been said that clever people correct their mistakes whilst the stupid thrive on them .
The current starch quota allocation most certainly classes as a mistake .
I am confident that the Union is capable of correcting it .
The construction of the enlarged Europe is often reminiscent of building a house from the roof down , instead of up from the foundations .
Damages actions for breach of competition rules ( debate )
The next item is the report , by Mr Sánchez Presedo , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the Green Paper on Damages actions for breach of the EC antitrust rules
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner Kroes , ladies and gentlemen , the existence of economic freedom , the functioning of the internal market and the sustainability of European development are inextricably linked to the competition policy .
Since the Treaty of Rome was signed 50 years ago , its importance has continued to grow .
Competition is an indicator of European vitality and excellence , a key policy in terms of fulfilling the Lisbon Strategy and achieving the Union 's objectives .
Anti-competitive infringements make the game unfair , impact on flows of exchanges amongst Member States and damage confidence in the rules . They reduce the Union 's dynamism and results .
It is important that we have dissuasive and reactive mechanisms .
Infringements have been dealt with principally by means of public actions of an administrative nature .
The centralisation of the application of Article 81 ( 3 ) - through a priori control by the Commission , toned down by means of the exemption regulations from the 1980s onwards - was a victim of its own success ; the demand for more and better competition revealed its economic inefficiency and its legal shortcomings .
The role of private actions was stressed by the Court of Justice of the European Communities when the 2001 Courage v. Crehan judgment recognised that anybody could have recourse to national judicial bodies in order to claim damages resulting from the actions of the infringer .
The modernisation of Regulation ( EC ) No 1 / 2003 of the Council put an end to the Commission 's monopoly and recognised a more open system , applicable in a decentralised manner by the administrative authorities making up the network of Community competition authorities and also directly by the national judicial authorities .
The possibility of private actions is nothing exotic , but rather a return to the classic jurisprudence according to which Community law imposes obligations on the States and on private individuals , and has vertical and horizontal effects that require judicial protection .
Their use in the Member States - according to a study ordered by the Commission - is extremely diverse and entirely underdeveloped - unlike in the United States , where nine out of every ten application procedures are judicial .
The rapporteur takes a positive view of the Commission 's publication of a Green Paper to identify the obstacles standing in the way of private actions and to find ways to remove them .
In an advanced system of competition , public action against the impunity of infringer undertakings should be backed with private actions against immunity and indemnity in relation to the damages suffered by the victims of their actions .
Facilitating private actions will make the competition rules more effective .
The arguments for it include both efficiency and justice .
The imposition of fines is insufficient unless accompanied by private actions to prevent the infringer from gaining advantage compared to competitors as a result of the infringement and to compensate the victims of the damages caused .
The report takes the view that public and private actions form two pillars with the complementary aim of safeguarding market discipline in the public interest and protecting the private interests of players on that market .
The application of Community competition law by administrative and judicial authorities must not lead to any lack of uniformity in its application .
Judgments must not be allowed to vary according to the authority making it .
This is a crucial point .
The Community acquis and the effectiveness of leniency programmes must be maintained , public and private actions must be coordinated and cooperation amongst all of the competent authorities must be intensified .
The report proposes a Community model in line with the Union 's legal culture , which takes account of the Member States ' legal traditions .
It opposes a slide towards the US model , since it is not in favour of introducing that model 's peculiar characteristics , such as judicial bodies consisting of non-professionals , ' class actions ' , punitive damage payments of three times the damage occasioned , strict requirements on the disclosure of documents and the system of lawyer 's fees and litigation costs .
We must compensate for imbalances and ensure that liabilities are met , without violating the principle of equality of arms or artificially stimulating litigiousness .
The aim is to encourage the rational use of legal actions and not judicial activism , and above all to promote the amicable and early settlement of disputes .
Community competition is an exclusive competence of the European Union .
National administrative and judicial procedures do not alter that and they must not prevent the existence of common guidelines for penalties , in accordance with the principles of better legislation .
I shall end by thanking the rapporteur for the Committee on Legal Affairs , Mr Doorn , for his valuable cooperation , the shadow rapporteurs for their help and the Members who have tabled amendments for their contributions .
I appreciate the constant and exemplary dialogue maintained with the Commission during the drawing up of the report and I would urge the Commissioner to carry on demonstrating her commitment in the next White Paper .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , Honourable Members , we are here tonight to debate an issue of fundamental importance : rights .
The Court has been clear : the right to damages is necessary to guarantee the effectiveness of Community competition rules .
But consumers and business customers do not use their rights .
Injuries are left uncompensated , while society and the economy absorb the loss : that is just reality .
That is clearly unjust , incompatible with our Community of law and at odds with our shared competitiveness objectives .
The European Commission and , I believe , most Members of this House will not tolerate this situation .
Our Green Paper set out the problems .
Finding appropriate solutions requires a very careful , measured approach , grounded in European legal traditions and developed through dialogue with stakeholders and , in particular , with Parliament .
That is why the Commission will present a White Paper , accompanied by an impact assessment , for further discussion around the New Year .
Mr Sánchez Presedo 's report provides a wealth of pertinent input into this process .
I congratulate the rapporteur wholeheartedly and thank the shadow rapporteurs and the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs for all their work .
I also thank Mr Doorn and the members of the Committee on Legal Affairs for their contribution .
We will give most careful consideration to all Parliament 's recommendations in preparing the White Paper .
I am aware that some are concerned that fostering private damage actions might lead to a US-style litigation culture .
We will certainly take this into account in drafting the White Paper .
But the scales are currently tipped against the victims .
Carefully balanced European solutions need to be found .
Common solutions that meet the strict tests of proportionality and subsidiarity should only be developed where national rules do not guarantee the right to damages effectively .
I have also heard it said that more private actions will create additional costs for business .
We heard similar arguments years ago as regards the ' polluter pays ' principle for the environment .
The fact is that today cartels and other abuses cause huge but hidden costs .
Empirical research shows that international cartels raise prices by over 20 % .
Recent cartel decisions by the Commission covered synthetic rubber , gas-insulated switch gear and acrylic glass .
All these cartels increased input costs for business and harmed European competitiveness .
The time has come to introduce the ' competition-infringer pays ' principle .
Let us not forget that , whilst some industries have to create some pollution to do business , in the competition environment there is no need and no excuse for infringements .
Infringers may not like having to repair the damage they cause , but they should simply not break the rules in the first place .
It is their choice .
I believe that making sure businesses and consumers do not lose out because of the illegal behaviour of some companies is worth fighting for .
I sincerely hope that this week Parliament will send a strong message of support for this objective .
We will discuss the detail together later , on the basis of a White Paper that will be balanced and measured and subject to the vigorous and very valuable scrutiny of this House .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs . - ( NL ) Mr President , I think it is now the third time that I am addressing this House on the topic of competition law around midnight .
I am not sure what the reason for this could be , but it is uncanny that it should evidently be regarded as , in some sense , a nocturnal topic .
As draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs , I should like to make a few observations .
The fundamental question is as to whether citizens and businesses that have sustained damage as a result of infringements of cartel law be entitled to damages I think they should , and so does the Committee on Legal Affairs .
We think that in such cases , there should be a right to damages in the Member States , which should provide for procedures of this kind , although how they organise them is up to them .
In some Member States , the government will need to establish first that an infringement has taken place .
In other Member States , this will be done differently , but everything in accordance with the Member States ' procedures .
After all , there is also the question of whether procedures of this kind can be imposed from Brussels on Member States in the first place .
You may be able to persuade them that these need to be introduced , but whether they can be imposed is , to our mind , a different matter altogether .
This is not , after all , about cartel law , but civil law , which , like criminal law , is a preserve of Member States , something in which the European Union cannot intervene .
This is why we have serious doubts as to the possible legal basis that should underlie European legal measures in order to introduce procedures of this kind .
The same applies , in fact , to all those other questions and observations in the Green Paper that pertain to the furnishing of proof , for example the hiring of experts or group activities .
These are all examples that fall within the scope of national civil law , in respect of which the European Union cannot prescribe any legislation .
These are the principal observations that we in the Committee on Legal Affairs have made .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , the Commissioner indicated during her address that she was looking for Parliament to give a strong measure of support to action in this area .
I want to make it clear , on behalf of my group , that we welcome the publication of the Green Paper and we are looking forward to the publication of the White Paper .
We think that people 's rights in this area are not properly applied and , certainly , we want to ensure that more is done than is currently being done .
However , as the Commissioner herself has indicated , that is going to require a delicate balance , not least for the reasons that Mr Doorn has outlined , and because of the hearing organised by Mr Sánchez Presedo , in which we devoted half a day to considering these difficult issues .

For my own part , I am very committed to regarding progress in this area as an integral part of the whole of the Commission 's agenda in terms of modernisation of competition policy , so let nobody be in any doubt about our encouragement of further action by the Commission .
However , as the Commissioner has made clear , both within Member State governments and amongst the business community , there is real concern to avoid the experiences of the United States .
It is not good enough just to say ' we are not going to do what the United States did ' , especially when , it must be said , after giving a considerable amount of detailed consideration to the issue , Mr Sánchez Presedo 's report goes into seeking to resolve , as it were , all these difficulties by changing the burden of proof , introducing punitive damages - at least in relation to cartels - and cost-free litigation , confusing EU and national competences , changing the rules in relation to disclosure , and cutting out of the assessment of the costs of this litigation any principles in relation to subsidiarity , proportionality or whether there is a proper legal base .
Therefore , when people ask why we are concerned about this report , it is because it has become a Christmas tree with too many bells hanging on it .
We are in favour of opening the door , we are certainly not in favour of encouraging a process which may lead us down the US route , against the wishes of the Commission and against the wishes of all of those who have worked on this report .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , the Socialist Group in the European Parliament is happy to embrace the initiative taken by the Commissioner in this Green Paper .
This is the very reason why we would argue that it is wise not to specify at this stage that the scope of a number of points should not be looked into further .
We want the Commission to be given ample opportunity to examine a number of things properly and to follow them up with impact assessments to study their effects .
After all , I can imagine that with regard to the Green Paper , we too will reach the conclusion that that is not the most obvious route to take and that indeed , a number of things need not be further elaborated or fleshed out ; we do not wish to take a decision on this at this moment though .
This is why we are calling on the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats to reconsider a number of those points or possibly to provide a formula which leaves slightly more room for what the conclusion should be , so as to in any event give the Commission the opportunity to look into this further .
We will then also look at our own amendments in a critical light .
I would hereby like to invite you to take another closer look at this tomorrow .

As for me , I should also like to address this point from a Dutch angle as we in the Netherlands are having a heated debate on this very topic at the moment ; finally , people are experiencing what competition policy at European level means and how we fight these cartels , because in a recent Dutch case , the Commissioner has charged high fines to beer brewers .
This is , of course , a topic on which the whole of the Netherlands assumes to be an authority .
It was a very telling example , because this beer cartel involved price agreements among beer brewers , who also have enormous influence on the hotel and catering industry and as a result of which people , the eventual customers , paid over the odds for their beers , something which was already subject of discussion in the Netherlands ever since the introduction of the euro .
This example , though , demonstrated once again that the fines that are then levied are first fed to the European Commission before they are channelled back to the Member States , and do not end up directly with these consumers .
Hotel and catering entrepreneurs are likely to take legal action against these beer brewers to see if they can recover any of the damage , but this is of no use to the consumer , the end user .
In that sense , it is very interesting as an example to see how headway can be made ; after all , the eventual end user is being conned by cartels of this kind .
This example also proves my point , and so I should like to call on this House to keep the door open and to find out how we can let the consumer , the end user , benefit more from this cartel policy .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , when we first discussed the Commission 's Green Paper , I felt like a kind of latter-day Cassandra forecasting all kinds of woes .
Perhaps I fared better than Cassandra in that you , Commissioner , and the rapporteur took some of my concerns seriously - I hesitate to call them ' predictions ' .
My concerns , though perhaps only gently - maybe too gently for some of my colleagues - are embedded in the report that we are debating .
So I can support giving you scope to explore the options of both follow-on actions and stand-alone actions .
I can share a vision of mutual recognition of decisions , but I make it clear that that lies in the future , not right now .
My main remaining reservations concern the question of how much of a carrot has to be offered to get the system to take off , particularly for stand-alone actions .
And you may note the report on that subject that has just come out in the UK .
If the carrot is too large , whether for the consumer , the lawyers or competing companies , I fear that , however we craft our rules , we are at risk of being pushed towards some of the worst aspects of damages actions that we hear about from the United States .
I say ' pushed ' because that is how it happens .
Nobody goes there voluntarily .
With the whole of the EU as the territory for the victor , a very fine balance has to be struck .
Another of my priorities would be to ensure that actions are well founded and that we do not end up with the kind of blackmail actions that happen in the United States .
I agree it will be difficult to get it right and account will have to be taken of national differences in legal practice and tradition , but if we can succeed it will be a very useful tool and well worth having .
I look forward to the White Paper too , but I warn you that I may not have put my Cassandra 's robes away yet .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , you have a difficult task ahead of you because I can see that opinions will differ greatly on both sides .
On the one side , you will have the support of a number of consumer associations , which will welcome your proposal .
On the other side , you will have many interest groups , which will denounce the risks of such an approach in the field of competition law .
Nevertheless , since you are proposing an initiative in an area of yours relating to anti-trust , you are operating at a level at which the Commission 's inaction will no doubt be challenged less than it would elsewhere .
I am thinking in particular of the way in which the Commission assesses a given merger proposal .
In the area of anti-trust , there is , in a way , more scope for a broader agreement between the Member States and the public players .
The basic idea , then , is to supplement public action with private action .
We are still only at the preliminary stage , and we can clearly see that the path will be full of pitfalls .
There are those , like Mr Doorn , who imagine that the Commission does not have to give its opinion on initiatives in this area , because all of that is meant to come under the civil law of the Member States .
Then , there are those - I believe that all of this evening 's speakers have voiced opinions along these lines - who are worried about the potential for such an initiative to be abused and , when we think about abuses in this area , everyone has in mind the abuse of the US system , where the victims whom the defence claims to help are in reality - if I dare say so - the cash cow of the legal professions .
Clearly , no one in this Chamber wants to see European competition law engage in such a scheme .
You have announced to us a White Paper , and you have announced to us an impact study : once again , we shall examine your proposals with the aim of helping you , with the desire to make competition law better able , by way of these proposals , to address Europeans ' concerns and to fulfil what they might normally expect from a just application of competition law .
Once again , however - and I am not the first person this evening to have said this - anything that is liable to involve us in an abuse of procedures that helps put money into professions which , incidentally , find many other ways of guaranteeing turnover , would not have our support .
It is in this spirit of openness and with the concern , often demonstrated in this Chamber , to protect consumers ' rights , that we shall support and examine your proposals .
Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioner for her initiative , and the rapporteur for his report .
I want to concentrate on possible consumer actions , so-called collective or representative actions .
These should not be the big bogeyman for business that they are often portrayed as .
If we want informed and responsible consumers who do not need over-nannying by the state , then the companion of that approach of treating consumers like grown-ups is that we must allow them to take action together to get redress .
After all , why should the state alone be the enforcer in anti-competitive matters ?
It is the consumer who loses as a result of anti-competitive behaviour , but often gets no redress or compensation .
There is nothing astounding in proposing this : the right to take action is already acknowledged by the ECJ .
What we have to do is to facilitate this , make justice accessible to those who lose and ensure that compensation is distributed in an equitable manner , not just to the privileged few .
This has to be the complementary approach to having informed consumers , giving them real power through increasing justice and redress .
Indeed , this should assist the better functioning of our internal market .
Consumers are often the best judges of what is anti-competitive .
We should have no fears about harnessing this force for the general good .
Everyone is absolutely clear that we do not want US-style class actions , so now is our unique opportunity to design something European which respects European values of our society and justice .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , honourable Members , over 40 years ago in van Gend [ amp ] Loos , the Court gave EU market players and citizens the rights they need to play a central role in our European project .
The legal environment in which the victims of antitrust infringements currently find themselves is not acceptable .
I got the message that everybody agrees on that .
I would like to thank you for the stimulating debate here this evening on how we might gradually improve this legal environment , and I look forward to Parliament 's vote on the report .
So far , so good .
I would now like to respond to a few issues raised in our debate this evening .
Mr Doorn raised the question of legal base .
That is important and quite clear .
At the stage of a Green Paper , and in the absence of any Commission proposal , it is rather premature , if you will allow me to say so , to discuss the question of legal base at this stage .
The Treaty offers appropriate , specific and general legal bases for measures in this area and I imagine that we could agree upon that .
However , a pertinent base , and hence the applicable procedure , can only be identified in line with the nature , objectives and scope of any individual measure possibly envisaged after the White Paper .
I will , however , consider the extent to which it may be appropriate to say something about legal bases in the forthcoming White Paper .
So , there is still something to look at there .
I am aware of the need to be sensitive as regards national procedural rules .
There is no doubt about that .
That is quite a clear warning .
On substance , we already have one uniform European competition law , and by their very nature , breaches of the antitrust rules have a cross-border impact because they affect our internal market , and that is what we are protecting .
It makes sense to me that the right to compensation should also be equally enforceable throughout our internal market .
It is only to the extent that the procedural rules of the Member States do not guarantee effectively the substantive rights conferred by the Treaty that the Commission may seek some approximation of these rules .
Any measures proposed would have to meet the strict tests of subsidiarity , proportionality and necessity .
The White Paper will be accompanied by an impact assessment , as I have already said .
Mr Evans mentioned the need to avoid encouraging a litigation culture and the risk of unmerited claims being brought .
The Commission is encouraging a competition culture compatible with our existing European legal cultures .
We will pursue a measured and balanced approach , because like you , we are determined to avoid opening the door to the excesses which some other jurisdictions have experienced .
But fear is a very bad adviser .
None of the key characteristics of US antitrust litigation is suggested as an option in the Green Paper .
Many of those of support facilitating damage actions , like Mrs Bowles , stressed the need to avoid tilting the scales too much in favour of claimants .
However , these same commentators also recognised that the scales are currently tipped against the victims of antitrust damages , and hence that something should be done .
The Commission is striving for a proportionate and measured approach developed in consultation with stakeholders .
Mrs Wallis mentioned collective actions for damages claims .
Given the costs of litigation , it is unlikely that individual consumers will bring small-value damages claims against the perpetrators of competition law infringements .
So it is worth looking at options for collective redress , as she rightly mentioned .
The Green Paper looks at representative actions brought by consumer organisations .
So let us be clear - and I repeat - US-style opt-out class actions are not on the agenda and will not be on my agenda .
In opt-out class actions , lawyers act on behalf of an unidentified class of persons and mainly pursue their own interests .
In representative actions , the latter have no separate interest different from that of the injured parties they represent .
The Commission thus believes that the interests of consumers are better served by a representative action than by an opt-out class action , and I hope this will also reassure Mrs Berès .
Your involvement signals the importance of the debate launched by the Green Paper , and is a reason for hope , as we are all aware that there is something to be done .
There is no doubt about it : the devil is in the detail .
I should like to leave you with two key messages .
First , I hope that this House will send out a strong signal that the current situation is not acceptable and that is what I have got from you .
This is all about rights , and this House has been a consistent supporter of rights across all policies and all areas of European cooperation .
We have to give European citizens and European businesses the ability to exercise their rights under European competition laws .
This is an area in which the Community can show its relevance to the daily life of citizens and to business .
Second , it is by working together in dialogue , through ideas and constructive criticism , that we will be able to make improvements , at the same time avoiding the known pitfalls .
I look forward to taking this process forward with the White Paper at the turn of the year .
Thank you for the interesting debate and thank you especially , rapporteur , for your hard work on this important file .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 12 noon .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of sitting
( The sitting was closed at 00.05 a.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9 a.m. )
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( announcement of motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Decision on urgent procedure
Proposal for a Council regulation on organic production and labelling of organic products - C6-0032 / 2006 - .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , very quickly , I call on all of the groups to reject this request for application of the urgent procedure , which is totally unnecessary .
On the one hand , we are talking about a regulation that will only come into force on 1 January 2009 , and , on the other hand , the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development is doing its job perfectly well .
It addressed this issue during its last meeting and it will address it again on 7 and 8 May with the aim of making progress in our discussions with the Council .
There are still two plenary sessions to be held right here in Strasbourg before the end of the German Presidency , and we have taken things well in hand .
We are continuing our discussions .
There is therefore no need to vote in favour of this request by the Council to have the urgent procedure applied .
( Parliament rejected the request for urgent procedure )
Discharge for the financial year 2005 ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on
the report by Salvador Garriga Polledo , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the discharge for implementation of the European Union general budget for the financial year 2005 , Section III - Commission [ SEC ( 2006 ) 0916 - C6-0263 / 2006 - [ SEC ( 2006 ) 0915 - C6-0262 / 2006 - ,
the report by Bart Staes , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the discharge for implementation of the European Union general budget for the financial year 2005 , Section I - European Parliament [ C6-0465 / 2006 - ,
the report by Daniel Caspary , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the discharge for implementation of the European Union general budget for the financial year 2005 , Section II - Council [ C6-0466 / 2006 - ,
the report by Daniel Caspary , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the discharge for implementation of the European Union general budget for the financial year 2005 , Section IV - Court of Justice [ C6-0467 / 2006 - ,
the report by Daniel Caspary , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the discharge for implementation of the European Union general budget for the financial year 2005 , Section V - Court of Auditors [ C6-0468 / 2006 - ,
the report by Daniel Caspary , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the discharge for implementation of the European Union general budget for the financial year 2005 , Section VI - European Economic and Social Committee [ C6-0469 / 2006 - ,
the report by Daniel Caspary , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the discharge for implementation of the European Union general budget for the financial year 2005 , Section VII - Committee of the Regions [ C6-0470 / 2006 - ,
the report by Daniel Caspary , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the discharge for implementation of the European Union general budget for the financial year 2005 , Section VIII A - European Ombudsman [ C6-0471 / 2006 - ,
the report by Daniel Caspary , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the discharge for implementation of the European Union general budget for the financial year 2005 , Section VIII B - European Data Protection Supervisor [ C6-0472 / 2006 - ,
the report by Mogens N. J. Camre , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the discharge for implementation of the budget for the Sixth , Seventh , Eighth and Ninth European Development Funds for the financial year 2005 - C6-0264 / 2006 - ,
the report by Edit Herczog , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the discharge for implementation of the budget of the European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training for the financial year 2005 [ C6-0386 / 2006 - ,
the report by Edit Herczog , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the discharge for implementation of the budget of the European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions for the financial year 2005 [ C6-0387 / 2006 - ,
the report by Edit Herczog , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the discharge for implementation of the budget of the European Agency for Reconstruction for the financial year 2005 [ C6-0388 / 2006 - ,
the report by Edit Herczog , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the discharge for implementation of the budget of the European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia for the financial year 2005 [ C6-0389 / 2006 - ,
the report by Edit Herczog , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the discharge for implementation of the budget of the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction for the financial year 2005 [ C6-0390 / 2006 - ,
the report by Edit Herczog , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the discharge for implementation of the budget of the European Environment Agency for the financial year 2005 [ C6-0391 / 2006 - ,
the report by Edit Herczog , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the discharge for implementation of the budget of the European Agency for Safety and Health at Work for the financial year 2005 [ C6-0392 / 2006 - ,
the report by Edit Herczog , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the discharge for implementation of the budget of the Translation Centre for the Bodies of the European Union for the financial year 2005 [ C6-0393 / 2006 - ,
the report by Edit Herczog , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the discharge for implementation of the budget of the European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products for the financial year 2005 [ C6-0394 / 2006 - ,
the report by Edit Herczog , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the discharge for implementation of the budget of Eurojust for the financial year 2005 [ C6-0395 / 2006 - ,
the report by Edit Herczog , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the discharge for implementation of the budget of the European Training Foundation for the financial year 2005 [ C6-0396 / 2006 - ,
the report by Edit Herczog , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the discharge for implementation of the budget of the European Maritime Safety Agency for the financial year 2005 [ C6-0397 / 2006 - ,
the report by Edit Herczog , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the discharge for implementation of the budget of the European Aviation Safety Agency for the financial year 2005 [ C6-0398 / 2006 - ,
the report by Edit Herczog , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the discharge for implementation of the budget of the European Food Safety Authority for the financial year 2005 [ C6-0399 / 2006 - ,
the report by Edit Herczog , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the discharge for implementation of the budget of the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control for the financial year 2005 [ C6-0400 / 2006 - , and
the report by Edit Herczog , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the discharge for implementation of the budget of the European Network and Information Security Agency for the financial year 2005 [ C6-0401 / 2006 - .
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner Kallas , we are finally reaching the end of the budgetary procedure for 2005 , which was preceded by its drawing up , its approval , its execution and , subsequently , its discharge .
I must say that , from a budgetary point of view , 2005 has not been a bad year .
It has been a difficult year , with the European Commission and the College of Commissioners having to face rather difficult circumstances , since this was the first full budget of the enlarged Union and , furthermore , the first budget entirely executed by this new College of Commissioners .
I must therefore begin by saying that the European Commission has not done a bad job .
I therefore propose that we grant discharge for implementation of the Community budget for the financial year 2005 , and that is what will be put to the honourable Members in the vote .
That does not mean , of course , that there is no strong and well-founded criticism , both of certain directorates-general and of a structural nature , and with regard to some of the issues of financial control which should be improved by the Commission over the coming years , which may be very difficult to resolve .
I would also like to point out that the Commission has reacted well to the report by the Court of Auditors and has moved forward several lines of its new action plan which I hope will allow for positive control over the coming years .
I have essentially based my resolution on the issue of national declarations .
National declarations on the management of Community funding are very important to this Parliament .
They were created in 2003 and they are intended to offer a guarantee that Member States have effective auditing systems for Community spending .
Furthermore , they should be signed by someone with a degree of authority at national level and , though the Treaty states that the European Commission is responsible for managing the budget , we must not forget that 80 % of it is managed in the Member States .
We therefore believed that it was necessary to launch a new initiative on national declarations .
We support what we believe to be the courageous initiatives of certain Member States - and I point in particular to the Netherlands and the United Kingdom - which have launched , within the Council , these ideas on national control declarations which may not be followed by other Member States , since their territorial distribution and organisation is different .
It is a step forward , however .
What we propose in the report is that the form that future declarations may take be left open so that they can reflect the realities of the political systems of each Member State .
As a fundamental idea , however , we in the European Parliament want these national declarations to go ahead , because that will be the only way to provide the Member States with some genuine responsibility for control of Community funds , which is the true basis for this statement of discharge .
Furthermore , there is a very important issue relating to national declarations . The DAS , as we MEPs see it , is a road that leads nowhere , and those of us who have followed the statements of assurance very closely have known that for twelve years .
It is impossible today to establish the legality of underlying operations in the Member States , particularly in the Structural Funds .
We must therefore do something to improve the quality of auditing and the involvement of the Member States and we are therefore asking the Council for a national declaration of management that covers all co-managed funds , based on the declarations of the different national bodies responsible for the management of spending .
Finally , Mr President , although my report covers other things , I believe that we could achieve a positive DAS over the coming years , which is necessary for the Community institutions and , in particular , crucial for public opinion , which wants to see reliability , transparency and control right down to the last euro of the public funds managed both by the Commission and by the Member States .
rapporteur . - ( NL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my report is about the discharge of the Parliament budget , about which there are four points I should like to make .

First of all , I should like to share something that we have been articulating for years in different discharge resolutions , namely that Parliament 's discharge does not only involve the management of the Secretary-General or that of the administration , but also policy and the decisions made by administrative bodies in our House , such as decisions taken by the President , the Bureau and also the Conference of Presidents .
Moreover , we do not grant discharge to Parliament 's Secretary-General , but to its President .
In this sense , the paragraph according to which the President of Parliament should actually be available to the Committee on Budgetary Control during the discharge procedure to talk about the discharge in a public and formal debate , is , to my mind , of huge importance .
In this respect , I prefer my wording to the amendment tabled by Mrs Grässle and the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats .
In fact , I think that Mrs Grässle 's amendment is at odds with what we approved last year with the Ferber report .
Secondly , buildings policy is important .
A huge sum of money is at stake , and I would draw your attention to the dispute between Parliament and the Belgian Government in this respect .
Years ago , the Belgian Government guaranteed , as did other governments in countries where Parliament has buildings at its disposal , that the land and the land development costs would be reimbursed to Parliament .
There is now a dispute about this very point in Brussels , and the sum involved is around EUR 15 million .
This is a huge amount of money .
The Belgian Government has failed to deliver in this respect , and this is why I , in this resolution , would urge them to make amends , because this would be a shot in the arm for our negotiators , the President of Parliament and the Vice-President responsible for buildings policy .
In the resolution , I have also drawn specific attention to the impact Parliament has on the neighbourhood in which we stay in Brussels .
The residents experience a great deal of nuisance in terms of traffic , work and living conditions , and I think that consultation between Parliament and the local residents is of vital importance .
I think we should be good neighbours , and consultation is important in that sense .
I would like to see a report issued on this subject by next year 's budgetary discharge .
My third point - a very thorny issue - is the voluntary pension fund , which , at the moment , suffers an actuarial shortage of EUR 28.8 million .
This is a huge amount of money .
I have to say that the shortage is dropping , because last year , it was EUR 43.7 million .
This voluntary pension fund , as it stands , contains the total sum of EUR 202 million , which has been invested in the stock market .
We all know that the stock market can be a risky business and that results on the stock market are not always positive .
A stock market can be fickle .
There is every chance , therefore , that great losses will be incurred with this money .
Hence the request for low-risk investments and for implementing what we already decided on in a huge number of resolutions , namely promoting ethical investments .
In the 2005 Budget , Parliament boosted this voluntary pension fund by EUR 11.4 million .
That too , is a large sum of money , and it strikes me as normal for the list of end beneficiaries to be made public .
We would ask for the list of end beneficiaries in the agricultural world , which makes huge inroads into the European budget , to be made public .
Everyone is in favour of this .
This is what will be done , as is evident from a website .
So why do we stand on the brakes when our own MEPs are involved ?
Surely this has to stop ?
From the nominal list , I noticed that the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats submitted four amendments to have certain things deleted and I also noticed that the Socialist Group in the European Parliament applied for a number of split votes .
That is their democratic right .
I suspect that it is the intention to vote all these paragraphs out .
Well , for the sake of transparency , I should like to announce at this stage that I have applied for nominal votes , because that way , the Members who vote against will have the opportunity to justify themselves before their electorates .
I at any rate find it unacceptable that , at the end of the journey , Parliament will need to foot the entire bill .
This is unacceptable and smacks of poor management of money and public funds .
Finally , I should like to draw your attention to a Kyoto-plus Plan .
In the fight against climate change , the European Union and this House are unchallenged leaders .
We have approved sound and important resolutions in this area .
Well , what we ask of the citizen , the consumer , households , industry , the world of transport we should also impose on ourselves ; accordingly , my resolution , my report contains a host of concrete proposals to reduce the environmental impact of our House , of our European Parliament in a much more ambitious manner than was hitherto the case .
I should like to finish off by saying that the two amendments tabled by Mr Fjellner and others enjoy my full support .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the institutions for whose budget discharge I have been responsible in the past include the Council , the Court of Justice , the Court of Auditors , the Committee of the Regions , the Economic and Social Committee , the Ombudsman and the Data Protection Ombudsman , and I currently see no reason to raise any queries about the last two of these .
If , though , I may start with the Council , what is termed a gentlemen 's agreement has been in place in respect of certain budget matters since 1970 , but , since that time , the European Community has developed to an enormous degree .
A number of things - none of them entirely lacking in relevance - have happened , and they make the gentlemen 's agreement seem inappropriate in today 's world ; for example , the European Parliament is now directly elected in free elections with a secret ballot , and , being firmly persuaded that this agreement needs , as a matter of urgency , to be adapted to the present situation , I propose that the Committee on Budgets and the Committee on the Control of Budgets should , during the coming months , hold a joint meeting in order to discuss this important topic and , by means of a common position , demand that the Council make the changes that are so urgently needed .
While I am on the subject of the Council , I am pleased to see that the Common Foreign and Security Policy is carrying more and more weight , and rightly too , although it is intolerable that the Council is not keeping its side of the agreement and drawing clear distinctions between the operational costs that need to be entered in the Commission budget and the purely administrative expenditure , and so I urge it to play by these rules in future .
At both the Court of Justice and the Court of Auditors , there is still room for improvement ; for example , the publication of the business and financial interests of the judges and the auditors has yet to be clarified .
This is something that we in this House have raised time and time again already , and so we , in our resolution , are setting a deadline of 30 September this year for the two institutions to indicate how they propose to comply with this House 's demand for the publication of those business and financial interests ; we have already been waiting for far too long for such statements .
Even before the latest enlargement round , the question was being raised within the Court as to whether the number of auditors should remain as it was , and various models for the Court 's reform have been on the table for some time ; for example , its former President , Professor Bernhard Friedmann , drafted a very sensible proposal with a rotation system similar to that used for the Council of the ECB .
It might also make sense to replace the present collegiate arrangement by creating the position of Chief Auditor , and so the Court ought not to pray in aid the existing position under the Treaties in justifying its refusal to consider reform , for reforms are due in the short or long term , and it would be good if the Court were , off its own bat , to come up with a sensible , practical and well-thought-out proposal for it .
The future of the Joint Services is under discussion not only in the Committee of the Regions , but also in the Economic and Social Committee , for there is something wrong with the way those services are organised when even the Committee of the Regions gets the idea that it is being put at a disadvantage , so both committees should set in train a neutral analysis , based on suitable reference values , of the costs , benefits and savings involved and , where necessary for this purpose , seek the advice of the Court of Auditors or of some other advisory body .
The objective of the debate must be to get the Joint Services , future , doing the work that needs to be done and doing it with good coordination and at reasonable cost .
This year 's discharge focussed particularly on the question of the questionable use of weighting , not only by the Committee of the Regions , but also in other institutions .
The discharge procedure is neither the time nor the place for any judgment on the legality of these payments to be handed down ; that is for the courts of law to do .
The question is whether those at the top of the Committee of the Regions , the people who run it , reacted in an appropriate way , and what principles they applied to the case .
I am persuaded that things still remain to be done by the Committee of the Regions ; in all cases in which fraud is found to have been committed , disciplinary action needs to be instituted as soon as possible , with the persons responsible being called to account .
This House will continue to keep an eye on this case , with respect to which we will have to examine the Staff Regulations with a view to ascertaining whether the interpretation of rules and transitional rules can be left to civil servants alone , and I do think that the legislative institutions of the Union should leave their administrators considerably less room for manoeuvre than they have done in the past .
Taken as a whole , the outcome of the Budget discharge highlights the importance of precise control of budgets by the European Parliament , and , with thanks to all the institutions for their cooperation and for making available the information required , I recommend that discharge be given to them , while also taking into account the points already made .
rapporteur . - ( DA ) Mr President , the annual approval of the accounts covers every account and partial account for every EU institution .
A great deal of work takes place in terms of sifting through the Court of Auditors ' reports .
The Commission has actively contributed to enlightening us , and the secretariat of the Committee on Budgetary Control has worked very hard to make it possible for the Members of this House to evaluate the content of the accounts .
There is , once again , scope this year to lament the fact that the Court of Auditors has been unable to provide an unqualified opinion .
The view that the conditions under which the EU works make it almost impossible for the Court of Auditors to provide an unqualified opinion of that nature is beginning to gain currency .
This comes back , to a large degree , to the fact that around 80 % of EU resources are transferred back to the Member States and are administered there , which means that the chances of putting together an overall picture are highly variable , given the many forms and inconsistent quality of the administration at national level .
If we are to avoid the problems that arise in connection with the correct administration of EU resources , it is hardly enough just to require greater supervision .
We have to ask ourselves whether the present legislation on aid both in the area of agriculture and in relation to the structural funds should be completely overhauled .
The former Commissioner from the Netherlands , Mr Bolkestein , has recently pointed out that 85 % of EU spending could beneficially be cut .
It is clearly , in reality , pointless for the EU 15 countries to give money to each other .
That is like making social security payments from the middle class to the middle class in an individual country .
The old Member States could organise the aid necessary for their development far better by using their own funds .
The situation whereby other countries , on the strength of EU legislation , have to pay for things that the country in question does not wish to pay for itself , or could pay for by itself , is a pretext for doing nothing .
Those who do not carry out reforms receive help from those who have carried out reforms and thus need not do anything themselves .
As former Swedish Prime Minister Göran Persson said , ' It cannot be right that we , who are willing to demand high taxes from our citizens , have to give money to countries that do not wish to tax their own citizens . '
My country , for example , charges 200 % tax on private cars in order , amongst other things , to be able to send a lot of money to countries where I can see many more new cars than in Copenhagen - cars on which not a cent of duty has been paid .
Clearly , that does not seem sensible .
My group , as far as most Members are concerned , wishes to vote in favour of granting discharge .
Personally , I have some reservations as it is my opinion that certain areas of the management of expenditure in the Commission and in certain committees do not meet normal standards .
I would very much like to thank the secretariat of the Committee on Budgetary Control for the very large amount of work it has done and also to thank my colleagues on the committee for their numerous significant observations in this debate and for the constructive cooperation that prevails , overall , within the committee .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I should like to present my opinion on the discharge of the 16 EU agencies for 2005 .
The agencies play an important role in the EU institutions ' image , because their goals and commitments are shared by all EU citizens .
Therefore , this 1 % of the EU 's total budget is wisely spent .
I welcome the conclusions by the European Court of Auditors that certified that the accounts of all 16 agencies were , in all material respects , reliable , legal and regular , except for a few specific observations .
The positive statement of assurance for all agencies is a major achievement and I take this opportunity to congratulate them all on their efforts .
I have focused on the agencies ' general functioning and I should like to devote the majority of my speech today to this issue .
For the 2005 financial year , we can conclude that the agencies were by and large well managed .
However , there are still areas for improvement .
There were a number of problems in specific areas of financial accounting .
A further problematic field in some agencies was non-compliance with procurement rules .
IT systems were not always adapted to needs .
Furthermore , we have to mention that shortcomings in human resources management , in particular recruitment procedures , posed a number of problems
Last but not least , it must be mentioned that , unsurprisingly , some typical start-up problems emerged in the newly-established agencies .
Let me present to you the nine proposals I have developed in my report , which could considerably improve the agencies ' efficiency in the interest of the Union .
The ever-growing number of agencies does not always reflect the real needs of the Union and its citizens .
Therefore , the setting-up of any new agency should be accompanied and underpinned by the cost-benefit study .
The Court of Auditors should give its opinion on the cost-benefit study before Parliament takes its decision .
The European Parliament should ask the Commission to present a report every five years on the added value of every existing agency .
In the event of a negative evaluation of an agency 's added value , all relevant institutions should take the necessary step of reformulating the mandate of the agency in question or closing it .
I strongly urge Parliament to ask the Court of Auditors to insert an additional chapter into its annual report devoted to all agencies to be discharged under the Commission accounts , in order to have a much clearer picture of the use of EU funding in agencies .
Parliament should ask the Commission to improve administrative and technical support to agencies .
We should call on the Commission to come up with a proposal to harmonise the format for annual reporting from the agencies and to develop performance indicators that could allow the comparison and assessment of their efficiency .
In my report , I welcome the considerable improvements in coordination among EU agencies .
We urge all agencies to make increasing use of SMART objectives , which should lead to more realistic planning and better implementation of goals .
I insist that the agencies ' work programmes should express their contribution in operational and measurable terms and due consideration should be given to the Commission 's internal control standards .
Let me now say something specific about the discharge procedure for all agencies .
Let me underline that all EU agencies are undergoing a discharge procedure but in two different ways .
The 16 agencies with which we are dealing today are to receive individual discharge , while the rest are to be discharged within the framework of the Commission 's budget .
There is no agency , therefore , that is not subject to the Court 's controls .
However , there is a considerable lack of transparency in the management of those agencies receiving discharge within the framework of the Commission 's accounts only .
In order to maintain the Commission 's co-responsibility and to increase the transparency and clarity of the discharge procedure for all agencies , I call on the European Court of Auditors to create a new chapter in its annual report that covers all EU agencies .
In my remaining time , I want to focus only on the European Agency for Reconstruction .
The results achieved and the considerable improvements put in place by the agency in order to respond positively to the recommendations by the European Court of Auditors and by Parliament can be highly praised .
I should like to congratulate the Director and the staff on their work .
Taking into consideration the agency 's high value , Parliament should ask the Commission to change the agency 's mandate , which is scheduled to finish in 2008 , and transform the agency into one responsible for implementing certain EU external actions , in particular in post-crisis areas .
Finally , I should like to thank the shadow rapporteurs and all my colleagues for their work , as well as the Secretariat .
I recommend that Parliament give a positive discharge to all 16 agencies .
Mr President , I am grateful for the quality and balance of the report before us today .
For this I would like to thank the Committee on Budgetary Control , the Committee 's previous chairman , Mr Fazakas , its current chairman , Mr Bösch , and , of course , the rapporteur , Mr Garriga Polledo .


Mr Garriga Polledo 's report proposes that Parliament grant the Commission discharge for its implementation of the budget and agree on the clearance of accounts .
The Commission is pleased to take note of this .
I wish to comment on why I think it is deserved .
To begin with , your recommendations will be followed up .
In fact , we have done much already , including the following :
We are implementing the revised Financial Regulation , which implies , among other things , enforcing the agreed provisions requiring Member States to produce ' an annual summary at the appropriate national level of available audits and declarations ' .
We will continue to report progress on our action plan towards an integrated internal control framework , as you ask in paragraph 56 .
In fact , I will present the progress report to the Committee on Budgetary Control next week .
We have improved , can improve and will improve the accounts .
For the 2006 accounts , we have already provided better information on recoveries and financial corrections .
This means that you can count on our accounts ' reliability .
We are pursuing the European Transparency Initiative .
With Parliament 's support progress on this file is being made every day .
In this year 's report , Parliament ' assures the Commission of its full support in the rigorous application of the legislation on suspension of payments to Member States ' .
When I appeared before the Committee on Budgetary Control on 1 March to discuss the draft Garriga Polledo report , I said that I would propose to my colleagues in the Commission a very careful analysis of the issues leading to reserves in the declarations of the directors-general this year and , depending on the importance of the problems and the risk identified , suspend payments or apply financial corrections .
We had serious discussions for more than two hours , and the outcome was a very strong affirmation of the determination of the College to take the necessary steps .
Today I would like to highlight several concrete decisions taken .
First , as regards the Integrated Administration and Control System ( IACS ) in Greece and agricultural subsidies , a very clear action plan has now been agreed with Greece in order to ensure proper implementation of the IACS in that country .
The action plan lays down unambiguous deadlines for action to be taken .
As Commissioner Fischer Boel stated plainly during the discharge hearing in the Committee on Budgetary Control last November , the Commission will suspend payments to Greece for direct aid if the agreed action plan and the deadlines are not respected by the Greek authorities .
The first important report from the Greek authorities is due on 15 May .
I would also recall that the Commission on a routine basis claws back EU farm money unduly spent by Member States , returning the funds to the Community budget in the ' clearance of accounts ' procedure .
Under the latest decision taken last week , a total of EUR 285.3 million is being recovered from 14 Member States for reasons relating in particular to insufficiencies in controls as well as the non-respect of payment deadlines by Member States .
Second , in the area of structural action , on 4 April 2007 , the Commission suspended payments to ERDF programmes in five of the nine regions of England , plus one programme in a sixth .
If no , or insufficient , action is taken , a flat-rate correction ranging from 5 to 10 % or 25 % of the amounts paid out and specific to each programme will be decided by the Commission to address the infringement of the rules and the extent and financial implications of the remaining shortcomings .
Suspensions and reservations often lead to the necessary improvements .
In 2005 , for example , DG Regio had reservations on the adequacy of control systems in Spain .
In 2006 , the DG audited that again and found that progress had made it unnecessary to repeat the reserve .
Likewise , for the European Social Fund , in early 2006 the Commission signalled its reservations on the systems in place in the United Kingdom .
Improvements were made by the UK and the reserve could be lifted .
These examples show that the Commission can and does interrupt payments .
The basis for decisions like these must be well justified and explained in a detailed manner .
We have therefore made great efforts again this year to improve the quality of the annual activity reports of Commission directorates-general .
The Court was rather critical of Commission controls in the research area .
This is direct management by the Commission and we have given this issue the highest priority .
An ex-post audit strategy is now in place across the research family of DGs for audits on the sixth Framework Programme ( FP6 ) .
This is a robust strategy and is accompanied by a significant increase in the percentage of the research budget covered by ex-post audits .
There will be 300 audits for FP6 in 2007 , compared with 45 carried out in 2006 .
Reflecting the priority given to this , the Commission is reallocating a significant number of staff to audit tasks and undertaking the necessary additional recruitment .
Furthermore , serious consideration is being given to the gradual introduction of lump sums in certain specific areas of the framework programme .
Let me say a few words on agencies .
The Commission has noted the increasing concern in Parliament over regulatory agencies .
We already provide a lot of support to the agencies and I think expectations and responsibilities must be clarified , in particular before new agencies are created .
We will therefore push for immediate progress on the proposed interinstitutional agreement .
The Council has indicated its willingness to continue discussions on this .
Its adoption would really help to address recommendations of Parliament on issues such as a systemic and regular evaluation and cost-benefit studies of the agencies and the harmonisation of their annual reporting .
The Commission remains accountable to the budgetary authority in implementing the budget .
We do so by informing you openly and honestly about our strengths and weaknesses .
We are grateful for your fair recognition of both .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Development . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by expressing my warm gratitude for the cooperation between the Committee on Development and the Commission , the Court of Auditors and the two rapporteurs Mr Camre and Mr Garriga Polledo .

It is good to see that the House is taking full account of our observations in reaching its decisions .
The function of our Committee on Development is to check to see that the funds that we disburse in order to give the world 's most vulnerable people a helping hand and guide them towards self-sufficiency , are put to proper and appropriate use .
Public acceptance of this is to a very large degree dependent on the impression not being communicated that this is about this or that potentate getting their bath taps gilded , but rather that the money really does get to the people who actually need it , and so this is what we have scrutinised in very considerable depth .
As in so many other contexts , the Court of Auditors has ascertained that serious errors were made in the way the money was spent .
We have looked at them all individually and have , of course , been forced to note that errors were made in the procedure for spending the money .
Rather , though , than being the sort of errors that might prove disadvantageous to the European Union , they were in fact procedural in nature and in need of improvement if we are to be able to say unequivocally that the funds have been properly used .
It has to be said , though , that the discharge process also possesses a political character , in that we are examining whether the Commission has indeed done that which we intended when the Budget was drawn up .
We therefore examined whether the environmental legislation really had been made a priority , whether any real improvements had been made on the crisis prevention front , and whether - and about this there was serious disagreement - it was indeed the case that 20 % of the funds for basic education and health care had been spent in the developing countries .
It has to be said that the figures are on the up , but they are still a long way off the 20 % on which we had agreed .
The statement that this is all tied together with there being so many donors and institutions to coordinate is reassuring only to a very limited degree .
I have to make it clear to the House that the European Union - together with its Member States - is far and away the biggest donor in the world , and that is something we can be allowed to say with self-confidence .
At the same time , though , it is not acceptable that someone should get up in front of this House and tell us that they have concentrated on other subject areas , and we hope that the priorities laid down by Parliament and the Council in the framing of their resolutions will eventually be set as such .
Our cooperation with the officials from the Commission went very well ; firm commitments have been made to the effect that we will , over the course of the year , be given the information and indicators that we need and that there will be evidence of marked improvements .
Speaking as someone who has always put a lot into the Budget process , I can spell it out to you that I shall also , when the next Budget is drawn up , be seeing to it that we keep a very close eye out for the improvements in Budget implementation that have been heralded - not only as regards the use of the funds for their intended purpose but also the achievement of policy targets - and that our behaviour , as a parliament , will be determined by whether or not you actually do as you have undertaken to do .

draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the share of the Budget made available for the policies that are the particular concern of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety is not a particularly large one ; in 2005 - the financial year in respect of which we are now supposed to be confirming the proper handling of the European taxpayers ' money - it amounted to less than half a percent of the overall Budget of EUR 116 billion .
I will say right at the outset that there was nothing that prevented the directors of the four agencies - the EMEA , the EEA , the EFSA and the ECDC - from being given discharge in respect of their management of their respective budgets .
The first months of the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control 's operations , in 2005 , were successful , and the management of its budget was the responsibility of the DG Health .
In 2005 , the European Food Safety Authority , in its third year of operations , was in the process of moving to Parma , which entailed difficulties in recruiting the necessary highly-qualified staff and without doubt made it impossible for all the funds allocated to it to be spent , so that over four million euros found their way back into the Community budget .
How this money , which is the EFSA 's , is being , or is to be , made available for use again this year is not something for us to discuss in the course of this discharge procedure , but we will have to discuss this with the Commission .
The European Medicines Agency has done its work to our general satisfaction , and has not spent all its money , one reason for this being evidently that there were technical difficulties with the conversion of its IT system .
The European Environmental Agency did the excellent work to which we have become accustomed , made proper use of all its funds , and could certainly have done with even more .
The Committee on the Environment has no fundamental criticism to make of the management of its four agencies ' budgets , but we have taken the opportunity of this discharge procedure to demand of the two ' old ' agencies - the EMEA and the EEA - that which is already required of the ' new ' ones in accordance with the basic regulations establishing them , namely that their work be regularly reviewed and evaluated by independent experts .
We would like to see added value to Europe assured by all forms of administrative activity in Europe - and that includes the agencies .
I will now turn to the side of the environment , public health and food safety for which the Commission bears responsibility , and here , although the take-up for commitment appropriations was highly satisfactory in all areas , it has to be said that the payment rates left much to be desired , being below 80 % not only in health and food safety , but also in the environmental sphere .
There are , of course , factors that explain why this is so ; one is that the establishment of the executive agency for public health had not yet been completed , and , at the same time , staff were tied up in preparing the new health and consumer protection programme , while 2004 's problems with budget commitments resulted in payment problems in the environmental sector in 2005 .
Understandable though the explanations given by the Commission 's offices are , the Commission must learn how to anticipate problems before they occur , in order to be able to take immediate action to address them ; after all , it is not that lacking in experience of dealing with administrative problems .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Transport and Tourism . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Transport and Tourism notes that the 2005 Budget allocated not much more than one billion euros to commitment appropriations and little more than the same figure in payment appropriations for transport policy , most of which - namely EUR 670 million in commitment appropriations and EUR 750 million in payment appropriations - went to the Trans-European Networks , and the committee is very pleased to say that those figures include payments for road safety and commitments to Marco Polo , with EUR 70 million in commitments and EUR 60 million in payments being allocated to the transport agencies .
The committee is , however , concerned at the above-average high level of errors in research contracts in the transport sector and about the fact that only 51 % of the funds available were allocated to road safety , which , in view of our desire to cut accident figures in half , is an important programme .
It is important , where the Trans-European Networks are concerned , that we should concentrate on the things that make for efficient transport , rather than beginning with the big projects straightaway , only then to discover that half the necessary funds are absent .
There are many Member States in which projects have been suspended for lack of funds .
What we have to do is give absolute priority to modernising the infrastructure we already have and only then think about new building works , which involves the need to use short resources in the most efficient way possible .
Nor must we think only of the projects connecting North and South , for Europe needs to grow together , and that is why the East to West rail projects also need to be modernised , for many of those lines are still as they were in the last century , in the age of steam locomotives .
Climate change is important too , of course .
The transport sector is one of the great sources of CO2 , accounting for 30 % of output , and so our research projects must prioritise policy on climate and sustainability .
In this respect , they have hitherto been wholly unsatisfactory , and that must change .
We have given the agencies discharge , but they still need the resources for the necessary tasks laid upon them .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Culture and Education . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the first thing I would like to say in my capacity as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Culture and Education is that we are not convinced that what we are spending on culture and education is sufficient .
The Committee on Culture and Education was much more ambitious and regrets that Parliament , the Commission and the Council have not as a whole made more funding available for what we want , which is to give Europe a soul , to enable all students to study in Europe , and , with that in mind , the Lisbon Strategy requires that changes be made in these areas over the next few years .
Speaking in very general terms , I would like to say that it is crucial , particularly in the major cultural and youth programmes , that we should , on the one hand , pursue a very careful - that is to say , a responsible and transparent - expenditure policy , while also , at the same time , refraining from excessive use of the existing rules in going down bureaucratic dead ends .
I am aware that we must , after the case of corruption and scandals that we have had , be very wary , but , nevertheless , we should not overshoot the mark either .
Particularly when projects are small and account for only some EUR 20 000 , applicants should not be required to submit reams of paper in order to get their applications accepted .
My second observation is that , if we have 99 national cultural agencies , things will get out of hand in no time , and this is where better management would be desirable .
The third thing I want to say is that I take the view that our still funding this second parliament in Strasbourg through our Budget is the wrong way to go about it .
If the French are unwilling to abandon this second seat and thus save money , then in future it should be the Council that takes responsibility for the money spent on it .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs . - ( ES ) I am speaking as rapporteur for the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs on the 2005 Budget .
There are many agencies involved , some of which Mrs Haug has mentioned already and , generally speaking , our observations are the same .
I would like to begin by commenting on the execution of the general budget of the Committee on Civil Liberties , and I can do so very briefly .
We note that progress has been made in relation to the execution of commitments , but the execution of payments needs to be given a kick start .
We stand at 79.8 % for 2005 compared to 80.3 % for 2004 .
This is one of the committee 's lowest levels .
Mrs Haug has mentioned others that appear to be in the same situation .
It goes without saying that this situation needs to be improved .
Furthermore , we know that the money for the next year is in jeopardy if we are not able to use it properly .
With regard to the execution of the budget for Eurojust ( the European judicial cooperation body ) , we note that the Court of Auditors has reasonable guarantees that the annual accounts for this financial year have been reliable and , with regard to the corresponding operations , that they are all legal , as they should be , and regular .
There is no situation that cannot be improved , however .
In this case too , we must call upon Eurojust to continue in this direction , improving its financial management .
With regard to the execution of the budget of the European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia , the committee is satisfied here as well , with regard to the legality of the underlying operations .
Nevertheless , we note that the Monitoring Centre must be called upon to improve its clarity , and in particular the transparency of its tendering procedures .
Finally , I shall deal with the execution of the budget of the Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction .
In this case , the Committee on Civil Liberties , like the Court of Auditors , wishes to make two serious complaints .
Various unacceptable anomalies have been found in the tendering and contracting procedures and we must demand a substantial improvement in these processes .
We must acknowledge , however , that certain measures are having an effect , but there is still a long way to go in order to make everything , shall we say , acceptable and correct .
Perhaps the most thorny issue of all - we have already asked the Commission for an explanation in this regard - is that , like the Court of Auditors , we note and deplore the bad administration in the case of an agent sent to Brussels on a long mission without any clear definition of his objectives ; in particular , there is great uncertainty with regard to the subsequent allocation to the Commission .
A lot of European taxpayers ' money needs to be explained here .
The Committee on Civil Liberties therefore asks for this case to be investigated thoroughly and for the adoption of the appropriate measures to prevent anything similar from happening in the future .
The Committee on Civil Liberties ' recommendation , therefore , like that of the Committee on Budgetary Control , is that discharge be granted .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , for the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , this evaluation is not a simple matter , for we have already , and repeatedly , urged that gender-specific data are needed if the expenditure is to be assessed , and , to our regret , such data is still not available , and so there are still limits on the amount of gender budgeting and gender mainstreaming that it is possible to include in the assessment .
We ask that these data be submitted in the next Budget discharge reports .
It is particularly in Structural Funds programmes and the like that precise data is vital if we are to see how much , in the final analysis , is allocated to the equal support of women .
It has turned out that the flow of funds in the Daphne programme has been blocked , and that is a major problem , for we know that violence is going on against women , children and young people on an enormous scale .
We know that the projects proposed were very good ones , yet even so the money has not been flowing , and that means that help is needed here .
In the actual case I am thinking of , a range of trans-European projects was rejected .
We are in the course of preparing a European Year against Violence , and the Council of Europe has started up a campaign .
There is massive need in this area , and the Commission must get a move on .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , with regard to the discharge for the agencies , I should like to begin by making various observations .
The first is that the number of agencies is constantly increasing , and that this increase is worrying because it seems to be taking place outside of any overall policy framework .
This situation poses various problems : that of the financial control of these agencies and that of the organisational weaknesses observed , which are not always resolved .
With regard to the first aspect , it is vital , in my opinion , to establish clear rules on the discharge procedure .
Indeed , 16 out of 35 agencies now receive individual discharge from Parliament .
In order to prevent the current inconsistencies in the application of Article 185 of the Financial Regulation - since many agencies now receive an overall discharge under the general budget of the European Commission - it would be appropriate if , in the future , all the agencies , whatever their status , were to receive an individual discharge from the European Parliament .
The second aspect that I should like to mention concerns the effective administration of the agencies .
Although progress has been observed in this area , it remains insufficient .
The priority is to strengthen the accounting systems , to ensure the proper application of the tender procedures and internal control regulations and , finally , to make the recruitment procedures more transparent .
At the same time , the Commission must continue its efforts to make the agencies more visible , by drafting an effective communications strategy , to develop synergies and , finally , to provide them with more technical and administrative services that are adapted to their needs .
Furthermore , I support the two proposals aimed at making it compulsory to publish a cost-benefit study before any agency is created , and at requesting the compilation , every five years , of an evaluation report on the added value generated by each agency in its field of activity .
These two proposals are key to ensuring that the activities developed by the agencies meet the specific needs of the various sectors .
To conclude , I should like to stress that , even though the Court of Auditors has reservations about three agencies , I am delighted that the agencies have , on the whole , improved on the 2004 exercise , and I call on them to continue their efforts along these lines .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DA ) Mr President , the Socialist Group in the European Parliament recommends granting discharge .
We recommend that Parliament approve the budgets for 2005 , but in doing so we have some comments to offer and some demands to make .
We have two basic demands .
Firstly , we consider it self-evident that supervision needs to be further tightened up .
We do not believe that there is , as yet , sufficient control of tax-payers ' money .
Secondly , we also believe that there is a need for more openness and more transparency .
In respect of the first point , it might be said that there has been some progress in this area .
We do recognise that and we do laud the implementation of a new accounting system within the Commission .
It has not been an easy process but it has surpassed all expectations .
I also recognise that the integrated financial control system , in particular in relation to agricultural funds , has been implemented for a large proportion of the budget , and that is clearly a very positive thing .
However , we are also critical in relation to those areas in which the Court of Auditors did , sadly , have some particularly marked criticisms .
What are particularly at issue are internal policies and , unfortunately , a portion of the agricultural funds , too .
We will , quite simply , have to tighten things up in these areas .
The Commission needs to exercise greater stringency , but so too , in particular , do the Member States .
The fact is that around 80 % of EU funds , as Members are aware , are administered via shared management , meaning that it is out in the Member States that the money is actually put to use .
In such circumstances it is clear that we are , of course , entirely dependent , - that is to say the Commission is dependent and we in Parliament are dependent - on this responsibility being taken seriously out in the Member States , and we do not feel , unfortunately , that that is being done .
Political responsibility needs to be clearly assigned , and this is something that needs to be followed up in relation to next year .
Moreover , it is , of course , obvious that this whole debate on openness has been going on now for a couple of years , and that is something we are pleased about .
We are also pleased about what have clearly been very positive initiatives on the part of the Commission .
We believe that it must be possible for individual European citizens to log on to the Internet and see how the EU 's money has been allocated to agricultural funds , structural funds and so on .
This process is under way but it must , of course , be followed up all the way to completion .
What is more , we need greater openness surrounding the numerous working parties that there are .
We must be given the names of those who take part in such working parties .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , first of all , I should like to congratulate the rapporteurs , and I can assure them that the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe shares their view .
We too support the discharge as it has been recommended .
The year under consideration - 2006 - is the first full budgetary year for which this Commission has to take full responsibility .
We have once again received a negative verdict from the Court of Auditors , for the twelfth time in a row , and everyone knows , of course , that things cannot go on like this .
I am pleased that the Court of Auditors has announced that a peer review will be organised , that they will let others take a closer look at their own activities , their own method .
This is all very well , but no matter how you look at it , the buck still stops with the Commission and it cannot pass it on to the Member States .
Last year , we signed the financial perspectives and for the first time , they contained a provision that the Member States must make national declarations at a suitable political level to declare that they have implemented the budget properly .
My big question is : what exactly has the Commission done with this article in the financial perspectives ?
Did it issue a letter to the Member States to make them aware of this ?
What is the Commission 's strategy in this matter ?
I should also like to draw the Commission 's attention to the fact that next year will be the crucial year for the Commission .
In 2008 , it will be ten years ago , in 1998 , when Parliament refused to grant discharge .
I will certainly not go so far as to say that this will happen again ; this will depend on how things pan out , but there must be clear progress .
It is unacceptable for this Parliament , in a year 's time , on the eve of the next European elections , to grant the Commission discharge once again without the slightest hesitation , when it is obvious that the Commission has not done everything in its power to improve the situation .
One of the keys to overcome this is to abide by the financial perspectives .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , today this House will decide whether to discharge the budget for the institutions of the European Union for 2005 .
As the report of the European Court of Auditors did not express any major reservations regarding any of these institutions , I am upholding the position that we can discharge every one of them .
This , however , does not mean that the annual accounts submitted to Parliament are flawless .
Firstly , even though the Court of Auditors acknowledged that on the whole the financial report of the European Communities is an accurate reflection of the Community 's financial situation as at the end of December 2005 , and that it found no significant errors , it did find numerous errors both in the amounts recorded in the central accounts systems , and in the reports submitted by individual Member States .
Of particular concern is the fact that despite critical remarks both by the Court of Auditors and by the European Parliament , some of these inaccuracies are repeated year after year .
Secondly , I would like to join those voices that can be heard coming both from the Court of Auditors and from this House demanding greater transparency on the use and management of EU funds .
In particular , I would like to support the Commission 's intention to publish the direct aid received by the largest agricultural producers in certain Member States , and also look forward to a simplification of the procedures as regards both procurement and grants , which will increase the transparency of the Commission 's activities and reduce the risk of corruption .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , our group , too , is prepared to grant the Commission discharge , effectively under the same conditions as those outlined a moment ago by Mr Jørgensen .
Mr Mulder just stated that it is the twelfth time in a row that the Court of Auditors has failed to issue a positive Statement of Assurance , which is , indeed , a situation that has to stop .
During the hearing in our committee , Commissioner Kallas , upon being appointed , said that a positive Statement of Assurance should be reached during his mandate ; at least that was his goal .
I know that the Commissioner is currently somewhat at loggerheads with the Court of Auditors ; there will be a peer review of the methods they are using , and I still hope that this positive Statement of Assurance will be issued at some point , certainly during this mandate .
It is true that a couple of problems seem to be here to stay , not least in the area of agriculture .
In that sense , I am pleased with the Commissioner 's statement with regard to what he said about the integrated management and control system .
We all know that Greece does not come up to the mark , not by a long shot , something that has been mentioned on two occasions in the Court of Auditors ' annual report .
There is now a concrete action plan ; the Commissioner has made it quite plain that he is prepared to suspend payments if Greece fails to meet the conditions or carry out the action plan correctly .
Two amendments have been tabled to that effect , one by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats and one by our own group .
I therefore hope that at least one of those two amendments will make it to the finishing line and that it will considerably help the Commissioner when he gets to the point where he has to decide to suspend payments .
I have noticed the Council 's absence with regard to the national management declarations .
It is outrageous that the Council should absent itself from a debate on the discharge , which we also need to grant to the Council , at a time when we know that 80 % of all financial resources are managed by the Member States themselves , and this is something I deeply regret .
I also support Mr Mulder in his question to the Commission as to what measures it has taken to ensure that the Member States issue national management declarations .
In our debate with the German State Secretary , it was concluded that shortcomings were attributable to our federal structure .
I cannot imagine this to be the case .
What I can imagine , though , is for a federal state such as Belgium to say ' OK , three of our regions have declarations , two of which are not up to scratch , and one is ' .
Why could this not be done ?
In this light , I am really pressing for positive management declarations from the Member States as well .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FI ) Madam President , Commissioner , the Court of Auditors has not delivered a favourable statement of assurance on the Union 's accounts for ten years .
One of the main reasons for this is probably that the money is allocated by the Commission , but it is the Member States which are responsible for overseeing how it is spent .
The body responsible for allocating funds does not monitor their use .
Some Member States are slacker than others in the way they monitor the funds they receive from the Union .
Our group sympathises with the view expressed in the report that in future the Court of Auditors should more often mention by name those countries which are guilty of inadequate monitoring .
There is no good reason not to expose Greece or other countries which are lax in this area .
Parliament 's view has always been that the Member States should issue a statement on the management at national level of the funds they receive from the Union .
Some Member States have done just this , for example , the Netherlands , done properly with the signature of the minister .
Most Member States are opposed to issuing a statement .
On the other hand , it has to be said that the Martha Andreasen case has not resulted in a situation where the chief accountant in the Commission would approve the authenticity of the accounts with her signature .
Parliament demands quite rightly that she be given legal powers .
Our group this year is in favour of granting discharge .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( SV ) Madam President , the demand for accountability is crucial to the democratic process .
Parliament 's efforts in this area in the past have been appalling .
In spite of report after report indicating fraud , irregularities , incompetence and waste , this House grants discharge year after year with majorities almost worthy of North Korea .
Last year was an exception .
Parliament had paid too high a rent for the building in which are now sitting .
It became impossible to sweep the problem under the carpet .
Instead , the pathetic situation arose in which the leaders of the large groups appeared as ' professional mourners ' , giving their assurances that their refusal to give discharge was really only pretend .
That is how the majority in this House carries out its democratic task .
Last year , I was rapporteur and found it impossible to propose granting discharge to the Committee of the Regions .
A culture of corruption appeared to permeate its secretariat .
Despite the fact that three different investigations of the Committee of the Regions were still under way , the House granted discharge in any case .
Now , OLAF has submitted its report , and national authorities have taken the matter to court .
There are therefore now still stronger reasons for not granting the Committee of the Regions discharge this year .
Moreover , the rapporteur , Mrs Herczog , has shown that neither the European Maritime Safety Agency nor the European Food Safety Authority should be granted discharge .
Let us , then , refuse to grant it .
on behalf of the ITS Group . - Madam President , I believe the Council of Ministers should consider as a matter of urgency appointing a team of genuinely independent , internationally respected accountants to carry out a full-scale investigation and analysis of the audit of this institution , its treasury , its accounting systems and controls and all its operational institutions as well , many of which trade commercially and yet routinely escape the full vigour of the law in their financial and business management .
Just take the 2005 accounts : a team of independent forensic accountants have concluded that payments worth EUR 27 billion were simply not registered accurately in the accounts and such incredible unaccountability has produced some equally incredible and unacceptable consequences .
We now know , for instance , that the EU has lost some EUR 600 billion over the years , which far exceeds the UK 's net contribution of GBP 75 billion since we joined .
The President of the Court of Auditors has admitted that there are serious ongoing problems : every annual report spells them out , page after page , and nothing much actually happens as a result .
The statement of assurance is supposed to cover ' down to the level of taxpayers ' .
Yet their interests are ignored year after year .
The discrepancies between balances in one year and the next are regular , routine and unacceptable .
In 2002 , for instance , the difference was EUR 200 million .
Last year , it was EUR 179 million , which is not much of an improvement over four years .
And these are not just errors : accountants describe them as serious financial malpractice .
( DE ) Madam President , a discharge procedure such as this one is not meant to be just about looking backwards , but also about considering what conclusions ought to be drawn from it .
I am sure that the Commissioner is listening very carefully to what is being said about the agencies and is also aware of how those who want to exercise a degree of control are becoming less satisfied about what is going on in many areas in which there is considerable confusion and in which things have started to get out of hand .
I am sure , Commissioner Kallas , that you too are aware of the direction in which the trilogue negotiations are going .
There is something pretty disturbing about the sight of members of the Committee on Budgets , people who have been grappling with this sort of thing for years , admitting time and time again that even they cannot see their way through , and that there are no clear dividing lines between the operational budget and the administrative one , so that , obviously , is where abuses are going on to a massive degree , mostly involving the hiding of administrative expenditure in the programmes .
That , Commissioner , goes diametrically against what you are trying to do with your efforts towards transparency , and I would like to encourage you to try to do in your own area what you have already started to do with agriculture , namely to lay open to view the way funds are used , right down to the last euro .
That is what every modern business is capable of doing .
They always have cost centres and clear references ; they even know exactly what has been done on business trips .
That we do not do likewise is something I regard as extremely regrettable and damaging , and I am sure , Commissioner , that you share my view that across-the-board cutbacks are called for , since it is not a matter of doubt that greater efficiency is achieved by having fewer workers rather than the opposite , which is currently the case .
( NL ) Madam President , I will confine myself to remarks pertaining to the European Parliament .
I should first of all like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Staes , for a very sound report .
We support his proposal to grant discharge , and we also support most of his remarks and comments made in this connection .
Needless to say , we as a group will want to highlight a few things , including our Amendment 3 , to which I would particularly like to draw your attention , because it , more so than the current text , calls for constructive teamwork and political dialogue with the President of this House , to which discharge is being granted , but who was not yet appointed in the budget under discussion .
I should also like to draw your attention to the amendments that Mr Fjellner has tabled , and I have co-signed , on the actual costs of maintaining three places of meeting at a time when we have 27 Member States .
The current figures date back to a time when there were only 15 of them .
On a somewhat personal note , I should like to say that obviously , as a former assistant , I viewed the remarks about secretarial compensation and the situation of parliamentary staff in a critical light , where some cases still leave a great deal to be desired .
I should like to finish off with the never-ending story about the voluntary pension fund .
As I see it , and so does my delegation , it is of the utmost importance that every impression be avoided that public resources - general cover of expenses - are used for private income , namely to boost the voluntary pension fund .
Finally , I should like to give the 20 seconds left to me to the next speaker .

( NL ) Madam President , I should first of all like to thank Mr Staes for his excellent report and the previous speaker for the 20 seconds extra speaking time .
Could it be that we perhaps hail from the same Member State ?
There is every chance that we do , because the same points that you highlighted I should like to highlight as well .
Turning to Mr Staes ' report first , I should like to thank him once again , because the report is outstanding .
For the first time since I was elected , you managed to grant discharge that did not lead to major controversy the week before .
Allow me to single out a few points .
It is unfortunate that in this procedure it is a rule rather than an exception that we have to keep asking for the same things over and over again - not only such things as electronic signatures or for red tape in this House to be reduced , but also matters of importance such as the question of to whom we actually grant discharge .
We endorse what Mr Staes had to say about this .
I should , on a personal level , also like to draw your attention to Mr Fjellner 's amendments .
I think it is of the utmost importance for us to know precisely what we spend Parliament 's money on , and , as I see it , it is consequently of the essence for the debate to know the exact cost of carving up our working hours across three places .
Moving to the statute of assistants , certainly now that we have managed to reach mutual agreement on the members ' statute , this is an important topic which , I hope , we will not need to raise again next year , and which is being worked on by one of the Bureau 's working parties as we speak .
It is vital , I think , for this assistants ' statute to be in place as soon as possible and for us to gain a decent insight into the working position of these assistants , their social security and their tax regimes .
Madam President , it is a pleasure to see you in the Chair , presiding efficiently over us .
First of all a comment to Mr Mote , who , I am sorry to see , has not bothered to stay to listen to the rest of the debate .
His solution to the problems of corruption and waste in Europe is to add another layer of bureaucracy by hiring a team of accountants from the private sector .
It seems to me a completely absurd solution , piling cost on cost .
Our group will support Amendments 1 and 3 calling for clarification of the costs of our working in three different places , which is an absurdity that the public cannot understand and we cannot understand .
We want clarification on that .
However , we are very puzzled that the PPE-DE Group has tabled four amendments - 79 , 80 , 81 and 83 - that would delete other useful parts of this report .
Mrs De Lange , who just spoke for the PPE-DE Group , baffles me .
She said that we want to avoid giving the public impression that money is being wrongly spent for the pension fund .
I agree with her .
However , the PPE-DE Group is proposing under Amendment 83 to delete an audit of Members ' allowances and how they are spent , which does not make sense at all .
I would urge her to persuade the rest of her colleagues to withdraw those amendments seeking to delete useful things in this report and to support it .
( PL ) Madam President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteurs on their perceptive and very thorough reports .
I would also like to thank the Court of Auditors , whose reports have given us a great deal of information on how the budget is drawn up .
I do , however , feel that the reports have been written in a language that is not easily understandable for the average citizen , and that we should improve the clarity of our documents , as ultimately we are writing them not for ourselves , but also for the public .
As far as control procedures are concerned , most of the remarks relate to the accuracy of the accounts .
This is important , but in accounting everything balances out , while in real life the funds are squandered and spent inefficiently .
In future I would like more attention to be focused on a substantial assessment of individual expenses than on their formal correctness .

( NL ) Madam President , since 2000 , two internal accountants from the Committee of the Regions have successively established serious instances of fraud , something which has also been confirmed by the anti-fraud office in various reports .
All those years , the Committee of the Regions played down the problems , promised improvement and we , Parliament , always granted discharge .
Only last year , a hearing was planned involving the two accountants who had been dismissed by the Committee of the Regions .
By intense lobbying by the self-same committee though , the hearing was removed from the Committee on Budgetary Control 's agenda at the last minute , and we reacted once again simply by granting discharge to the Committee of the Regions .
A few months ago , the last - for the time being - OLAF report on this saga came out .
OLAF recommends not only disciplinary action , but even criminal prosecution .
The Committee of the Regions having repeatedly refused to allow it , the Committee on Budgetary Control was finally allowed to read this report , which revealed structurally organised malversations at various levels within the hierarchy .
Also , new anonymous reportings are once again coming in .
The rules do not allow me to quote from the OLAF report , but even now , after years of fraud , no disciplinary action has been taken , while both accountants have been dismissed .
It is incredible to think that we are once again about to grant discharge to the Committee of the Regions .
( CS ) Madam President , I should like to congratulate the rapporteurs and to make a few comments , both general and specific , based on my personal experience .
Firstly , point 1 states that not all agencies always have good a reputation .
I should like to speak up for the European Agency for Safety and Health at Work , based in Bilbao , which is certainly a major exception and to which this point does not apply .
As a rapporteur I worked with this Agency on drawing up an assessment of the framework directive on protecting health at work , and I am currently collaborating on drawing up new standards for statistics on accidents at work .
Furthermore I have visited the agency twice and can confirm that it provides us with very good data .
As for point 11 , calling for improved technical assistance for the agencies , I should like to say one thing : this is not solely a matter of technical support ; it is a matter of better framing the requests that we make to Parliament 's agencies .
On this issue we need to become more proactive as a Parliament .
Ultimately , this relates also to point 15 , which is about cooperation with other organisations .
In this context , I can report that the agency in Bilbao works closely with the World Health Organisation and provides very interesting statistical data .
One final comment : I am firmly in favour of point 25 and I am delighted to say that the agency has improved its communications , and that greater use is being made of its expertise , in particular by SMEs . Thank you .
Madam President , time and again we hear the plea from the Commission , ' It 's not our fault !
How can we police our Community money ? '
That is , Member States ' taxpayers ' money is spent by the Member States .
Indeed , we have the remarkable event last year of the Commission castigating the Court of Auditors for picking on them .
But perhaps the Commission has a point and this line of thinking has persuaded the governments of the UK , Sweden and the Netherlands to agree to declarations about the future management of EU funds - for what that is worth .
More deeply , the Commission 's point shows up the essential weakness of the system .
The agencies in Member States that spend EU money have little incentive to worry about the taxpayers in some other Member State who provided it .
So what do we do about this ?
Well , I shall continue to tell the people of my country that waste and financial irregularity are an unfortunate but inevitable consequence of the system - a flawed system in which the disconnection between the taxpayers who provide the funds and those who spend them becomes ever wider .
Madam President , like a scout , I 'm always prepared .
I have three points to make .
Firstly , I think we seem to be forgetting a little why we are here .
We talk about the report , which is about sound financial management .
I think there are three reasons why we have these reports .
The first is trust .
We need the markets to trust us .
Secondly , it is democracy .
We need the people to trust us .
If we have sound financial management , others will follow .
Thirdly , it is about transparency , in other words , reducing scepticism .
We are trying to improve financial control .
So my first point is that there is a reason why we are doing this .
I think the Commission is doing a good job , contrary to what the previous speaker said .
Secondly - and this is a historic moment for me , because I am going to fundamentally agree with my compatriot from the left side of the House - Mr Seppänen is absolutely right , as are all those previous speakers who said that the fault lies not with the way the Commission is dealing with the money , but with the way the Member States are dealing with it .
In other words , 80 % of the funds are managed by Member States .
There is absolutely no financial responsibility .
Allow me to make a proposal .
If we , in the next IGC , open up a couple of institutional questions , why not do the same with regard to the Member States as we do for the Commission ?
Why do we not put into the new treaties a legal obligation for the Member States to be held accountable for the EU money that they spend ?
Perhaps this is something that could give us a positive statement of assurance in the long run .
Thirdly and finally , I would like to agree with all of those who support Mr Fjellner 's amendments : Mr Newton Dunn , Mrs De Lange , Mr Staes and Mrs Mastenbroek .
We need two things in this report .
One is an environmental impact assessment of the cost of the three seats and the other is the cost of the three seats of the European Parliament .
( PT ) Madam President , I should like to congratulate all of the rapporteurs on their excellent work .

I extend these congratulations , of course , to the chairmen of our committee , Mr Fazakas and Mr Bösch .
I should also like to express my appreciation for Mr Kallas ' words as regards ex-post audits set to take place in connection with everything regarding the direct management of funds . I must say right away that we shall be keeping a close eye on these audits , how they are carried out , the number of mistakes detected and the necessary comparison with the results obtained by the Court of Auditors .
Most importantly , I should like to say to our Vice-President that Parliament has the ultimate say on the discharge and that this power will certainly be used in full when we are back here next year discussing the issue of the recovery of funds .
I was the rapporteur of a highly critical report on the Commission 's handling of this issue .
The Court of Auditors declared in the Committee on Budgetary Control that it was unable to find the billions of euros in funds that , according to the Commission , were to be recovered .
I must say that I too am unable to find these amounts and I should like to point out that next year this issue must be tackled totally differently ; otherwise , we shall have to take a much harder line .
( FI ) Madam President , the administration of EU funds is quite an awkward task .
If the budget is to be implemented effectively there need to be clear legal instruments and a clear division of labour .
There is room for improvement in both these areas .
Moreover , EU funds , as we know , are mainly managed by the national authorities .
There does not seem to be any progress being made in the simplification of legislation .
Whilst the number of old regulations is being trimmed down , new ones are constantly being drafted .
People are lured by meticulous micromanagement and nobody ventures to delegate decision-making downwards .
This has led and is leading to an ever greater need for supervision .
At least at the level of the law EU funds are controlled most stringently .
On the other hand , the amount of supervision undertaken does not necessarily improve its quality or the way it is managed .
Frequently , too much supervision only slows down and paralyses operations .
For example , private companies are more unwilling now to participate in EU Structural Funds projects because they are so very bureaucratic .
That is why it is good that such institutions as the Court of Auditors have begun to pay closer attention to the quality rather than to the amount of supervision that goes on .
Budget supervision requires a clearer division of responsibilities .
The responsibility that a holder of office has should be absolutely clear .
The system should not be too hierarchical .
Collective accountability is not accountability at all .
For that reason , financial supervision goes hand in hand with simplification of the laws and clarification of the responsibilities of office holders .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , speaking on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , I would like to thank all the rapporteurs most warmly , for the further headway we are able to make is thanks to their work , and it may well be that we have made more of it on the agencies front than elsewhere , so many thanks are owed to Mrs Herczog for the really good ideas she has contributed .
It is vital that there should be closer links between the agencies and the Commission , which needs to have a blocking minority on their supervisory boards , and must understand and accept that these agencies are partners in lawmaking and in the management of the EU 's programmes .
Regrettably , though , the situation as regards the Commission 's budget is virtually unchanged .
From now on to the end of the period , we will have to pay attention to how an unconditional statement of assurance may be had , for the directly-managed funds at any rate , and , in its own sphere , the Commission shows itself capable of doing that , and should make a good job of it .
We want to work with you on this and to support you , but that presupposes that you take the initiative ; we will be with you all the way , from the tolerable risk to the single audits and all the issues connected with them .
I would also like to say a word of thanks to the Court of Auditors - which we see as a very important institution - and to the people who work in it , who have done a good job , on whom we rely , and on whom we will continue to rely over the coming years .
I have to tell the Commissioner that we still have work to catch up on , and there is something to which we should perhaps give priority , in that you still owe us information on the figures and the recovery of funds , which we have not as yet been able to get a grip on .
We think it would be very important that you should tell this House on which figures we can then rely , for there are at least four that have been doing the rounds over the past six or eight weeks .
Turning to this House 's budget , we have tabled deleting amendments in relation to the pension fund , not because we object to it and want to say something about its substance , but because we do not want to pre-empt the work of the working party that we jointly appointed , for why should we now want to impose restrictions on its work ?
I therefore urge you to support these amendments .
Far from pre-empting whatever might emerge later on these topics , they give the group a chance to do what it thinks to be right .
( DE ) Madam President , congratulations are in order to our rapporteurs , for the taxpayers attach importance to seeing that this House is doing a respectable job of work when it comes to the protection of their money .
I am perfectly well aware - and I think this is what Mrs Gräßle wanted to say - that it is always rather difficult to filter out what the real priorities are when a large number of people are sounding off about what they would like to see done , but it is precisely this technical problem that our committee sees as a challenge .
I think the problem has been solved very well , and we will continue to keep tabs on the issues that have been raised ; we want to fill in the hole in the IACS system , and I am grateful for the Commission 's support , of which we have again been assured by Vice-President Kallas .
We would like to be able to stand before the electorate and say that the CAP has been certified sound , and we are very close to being able to ; progress has been made , and that we find very encouraging .
Secondly , we want the Member States to cough up for the 80 % of this EUR 100 billion budget that are spent through them , and I see the Council 's absence today as a disgrace .
They - currently from Germany , from another Member State some other time ; I have no desire to single any one country out - may be our lords and masters , but we will remind them of that the next time they get on their hind legs before their own voters and talk about what a God-awful mess Brussels is in .
The Member States ' absence when we debate these things is something that we cannot expect our taxpayers to put up with , and I might add that the same can be said of the leadership of this House , for neither the Secretary-General nor the President are in the Chamber , and I say that , Madam Vice-President , without wishing to cast doubts on your own competence .
What we want for the future is for the Member States to take responsibility .
Finally , Commissioner Kallas , I was rather perturbed by your statement - which I hope will not be repeated - since the Court of Auditors exists to monitor and criticise the Commission , rather than the other way round , and that happens to be the way things are done in a democratically-ordered state .
We have noted what you said about the absence of certain parties .
( LT ) I would like to support the views expressed by Edit Herczog about agencies , and I would stress that compared with last year it can be clearly seen that there is more fiscal discipline in this area .
However , agencies are growing like mushrooms after a rain .
If in 1990 we had three agencies , now , along with the executive agencies , we have 23 .
It is clear that there is no strategic plan for establishing agencies .
In May of last year we were invited by the Commission to become acquainted with the activities of the Intelligent Energy Executive Agency .
What a great example of agency operations that was : at the end of the year the Commission put forward a proposal that this agency be reorganised .
Clearly , we should give more attention to the wider problem : how many agencies do we need , and are they really necessary ?
At the moment this process is haphazard .
Different commissioners come to different committees of Parliament , which are responsible for certain areas , and they go to the Committee on Budgets .
It is therefore hard to evaluate the whole process of establishing agencies and the need for them , though it seems that many procedural areas have been defined .
Therefore , I think our Committee on Budgetary Control should , together with the entire Parliament , support the initiative and encourage a speedier arrival at an agreement between institutions in relation to the operation of European agencies , their work procedures and their establishment .
( ES ) I would like to begin with a procedural question .
Where is the Council , Madam President ?
I would insist , where is the Council ?
We are talking about a budget , 90 % of which is spent by the Member States .
So where is the Council ?
Where is the Council , Mr Kallas ?
My dear friend Herbert Bösch , ladies and gentlemen of the German press who are following our proceedings , Frankfurter Allgemeine , Die Welt , where is the Council ?
Why is it not here when we are talking about how the Council spends 90 % of our budget ?
My dear friends Herbert Bösch and Markus Ferber , German fellow Members , we have a German Presidency .
Where is the Council ?
Why is the Council not showing its face here , listening to all of our views on how the Member States are spending the budget ?
I hope that in the Committee on Budgetary Control , under the chairmanship of Herbert Bösch , we can take some sort of initiative to point out that it is scandalous - if the press has not already said so - that nobody from the Council is present , to show its face , so that it can respond if necessary to our comments .
I cannot put it any more directly .
Moving on from that issue , which is a serious one , this debate is gaining weight year by year , and we appreciate , and I applaud , Vice-President Siim Kallas 's communication to the effect that we have now recovered EUR 2.1 billion from the Member States .
That is money that they have spent badly and we are recovering it .
I would love to know how this EUR 2.1 billion is distributed .
We have asked for that information and we are sure that , within the context of the transparency initiative that he is heading and which this Parliament will support , we will find out the details .
This is perhaps where the Council is seeing sense .
That what is not spent properly should return to the Community 's coffers .
I therefore wholeheartedly welcome Siim Kallas 's initiative to be especially tough , honest and firm in the recovery of badly-spent funds .
So that there be no doubt , and as a number of speakers have raised the point , it is quite clear that the agenda is set with the participation of the Council .
It is free to be here ; it has obviously made a decision not to be here .
That will be noted and has clearly been remarked upon .
( HU ) The 2005 discharge represents one of the important milestones of the reforms begun three years ago by COCOBU .
One of the aims of the reform was to simplify the procedure , which in addition to being welcomed by all participants is also something that can be implemented at once .
It has proven to be a much more difficult and complex task to realise the objective we share with Commissioner Siim Kallas , according to which a positive DAS would be guaranteed for 2009 , thereby pre-empting the frequently unfounded criticisms .
In order for the European Court of Auditors to issue a certification without reservations , we need the declarations of the Member States that use a total of 80 % of the moneys .
To date , the governments of Member States have avoided doing so .
Last year we were also successful in reaching interinstitutional agreement on this , whereby the need for a positive declaration was signed , and the national audit offices are prepared to work together with the European Court of Auditors .
For all this , we have the involvement of the national parliaments to thank , which meant that we were successful in securing the necessary political foundation .
Madam President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteurs in this particular debate , especially Salvador Garriga Polledo for the discharge report on the Commission , on which I would like to focus most of my comments .
Commissioner , I think that we sense in Parliament and in this debate that real progress has been made in the Commission under Mr Barroso to be able to ensure that European citizens have proper accountability of funds .
However , we know from the Court of Auditors report that even if the underlying transactions were legal and regular , for certain parts of the budget there are material errors which still remain for elements of the operational programmes , and therefore there is no statement of assurance for the 12th year running which , I think we all underline , is totally unacceptable .
The question is , how do we get there ?
Under the Treaties , the Commission stipulates that the Commission is responsible for managing the budget , but we know 80 % , as other colleagues have said , is managed by the Member States .
It is logical that no statement of assurance will be given until the Member States produce their national declarations .
I welcome the Presidency of the Council coming at least at the end of our debate , because this refers to the Presidency and its responsibility in enabling national declarations to be done .
Obviously , in the interinstitutional agreement we have made some progress in asking Member States to have national declarations .
I agree with our rapporteur that we need to have the Commission proposal to encourage Member States to do so , but one gets the feeling that Member States do not care for EU monies spent in their countries because they say it is not theirs .
But of course it is !
It is the taxpayers ' money and should be properly accounted for .
I therefore come to the conclusion , looking at the excellent report by Mr Garriga Polledo , that should there be an intergovernmental conference later this year , we have to make it a legally binding requirement for all Member States to produce national management declarations , because clearly the legal basis at this stage is insufficient and some Member States just slough it off and say that they do not worry because they are not concerned .
But is concerns everybody .
Whilst we are pleased to note the presence of representatives from the Council , I am told that is actually for the next debate .
( DE ) Madam President , I should like to start by thanking all the rapporteurs for having done a splendid job of work .
Perhaps the Health Minister will do her bit on behalf of the Council to make the Budget controls a bit more transparent , too , for she is working hard for that in the health sector , and maybe that is an example to us .
In Germany , we have a saying according to which , when you go out riding , your own stall must be clean , and what I am driving at here is that 80 % of the funds are managed by the Member States , but when I consider the banner headlines of the past few years , or even of recent months , about the Commission 's buildings policy and certain structures that did nothing to help transparent procedures become the norm in the award of contracts , it becomes clear that we have to examine extremely carefully the 20 % that the Commission manages .
The Commission and the Member States pass the buck back and forth among themselves , and that gets nobody anywhere ; each has his own responsibility .
In the Commission , too , a decent amount of work is needed if these sort of structures are to be broken down ; I still remember clearly , all the things that the Commission , here in this House , promised us back in 1999 in connection with the resignation of the Commission at the time .
Where transparency is concerned , I sometimes have no idea what aspects of this debate make sense and which do not , and I hope that someone will be able to explain it all to me .
What I would like to say to Mr Bösch , on the subject of IACS , is that in my own country , the incidence of fraud - which is actually nothing to do with fraud , but rather , because of applications filled in wrong but without criminal intent , is really an incidence of errors - stands at 0.9 % .
When I see how much administrative effort has to go into cutting down from 0.9 % to 0.5 % , I do sometimes worry that the costs of the bureaucracy that we thereby create are much greater than what we are able to save for the taxpayers ' benefit , and this is where a fair balance has to be found if we are to get on the right track .
Madam President , honourable Members , I just have some brief comments to make .
First of all , thank you all for your comments .
Concerning some smaller issues , such as the secondment of agents , we will investigate or study the case raised about gender mainstreaming .
A pilot study is under way and it is difficult to collect information about policies linked to gender issues .
I would also like to stress that interinstitutional dialogue concerning the agencies is extremely valuable , if Parliament is in favour of this idea .
The Commission proposed an interinstitutional agreement concerning agencies in 2005 and this was blocked in the Council .
Now , during the German Presidency , you have tried to revitalise interest in this agreement .
This is vital if we are to really straighten out this issue .
As regards some small details , one Member asked about the size of the losses from the European budget .
I just want to repeat that , in exact accounting terms , the losses are those amounts of money which are written off from our balance sheet .
In the year 2005 , the amount was EUR 90 805 147.47 , which is 0.09 % of our budget .
This is the exact figure corresponding to the definition of losses .
Also , I must say to Mr Seppänen that the accounts for 2006 have already been signed by our chief accounting officer .
Those agencies are an important issue .
Secondly , national declarations were the main issue on which many participants touched , saying that there are problems with the shared management of EU funds .
The wording from the interinstitutional agreement was included in the revised Financial Regulation .
Article 53b says that Member States should produce an annual summary at the appropriate national level of the available audits and declarations .
It has been agreed with the Council that on 15 February 2008 a summary of audits in agriculture will be made available .
The technical aspects of doing this in other areas , in particular in relation to the structural funds , are still under discussion , but there will definitely be firm results .
The Commission raised this issue on 27 March in ECOFIN and yesterday it was discussed in the Council 's Financial Committee .
We have been in contact with the German Presidency and the German Ministry of Finance with a view to discussing again in June how we can reach a definite outcome on the issue of shared management .
The main problem here , visible throughout all these discussions , is that this must be done in such a way as to provide evidence for the Court of Auditors .
A great deal of tension could arise if the Court of Auditors says , ' You can provide us with your national declaration but this does not mean anything .
We will still make our checks and audits and evaluate the situation ' .
There must be a workable solution .
From the beginning , the Commission has supported the idea of shared management .
We are working with national audit institutions to involve them in this process , but there must also be clear evidence for the Court of Auditors .
It is going ahead .
Five countries have already declared their readiness to issue national declarations .
When I compare the Council meetings I attended at the beginning of this Commission with the situation today , which is completely different , I see a great step forward .
I would like to make one last point on an issue raised by some Members .
Yes , there will be an intergovernmental conference .
As we understand it , quite intensive preparations are being made for this intergovernmental conference .
This is a situation where we can also have some input concerning this issue of discharge , perhaps from the angle Mr Elles referred to , or in terms of the wording of the statement of assurance .
In any case , something can be done .
If Parliament also expresses its great interest in these possible amendments , it will definitely help to prepare the way for a positive statement of assurance .

rapporteur . - ( NL ) Madam President , what I have to say is more like a point of order in accordance with Rule 165 of our Rules of Procedure .
Various speakers have asked why the German Presidency , which came at the end of this debate - I assume to address this House in the next one - was absent .
I should like to ask the German Presidency very expressly what the reason was for not taking part in the discharge debate .
It is an important debate , given that 80 % of the resources spent by the Commission and the Member States are discussed , as various speakers have already pointed out .
If I am not given a good reason , then I am reluctant to recommend to my group that discharge be granted to the Council .
I would then prefer we voted against granting the Council discharge , so that we can have this debate again in six months ' time .
Thank you , Mr Staes .
The representatives from the Council that are now present with us are from the German Health Ministry and I think it would be unfair to ask them to respond to this point .
In the light of the tenor of a number of speeches , I have made it quite clear that we are dissatisfied with the non-attendance and that will be followed up .
I will not ask the present representative to answer specifically , but the point has been noted and well made .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be noon today .
Combating HIV / Aids within the EU and in the neighbouring countries 2006-2009 ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Andrejevs , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on combating HIV / AIDS within the European Union and in the neighbouring countries , 2006-2009 .
rapporteur . - Madam President , I wish to begin by thanking the President-in-Office for her encouraging words made in Bremen - and I hope also here during our debate today - as well as for her continued commitment in the fight against HIV / AIDS .
As the Federal Chancellor , Angela Merkel , stated in her keynote speech at the conference in Bremen , the fight against HIV / AIDS is the responsibility of all Member States .
I strongly believe that every single national government should follow Germany 's example and take full political responsibility by putting the fight against HIV / AIDS on its list of top policy priorities .
Today , Parliament is being asked to vote on my report on combating HIV / AIDS within the European Union and in the neighbouring countries , 2006-2009 , which contains many important suggestions on how to combat the disease .
Various colleagues contributed to this final consolidated version , and I want to use this opportunity to thank all my colleagues who contributed to this report as shadow rapporteurs or by tabling amendments .
Their input was of great value and is much appreciated .
As you know , after the vote in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , several new amendments were tabled by the political groups to be voted on during today 's sitting .
The majority of those amendments have my support . However , I could not agree on some .
If adopted , one of the amendments would , in reality , prolong the current situation where two Member States of the EU are not reporting data to the EU surveillance bodies concerning HIV / AIDS , especially to the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control .
Therefore , in my report I urged the responsible bodies in those two Member States to start reporting data .
All the other 25 Member States report their national data anonymously , which does not contradict personal data protection .
I want to draw your attention to , and ask for your support for , amendment 4 , tabled by the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , regarding equal access to medicines within the European Union .
Let me briefly explain the motivation for tabling this amendment .
As already stated in the report , access to anti-retroviral treatment and anti-retroviral drugs are different and varying among the Member States of the European Union .
At the same time , let me remind you that Article 300 of the EC Treaty provides a legal basis for the Commission to conduct negotiations on behalf of all Member States if the Council authorises the Commission to do so .
In such a case , if the European Parliament and the Council were to decide in favour of this proposal , the Commission 's mandate would be limited in scope and duration only to those particular negotiations , namely for equal access to anti-retroviral medicines .
Negotiating on behalf of 27 Member States , the outcome could be beneficial for everyone and provide all citizens of the EU with equal access to those medicines .
To conclude , I should like to thank once more all my colleagues who contributed to the work done in this report .
The work combating this pandemic will not stop after today 's vote : it will continue in the field .
Therefore , I should like to call on all the national governments and the Commission to support non-governmental organisations , social organisations and society as a whole to fight against HIV / AIDS .
I call for them to be empowered by allocating the necessary financial resources to strengthen those who fight this epidemic in the front line .
The role of civic society in this fight is not to be underestimated , and we need to guarantee our full political support .

Mr President , honourable Members , I thank you for giving me the opportunity to address you here today , and Mr Andrejevs , too , for presenting his report , which makes it plain that HIV / AIDS remains a dangerous illness , which , although we often - and rightly - think of it as associated with Africa , is also an issue for our own continent of Europe .
In parts of our continent , infection is now spreading more rapidly than in other parts of the world , and it is , alas , on the increase in all the Member States of the European Union .
We must , then , make this issue our own , for HIV / AIDS is more than a health problem ; it also has to do with economic and social development in the states affected by it .
I am very glad , then , that we succeeded in getting over 41 European states , including some of our neighbours , represented by ministers or their deputies at the Bremen conference , that we were able to highlight the importance of the alliance between government and civil society in the fight against HIV / AIDS and that it was also made plain that HIV / AIDS has to be seen as the big issue .
I am very grateful to the German Federal Chancellor for her clear statement and also for the fact that the results of this conference and its conclusions will be on the agenda not only of the Health Ministers ' Council , but also of the summit in June .
The main thing that the Bremen declaration did was to set out , in four core points and in clear terms , where our priorities have to be , and they coincide to a very large degree with what you have set out in your report and in its reasoning .
All our strategies must give priority to prevention , for neither medicines nor vaccinations are available to prevent the spread of HIV / AIDS .
It is absolutely vital that the human rights of persons who have contracted the illness should be recognised , respected and promoted , and that includes their right to be protected from discrimination and against being stigmatised .
General access to diagnosis and treatment must be guaranteed ; the question has just been raised as to whether we can negotiate prices for medicines .
One advance achieved by Bremen is that the pharmaceutical industry has made it clear that good provision necessarily involves affordable medicines , and has indicated its willingness to join with the Commission , your House and the Member States in finding a way in which each Member State can , by negotiating prices , ensure access to affordable treatment and injections .
Now , that is progress .
There must also be a renewed and greater commitment to research and development , with better interlinking of facilities in Europe , and more investment in vaccinations and microbicides .
I do believe that this conference has enabled us to make some headway , and would be delighted if our Member States , together with Parliament and the Commission , were to put this issue at the top of the agenda , thus making the point that AIDS is an issue for all of us .
It is not just a problem for our neighbour states , but a problem for Europe ; it has a great deal to do with our social and economic development , no less than it does with our success or failure in giving the public added value .

Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Andrejevs , and the members of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety for their excellent work in drafting this report .
I would also like to thank the other two committees , the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs and the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , for their contributions on this important issue .
Let me also say how happy I am that Mrs Schmidt , the German Health Minister , is here today .
It is the first time in my three years as Commissioner that my counterpart from the Council has attended such a debate in plenary .
I am very happy , because it demonstrates the importance of all three institutions working together very closely , very firmly and very effectively in dealing with this disease .
HIV / AIDS : is it a forgotten problem or is it a hidden disease ?
Is our approach that if we do not talk about it , it will go away ?
Well , it does not work like that .
The question , then , is have we become complacent ?
Do we take it for granted that we have overcome this problem , that there is no need for action or that it is a problem for others , for certain risk groups ?
That they , therefore , must deal with it , while we do not have to worry about it ?
Maybe that was in people 's minds in the past , but I am glad that today it is not the case .
We now know that this is a problem for the whole of society .
Perhaps society is now paying because of our complacency in the past and now is the time to take new effective action to deal with this problem .
Most of you know my frustration that in the European Union , where we have the highest level of education in the world , the highest level of healthcare and the highest standard of living , people still die because of the wrong lifestyle choices .
Our efforts to ensure prevention aim to address that .
For me it is frustrating , and even embarrassing , that 20 or 25 years on we still have to discuss the same issues regarding HIV / AIDS .
We still have to discuss the same measures to be taken , measures that should now be standard and routine in the European Union .
We still have to explain that the simple use of condoms is the most effective way to protect ourselves .
It is a simple truth .
We must also explain that everybody is at risk ; we cannot start saying to some groups that it is their problem and that those not in the risk group do not have to worry about it .
We still have to stress that simple preventative measures do protect .
The results of the Eurobarometer poll were , as you know , shocking .
A large percentage of people in the European Union still believe that they can get infected with HIV / AIDS by kissing on the mouth , drinking from the same glass or by using the same toilet seat .
It is embarrassing that after 25 years people still do not know more than that .
Or , even worse , that taking care of patients who are HIV-positive could actually infect the healthcare worker .
I believe that we have to step up our efforts .
It is now a problem for the general population , especially young people and women .
A large number of young people became sexually active after the end of the campaigns of the 1980s .
We saw a huge wave of campaigns by famous people - actors , heads of government and singers - who drew attention to this problem and helped focus on how to deal with it .
Unfortunately that has stopped .
We thought we had the matter under control , but we did not .
The new generations are growing up unaware .
I am therefore very grateful to the German Presidency , the Health Minister and the Chancellor herself for refocusing on this disease and the simple ways in which we can protect ourselves .
At the same time , it is extremely important to invest in research , and the Commission is doing that .
It is very important to invest in medicine - I will not repeat what has already been said - and to ensure access to affordable and effective ARV medicines .
These are important measures that we can take .
For us it is a very high priority and , as I said , I am very happy that the Council and the German Presidency , and Parliament too , look at it in the same way .
We will resume and step up our campaigns to educate young people .
We will again encourage the use of condoms .
We will carry out research on preventative measures and medicine .
This will be gender-related , because we realise that there are aspects that differ amongst men and women and we will adjust our research and our efforts to take account of this reality .
I have noted the paragraph in the report and agree that , within the Commission , we must make sure that we cooperate among ourselves , among the individual departments responsible for defined areas , whilst also dealing with the subject as a global problem .
We know that it affects the Neighbourhood countries but also developing countries , and we have a responsibility to work with them as well .
I would like to commend the rapporteur and Parliament on the report .
It really touches on all the important issues .
We will be working on those issues .
In some cases , such as interdepartmental cooperation within the Commission , we were already doing so .
We will also take action by means of funding and through programmes .
For example , in 2007 we will be working on developing best practices in addressing the risky sexual behaviour among young people and the prevention of HIV / AIDS in men who have sex with men and developing training programmes for healthcare personnel and NGOs to improve the treatment and care of people living with HIV / AIDS .
For us it is a very high priority .
It is not just about a policy or a strategy .
It is a question of moral obligation .
I believe that the system as a whole has failed our citizens over the past 20 years and it is now time to resume our efforts and correct our mistakes .
Thank you very much for your speech , Commissioner , which was full of feeling and commitment and also very much in line with Parliament 's concerns and demands .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality . - ( HU ) HIV / AIDS , one of the most dangerous diseases today , knows no boundaries .
In the past two years , the number of girls and women infected with HIV has grown in all parts of the world , and at a particularly fast pace in Eastern Europe , Asia and Latin America .
Taking measures against this epidemic can therefore not be confined to the territory of the EU , but urgently requires global collaboration .
In 2005 there were close to 5 million new HIV infections worldwide , and AIDS-related diseases claimed the lives of 3 million people .
Among these , some half a million were children .
The other increasingly at-risk group is women , since more and more of them are infected with the HIV virus without their being aware of it , and they in turn become carriers of a virus they can pass on to their children .
An anti-HIV / AIDS strategy should make the protection of women and children the most important component .
The most effective tools in this struggle are prevention , information , tools for public education , and the increased use of the most suitable communication channels , data gathering , research and early detection and treatment ; we must ensure that high quality , non-exclusionary health care is available regardless of the person 's age and sex .
Mr President , in order to cure HIV / AIDS in the EU and neighbouring countries we need an integrated strategy that will promote prevention on a community level as well as in these countries , but also , I would say , on a worldwide scale .
The number of people infected by AIDS as well as of those living with AIDS is constantly on the rise and 12 000 new infections are registered worldwide everyday .
There is no vaccine for the prevention of the disease and no therapeutic treatment has proved successful so far .
Following the ancient saying of Hippocrates : ' prevention is better than cure ' , an integrated strategy would consist of promoting effective prevention .
Prevention can be achieved through public awareness - as the Commissioner mentioned - and thus all necessary preventive measures could be taken .
Furthermore , we must take certain steps towards eliminating prejudices related to the specific disease .
People infected with the disease constantly face intolerance and discrimination .
At the same time , of course , together with the prevention efforts , we must promote the fields of research and innovation that will give us the ability to have new medications and possibly vaccines .
To close , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Andrejevs , for the exceptional work he has done .
We had an exceptional collaboration and I thank him for that .
I believe that with this report we will be able to come up with an extraordinary prevention strategy both in the European Union and on a worldwide scale .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , AIDS is still an ongoing tragedy , not only in developing countries , but also in Europe , not only among homosexuals and drug users , but also among heterosexuals and the totally abstinent , and so I should like to extend warm thanks to our rapporteur .
Mr Andrejevs , who has put a great deal into this work and has written a fine report .
Our group must pull out all the stops in order to call a halt to the AIDS epidemic , and we need to invest with this in mind .
First of all , we must invest in people , in women .
We must take prevention seriously .
We must take the reality of women , young people , sex workers and drug users seriously , and that reality is what we need to take as a basis .
It is essential that good information be provided in schools and hospitals , the sort of information that treats people 's moral choices with respect , and should also include information about all sexually transmittable diseases , since these increase vulnerability for AIDS .
Secondly , we must invest in new products , in microbicides , in products that enable women to protect themselves against AIDS , in medicines and vaccines , and in more environmentally-friendly medicines .
Condoms for men and women must be become more widely available .
Thirdly , we need to invest in political innovation .
We must overcome the existing obstacles without delay .
Medicines and vaccines are often not affordable to groups that need them the most .
Reasons for this are the high development costs of medicines and the relatively short recoup time , as a result of which new medicines are prohibatively expensive .
We must face these problems and the public responsibility that goes with them .
There are ways out of this situation , for example more public-private partnerships to develop AIDS medicines and vaccines , which may bring their cost down to some extent , while we should also make use of all the options open to us in order to invalidate patents in the public interest , something for which the TRIPS agreements set the right tone .
Finally , what is needed if essential medicines are to be available for the fight against AIDS is better negotiation with the pharmaceutical industry , something in which the Commission can play a key role , and I would warmly support the rapporteur 's amendment to this effect .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , Minister , Commissioner , congratulations to Professor Andrejevs for his excellent report .
AIDS is a major threat to global health , and oddly enough , it becomes even more so as the treatment of sufferers improves , because with improved treatment , patient survival also improves , and therefore the pool of infectivity grows .
I wish to take this opportunity to home in on just one aspect : infection due to the use of infected needles by drug-users .
Many thousands of individuals are infected every year because of this .
This problem can easily be dealt with at least in EU Member States if only governments could understand the simple fact that drug addiction is a disease , not a criminal offence , and therefore proper measures should be taken so that drug-addicted individuals are given clean , uninfected needles to use in the treatment of their illness .
This should be done under proper medical supervision and surveillance and without the involvement of the police or judicial authorities .
I hope that eventually governments will use medical common sense , and not a police sledgehammer approach , in dealing with drug-addicted ill people .
I am interested to hear the comments of the Commissioner and the Minister on this issue .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , it is a pleasure for me to speak before this House in the important debate on one of the gravest problems and threats of modern times : the fight against HIV and AIDS .
The world today appears to have become rather blasé about the issue of HIV / AIDS , and is not paying sufficient attention to the problem , or investing enough in relation to the gravity and extent of the threat .
And reality contrasts starkly with this : almost 40 million people have the HIV virus worldwide and over 95 % of them live in the developing countries .
This fact should induce us to give more aid to those countries .
The alarming thing is that over half of new HIV cases are among the under-25s .
Cases in the European Union and neighbouring countries are increasing at an alarming rate .
We should also remember that the people most susceptible to HIV infection are drug addicts , migrants and men having sex with men .
All of these groups require particular care and assistance .
That is why it is so important for all institutions and organisations promoting safer lifestyles and risk avoidance should regularly include the fight against HIV in their programmes .
It is also important that the Commission makes use of its neighbourhood policy to reach out to areas threatened in countries neighbouring the EU , with special focus on the Kaliningrad enclave , where the threat is also growing at an alarming rate .
But what we should be focussing on most are clear information campaigns about HIV infection , as this is the most important means of stemming this modern plague .
Once again , I would like to underline that only HIV prevention and education , especially among young people , will help to avert an epidemic on a global scale .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , AIDS is a long way away from being vanquished .
New cases are continuing to increase , taking on the proportions of a global epidemic .
The most worrying thing is that half of new cases involve persons under the age of 25 .
In Europe over 50 % of the population believes that you can catch AIDS from a kiss .
For this reason , we need information campaigns written in scientifically accurate language that give the population clear information on prevention , methods of protection and risky behaviour .
It is necessary to combat all forms of ghettoisation , by putting in place policies and programmes for the promotion of social inclusion and access to the employment market for those with the virus .
We also need public funds to promote research and development activities focusing on public health needs , where access to research results is available to all , including the poorest patients .
The medicines that are needed to save millions of lives cannot be treated as ordinary goods , governed by the laws of the market .
As the report states , we need to guarantee the right of every human being to health care , medical services and access to medicines .

( SK ) I would like to begin by thanking the rapporteur for a detailed report covering all aspects of the fight against this insidious disease . It is regrettable that EuroHIV lacks national data from Spain and Italy , even though the agency regards them as the two countries with the highest incidence of the epidemic , and despite the fact that the estimated number of people infected with the virus in some EU countries is nearly three times the official number .
Slovakia , for example , is estimated to have ten times more infected patients than the official statistics indicate .
It is understandably difficult to obtain accurate statistics , because there are also patients who refuse treatment and disappear from sight as far as doctors are concerned .
The legislation does not solve this problem , and in spite of the risk of infection , no one can force a person to have treatment .
It is often difficult even to determine the source of infection .
With syphilis , identifying an infected person is a simple matter .
With HIV , it takes a very long time .
I support Commissioner Kyprianou in the emphasis he places on the difficulty of research , and in his efforts to ensure that treatment is provided under the 7th Framework Programme .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs . - Mr President , may I start by congratulating the rapporteur on the work that he has done on this extremely important report .
Can I first say that of course , AIDS and HIV are themselves not prejudiced .
They affect anyone who actually becomes vulnerable either by the use of badly treated blood which is often contaminated and passed on , unsafe sex and the bad use of needles to list just some examples .
But what we have to deal with is how to prevent the transmission .
It seems to me that highest on the agenda is the whole issue of information and education .
We have to inform people about how they can protect themselves .
We have to inform people about their rights and about access to medicines .
At the same time we have to create a whole process for awareness-raising amongst communities and individuals who feel that they themselves are not under threat or will not be affected by AIDS and HIV .
When we look in particular at Africa , where millions and millions of lives are being ravaged , and when we look across Europe , where more and more young people are becoming infected with the HIV virus , what we have to look at is not only the accessibility of treatment , but also the cost of treatment .
We must do everything we can to reduce the cost of that treatment and to make it available to all .
To those who say that condom use is not effective in preventing the transmission of the HIV virus , I say they do a great deal of damage and in fact they cost lives .
Condoms do work .
Needle exchange does work .
Good practices do work and they save lives .
And those who promote abstinence ?
Well , if abstinence can work in sexual relationships , of course it will .
But what about when abstinence is not a choice ?
The young 14-year old girl raped on a highway in Africa : does she have a choice ?
No . She has no choice .
And that is where education and the promotion of awareness-raising and ending the discrimination that blights the lives of people living with AIDS and HIV is so important .
Finally , I do not think she is often quoted in this House , but I want to quote Madonna - that is the pop star .
She once said that to come out and declare your sexuality is to be a hero .
To come out and say that you are HIV positive and to deal with the discrimination and the anger that you therefore suffer is to declare yourself a warrior : a warrior because you fight the battles that you never want another generation to have to fight again .
I commend the report and I commend it to the House .
( SV ) Mr President , according to official statistics , more than 215 000 people in the EU were infected by HIV between 1998 and 2005 .
In Europe , almost 650 000 people were infected , many of them under 25 years of age .
In a way , that makes me feel extremely sad and downcast .
It also makes me very indignant because , just as Mr Kyprianou said earlier , this is happening quite unnecessarily .
These people could have avoided becoming infected .
That is why I am very pleased indeed that we are having this debate today .
I am very pleased with the report that we are to vote on and by the fact that the Commission and the Council have said they are willing to give priority to these issues .
The fact is , it is a question of tackling the ignorance that clearly exists about the ways in which people are infected by HIV and Aids .
This just goes to show that we need to concentrate even more on providing information and on encouraging openness about sexuality in general .
We must dare to talk about gender equality and self-determination in sexual matters .
The fact that it is mainly the most vulnerable groups in society that are affected by HIV and the spread of infection shows that we need to work in new ways if we are genuinely to reach all social groups .
The fact that it is vulnerable groups that are affected also poses some very tough challenges for our work on preventing those with HIV from being stigmatised .
That is something to which a very great deal of priority needs to be given .
I am also very pleased that the report highlights support for the global fund for combating HIV / Aids , tuberculosis and malaria .
This is very important work , which I hope we can do more to support .
I am also very pleased that the report and several of the amendments indicate the significance of combating tuberculosis and HIV in parallel .
I am grateful for the work we have promised to do together to combat this quite unnecessary spread of infection .
( DE ) Mr President , what makes today 's debate on the fight against HIV / AIDS in the European Union and its neighbouring countries so important is the fact that even we in this House sometimes forget the facts about it .
HIV / AIDS remains a menace of an illness , not only in African countries , but also in our own Member States and in the countries that are our neighbours .
The rate of HIV infection is on the increase , and it is estimated that the number of persons with the virus is - as has been said several times over today - three times higher than the official figure .
Good though it is that all the European institutions have , once again , spoken out in favour of an effective war on this menacing disease , I can do no other than share Commissioner Kyprianou 's frustration when we come up against figures like these on new infections and against such misleading information after the many years in which we believed that the upcoming generations had got the message .
Information campaigns need to be organised not only in order to prevent new infections with HIV , but also to prevent people with the condition from being stigmatised and to give people the knowledge that they need , because it is pretty astonishing that people still believe that they can be infected through a kiss or a glass of water , and it is here , in the sphere of education and prevention , where far too little is being done , that a start has to be made .
I never cease to be horrified by the reception given by some religious groups to education and information campaigns sponsored by the relevant ministers in some Member States , and here , too , we have to nail our political colours to the mast .
What is at stake , among other things , is compliance with EU law as it stands ; there is a directive that lays down quality and safety standards for the collection , processing and distribution of human blood , and we must insist on all Member States transposing it in full , not least for the protection of their own inhabitants .
Mr President , I would like to thank all the Members of the European Parliament , and also the Commission , for the debate we have had today , which shows very clearly how our common action in doing our utmost to keep new infections at as low a level as possible , and to guarantee unrestricted access to treatment for people who are infected , is to a very considerable degree dependent on the subject not being made taboo , and on the sufferers not being stigmatised and discriminated against .
I am glad that it has been spelled out , both here and at the major conference in Bremen , that HIV / AIDS must go to the top of the agenda , for I am firmly persuaded that it is only if the Heads of State or Government make this issue their own that we will , everywhere , and not least in our neighbouring countries , be able to ensure the creation of the infrastructure that is needed if cooperation with civil society and , above all , with sufferers , is to bear fruit , and if the things to which reference has been made are actually to be done .
The first thing we must do is to give some thought to prevention and information , asking ourselves how we get the message across to young people , to immigrants , or to those to whom access is difficult , such as , for example , those women who have been forced into prostitution ; this can be done only through close cooperation between those with political power and those within civil society who accept responsibility and work with us , and mention of forced prostitution makes it clear that this is not just about health policy , for governments must do all they can to protect women .

Thirdly , prevention is possible only if we talk frankly about how infection can happen , and that might well lead to us , in our own countries , adopting a drugs policy that does not criminalise drugs , because , although action must be taken , including by means of the law , against drug pushers , those who have become ill as a result of their addiction must be assured of such things as access to clean needles and of easy access to help and services .
All these things have a part to play in this .
This is far from an easy path to take , not least in the countries around us , where the Member States and their governments face the accusation that , by adopting such a policy , they are themselves acting as dealers and encouraging drug dependency - a taboo subject in many countries .
It is for this reason that I was , in Bremen , very glad to see that the ministers from the new Eastern European Member States were willing to talk very frankly about these things , because I see in this frank and open approach to these problems , in the removal of taboos , a way in which we can move forward in the way we all hope to do .
That being so , then , if we pool best practices in the prevention field and exchange ideas , if we jointly invest in research and development and take up this cause , we have already taken a step forward .
Secondly , I am very much in favour of your House , the Member States and the Commission coming to the shared realisation that any real campaign against HIV / AIDS also needs the sort of infrastructure that makes health care possible while also ensuring that the people accessing treatment find qualified people to talk to when they do so .
Thirdly , we have to ensure that access to affordable medicines can be assured in every Member State by allowing 10 % of the health budget to be spent on HIV vaccinations or treatments .
I appreciate the opportunity given for this debate here today , and am very glad that we will continue to cooperate closely in addressing this issue for the sake of the people who live alongside us and in order that young people may be protected against HIV / AIDS infection .
Mr President , I would like to thank all Members and the Minister for a very interesting debate .
As you know , our motto this year for our HIV / AIDS campaign was ' AIDS - remember me ? '
Unfortunately , we still have to remind people - including , I regret to say , decision-makers - about the existence of this disease .
This must be done in several ways .
First of all , concerning decision-makers , I repeat what the Minister has already said : ' Spending on this effort is not a cost ; it is an investment ' .
We have to remind our leaders and decision-makers of this .
Also , dealing with HIV / AIDS in neighbouring countries and in developing countries is not just our moral obligation towards our partner third countries , it is also a self-protection measure .
We have to use all practical arguments to convince those who take the decisions .
Of course , I agree that prevention is the most important policy , as we do not have a cure at the moment .
But this can be done more effectively through education and information .
It has to be done in a very balanced way : on the one hand , we have to educate people , especially young people , that this is a dangerous illness .
It is not like the flu : you cannot take antibiotics and it will go away .
It could eventually kill you .
We have to show the risks of the disease , but not in a way that marginalises , stigmatises or discriminates against those who are infected .
Stigmatisation also prevents dealing with the disease because people are afraid of the stigma .
People do not get tested and remain unaware that they are infected .
They end up infecting others and not seeking treatment themselves .
It is a delicate balancing act , but it is our task and we have to do it .
As has already been mentioned , it is unfortunate that young people today practise unsafe sex .
As I said in my opening remarks , the simple use of condoms is something that we have to keep reminding young people about : it is an important way for them to protect themselves .
Abstinence is something that should be based on moral or religious beliefs , not as a measure against the disease , because we want people to know how to protect themselves if they decide to have sex .
Everyone is entitled to their moral beliefs .
They can act based on those , but the education has to be there .
They have to know how to protect themselves .
As I said , we will also place particular emphasis on research and development measures , in particular protective measures for women , and especially measures that women can take that do not require the male partner 's agreement .
Therefore , I am very much in agreement with that paragraph in the report .
Civil society is a very important factor for us .
We have to develop partnerships - not just the European institutions , but European citizens as well - so we plan to , and do , work very closely with civil society .
We established an HIV / AIDS Civil Society Forum in 2005 and we have made this a core aspect of our work in addressing HIV / AIDS in Europe .
Indeed , the Civil Society Forum has been and is meeting yesterday and today in Luxembourg to discuss this important issue .
It consists of NGOs , women 's groups , groups for men who have sex with men , sex workers , prisoners , drug users .
We have to include the whole of society in dealing with this issue .
I agree with Mr Matsakis that we must work on dealing with the issue of drug addicts and the exchange of needles , because I agree that it is a health issue and not an issue for criminalisation .
Also , we have to mention the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control , the instrument we created together and which should be a very effective mechanism in surveillance and in dealing with this important problem .
Therefore , I believe that this debate , and hopefully more to follow , will not only help in focusing the attention of all those who have to take the right decisions , but will also help European citizens to be informed about the continued existence of this problem .
On behalf of the Commission , I can assure you that this will remain at the top of our political agenda .
The debate is closed .
I believe that it is right to congratulate Mr Andrejevs once again on the magnificent report that he has prepared and that this debate has been one of the most gratifying debates that we have held in recent times , showing great harmony between the Council , the Commission and Parliament .
A debate that demonstrates commitment and which I believe offers hope in terms of how the European Union should act as a whole , in terms of interinstitutional action in relation to a problem that is at the forefront of everybody 's concerns .
The vote will take place at 12 noon
Written statements ( Rule 142 of the Rules of Procedure )
in writing . - ( FR ) AIDS is the biggest epidemic in history , affecting all regions , all social sectors and all age groups .
Today , one person is infected every six seconds .
The European Parliament must relaunch a campaign that is running out of steam , and I welcome the own-initiative report on which we are voting today .
AIDS is being forgotten about , but it has not forgotten about us - it is spreading mainly among the young , women , migrant populations and within the new EU Member States .
Young Europeans are becoming less and less vigilant , and seem to confuse existing treatments with a cure .
Let us remember : AIDS is still killing people today .
The disease knows no bounds , and , now more than ever , our solidarity must be transnational .
That is why I am pleased that the report recommends not only European measures in the areas of prevention , information and research , but also international measures , by means of the neighbourhood policy and the TACIS programme .
The fight against AIDS is not merely a fight against a pandemic ; it also plays a role in the promotion of health care and sexual rights , as well as women 's rights .
This is not only a joint political measure ; this is a universal duty .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the data on the current state of the fight against AIDS are discouraging : worldwide over 39 million people are living with HIV , while in 2006 alone 4.3 million people were infected with the virus .
The data on the European Union are also upsetting , showing a significant rise in new cases over the last seven years .
It is therefore necessary for both national and European institutions to adopt a new approach as quickly as possible . They need to identify prevention measures to be directed towards at-risk groups and to maintain information campaigns and sexual education campaigns in schools , since half of new cases involve young people under the age of 25 .
Worldwide , the European Union and the international community have a duty both to ensure access to medicines and treatments at prices that are accessible even for the poorest countries , by fighting the drug company lobby , and also to continue to carry out research to produce , as rapidly as possible , new innovative antiretroviral medicines , vaccines and microbicides .
In the light of these data I call on all the Member States that have not yet done so , among them Italy , to release the funds promised to the Global Fund .
The Italian Government ought to make its financial contribution , which in this particular case is 260 million euros , to the Global Fund to Fight AIDS , Tuberculosis and Malaria as soon as possible .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.50 a.m. and resumed at 12 noon )

Welcome
I am pleased to be able to welcome to our Parliament Vicente Fox , the former President of Mexico , who is in the official gallery .
1 .
EC-Malaysia Agreement on certain aspects of air services ( vote )
- Report : Costa
2 .
Europol staff salaries and allowances ( vote )
- Report : Cavada
Mr President , can you not take the entire group of reports under Rule 131 as single votes en bloc ?
The budget procedure stipulates a separate vote on each report .
All I can do to speed up voting is to avoid the reference to the simplified procedure for each report .
3 .
Tariff quotas for imports into Bulgaria and Romania of raw cane sugar ( vote )
- Report : Graefe zu Baringdorf
4 .
Waiver of the immunity of Vural Öger ( vote )
- Report : Speroni
5 .
Discharge 2005 : Section IV , Court of Justice ( vote )
- Report : Caspary
6 .
Discharge 2005 : Section V , Court of Auditors ( vote )
- Report : Caspary
7 .
Discharge 2005 : Section VI , European Economic and Social Committee ( vote )
- Report : Caspary
8 .
Discharge 2005 : Section VIIIA , European Ombudsman ( vote )
- Report : Caspary
9 .
Discharge 2005 : Section VIII B , European Data Protection Supervisor ( vote )
- Report : Caspary
10 .
Discharge 2005 : 6th , 7th , 8th and 9th EDFs ( vote )
- Report : Camre
11 .
Discharge 2005 : European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training ( vote )
- Report : Herczog
12 .
Discharge 2005 : European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions ( vote )
- Report : Herczog
13 .
Discharge 2005 : European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia ( vote )
- Report : Herczog
14 .
Discharge 2005 : European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction ( vote )
- Report : Herczog
15 .
Discharge 2005 : European Environment Agency ( vote )
- Report : Herczog
16 .
Discharge 2005 : European Agency for Safety and Health at Work ( vote )
- Report : Herczog
17 .
Discharge 2005 : Translation Centre for the Bodies of the European Union ( vote )
- Report : Herczog
18 .
Discharge 2005 : European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products ( vote )
- Report : Herczog
19 .
Discharge 2005 : Eurojust ( vote )
- Report : Herczog
20 .
Discharge 2005 : European Training Foundation ( vote )
- Report : Herczog
21 .
Discharge 2005 : European Maritime Safety Agency ( vote )
- Report : Herczog
22 .
Discharge 2005 : European Aviation Safety Agency ( vote )
- Report : Herczog
23 .
Discharge 2005 : European Food Safety Authority ( vote )
- Report : Herczog
24 .
Discharge 2005 : European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control ( vote )
- Report : Herczog
25 .
Discharge 2005 : European Network and Information Security Agency ( vote )
- Report : Herczog
26 .
Payment services in the internal market ( vote )
- Report : Gauzès
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the report submitted to you is the result of extensive , concerted efforts with the Council of Ministers and the Commission to arrive at a vote at first reading .
I therefore call on you to vote in favour .
On the other hand , I call on you to reject the amendment to Article 71 , which has nothing to do with the draft directive .
We are in fact talking here about an issue relating to the retention of data in the SWIFT system , in particular , and , in this regard , I must inform our fellow Members that , during yesterday 's debate , the Commission indicated that it would endeavour to ensure that data are kept secure .
I have , incidentally , just received a letter from the German Presidency supporting this position .
I would therefore ask you to reject the amendment to Article 71 .
On the other hand , I am in favour of the oral amendment that will be tabled by Mrs Berès during the vote on the legislative resolution .
To conclude , I should like to thank all those who helped draft this report - the committee , the shadow rapporteurs and the draftsmen of the opinion , and all the technical colleagues who assisted me .
- Before the vote on the legislative resolution :
( FR ) Mr President , in line with the rapporteur , I should like to table an oral amendment to this report that will enable us to add a citation , the text of which I shall read out to you : ' having regard to the letter sent to the President of the European Parliament on 1 March 2007 by the chairman of the working group laid down in Article 29 of Directive 95 / 46 / EC , with regard to the issues linked to data protection , particularly in the administration of the SWIFT system , ' .
I call on you to have our Parliament validate this oral amendment to the excellent draft report by our fellow Member , Mr Gauzès .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
27 .
Quota system in relation to the production of potato starch ( vote )
- Report : Wojciechowski , Janusz
- Before the vote on Amendment 8 :
rapporteur . - ( PL ) Mr President , We recently voted on an amendment to extend the system of starch quotas to four years .
This is good news for the old Member States who have 90 % of these quotas , which is enough to meet their requirements .
Let us now do something nice for the new Member States , which are less happy with their quotas , and adopt amendment eight .
This will allow quotas to be carried over from one year to the next - what the old Member States do not use in one year should be allocated in the following year to the new Member States , with the agreement of the Commission .
I would like to point out that in the long term this amendment would not lead to an increase in quotas , and I ask that it be approved for the sake of European solidarity .
If this amendment is adopted , I have been authorised by the Union for Europe of the Nations Group to withdraw amendments five , six and seven , which will result in an increase in quotas .
We have received some information that would have been more appropriate during the course of the debate which has already taken place on the report .
28 .
Future enlargements and cohesion ( vote )
- Report : Pieper
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , I should like to thank the Members who have played their part in this report 's coming into being .
In committee , we agreed on 19 compromise amendments .
The majority in committee was a clear one , of 35 to 3 , and I hope for a similar confirmation from the plenary .
- Before the vote on Amendment 26 :
Mr President , I would just like to point out that a mistake has been made which we would like to correct .
It is in paragraph 2a .
It starts ' Regrets the agreement reached on the financial framework 2007-2013 , in particular the reductions in the structural funds from 0.47 % ' .
It should be ' 0.41 % ' .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
29 .
The Commission 's annual strategic priorities ( Budget 2008 ) ( vote )
- Report : Virrankoski
- Before the vote on paragraph 17 :
rapporteur . - ( FI ) Mr President , could the word ' revise ' please be changed to ' improve ' .
In English , instead of ' revision ' , the word ' improvement ' .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
30 .
Discharge 2005 : Section III , Commission ( vote )
- Report : Garriga Polledo
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Mr President , I would like to table an oral amendment intended to remove two footnotes in paragraphs 37 and 108 of the report , on pages 16 and 25 of the English version .
This is because both footnotes are redundant and contribute nothing to the report .
I would call upon all of the groups in the House to accept this oral amendment , please .
( The oral amendments were accepted )
31 .
Discharge 2005 : Section I , European Parliament ( vote )
- Report : Staes
- Before the vote on Amendment 7 :
Mr President , I have a point of order based on Rules 166 and 71 of the Rules of Procedure .
Besides the Fjellner amendment asking for the costs of maintaining Parliament 's three places of work , I would like to advise the House that paragraph 83 of the original text also called for specification of the environmental impact .
7D , the PPE-DE amendment , calls for a deletion .
- Before the vote on paragraph 77 :
( DE ) Mr President , I am not quite certain of this , but I do fear that you have not had paragraph 75 voted on .
You said you would have us vote on paragraph 76 , but the display indicated paragraph 75 .
You then said you would have us vote on paragraph 77 , but the display indicated paragraph 76 .
I would ask you to dispel this uncertainty .
I think that everything has been done correctly .
First we voted on paragraph 75 , which was adopted .
Then we voted on paragraph 76 , again by roll call , and it was adopted .
I am just now announcing the vote on paragraph 77 , on which we are voting by roll call , and I declare voting open .
32 .
Discharge 2005 : Section II , Council ( vote )
- Report : Caspary
- Before the vote :
( DE ) Mr President , before we move on to give discharge to the Council , I should like to draw the House 's attention to the fact that the Council was not present for the debate on the Budget discharge of the Commission and the other institutions and is not , as we can see , present for the decision .
In view of the fact that 80 % of the EU 's Budget resources are handled via the Member States , which bear responsibility for these funds , we regard this as an intolerable state of affairs .
We expect the Council , over the coming months , to come up with a definite action plan for the drafting of the national statements of assurance .
( Loud applause )
I note the comment by Mr Bösch , which clearly does not prevent us from continuing with the vote .
Voting by roll call on the discharge is now open .
33 .
Discharge 2005 : Section VII , Committee of the Regions ( vote )
- Report : Caspary
34 .
Discharge 2005 : European Agency for Reconstruction ( vote )
- Report : Herczog
35 .
Combating HIV / Aids within the EU and in the neighbouring countries 2006-2009 ( vote )
- Report : Andrejevs
That concludes the vote .
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For details of the outcome of the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
Although I understand the need for Europol to carry out internal changes with regard to salaries and subsidies , Parliament has , since 1998 , consistently rejected all initiatives put to it when consulted on detailed issues relating to Europol .
Such consultation could not be considered relevant while Europol remained intergovernmental in scope , with neither democratic nor legal control .
I welcome the fact that Parliament 's repeated requests have finally been answered : in December 2006 , the Commission stated its intention to give Europol a more acceptable legal framework , conferring on it the status of an EU agency , funded by the Community budget , and giving its staff the status of Community employees .
Although the process of transforming Europol has yet to be concluded , I have decided to vote in favour of this Finnish initiative on adapting the basic salaries and allowances of Europol , and this as a message of good faith and of complete support for this process of transformation , which I trust will be completed at the earliest opportunity .
in writing . ( SV ) The June List believes that increased democratic , legal and budget-related control over Europol is desirable .
Because the Europol Convention constitutes intergovernmental cooperation , it is the national parliaments , however , that should exercise this control , and not the European Parliament .
We have therefore voted against the report .
Bulgarian and Romanian refiners depend to a great extent on the import of raw cane sugar from third countries .
That being the case , in order to prevent a break in the supply of raw cane sugar to full-time refiners , tariff quotas for imports of raw cane sugar to Bulgaria and Romania from third countries must be opened .
It is in this context that the Commission 's proposal , which will have no impact whatsoever on the refineries of other Member States , has appeared .
I agree with the Commission proposal , given the exceptional circumstances involved , and shall be voting in favour of the Graefe zu Baringdorf report .
in writing . ( SV ) We have voted against this report .
The June List is of the view that comprehensive reform of the sugar market within the EU is necessary with a view to liberalising the market without delay and giving sugar-producing countries outside the EU the opportunity to compete on fair terms .
It is absurd , then , to induct new Member States into a system with no future and get them used to that system 's rules .
Because Romania and Bulgaria have properly operating sugar markets , they should be allowed to keep them and not be inducted into the EU 's common organisation of the sugar market .
This common organisation should instead be abolished .
I will be voting for this report .
As the Member representing the European Parliament on the Council of Ministers ' Consultative Committee on Racism and Xenophobia , I strongly supported the establishment of the European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia .
Since its inception it has done some excellent work .
When it was initially established I resisted its remit extending to cover not just the EU but the territory of the Council of Europe as I believed it would dilute the Centre 's work and cause it to lose its focus on the rising tide of racism , xenophobia and anti-Semitism inside the Union .
Now we are to make it a fundamental rights agency .
I believe this is a similar mistake that will lessen the attention that must be paid to extreme right-wing organisations and parties in the Union , particularly within some of the new Member States .
Some who supported the change were merely misguided , but others knew exactly what they were doing !
in writing . ( PL ) Mr President , I am voting in favour of Edit Herczog 's report on discharging the budget of the European Air Safety Agency for 2005 .
Mrs Herczog has accurately assessed the problem of the growing number of Community agencies which do not always succeed in meeting the general requirements and whose tasks do not always meet the real needs of the European Union and the expectations of its citizens .
I support the appeal to the Commission to set out general framework requirements for the creation of new Community agencies , for a cost-benefit analysis before any new agency is set up , and for a report every five years analysing the value provided by all agencies in operation .
I am pleased to support the decision by the Agency 's Board of Management to adopt standards of internal control based on the standards adopted by the Commission and on ISO 9000 .
During this monopolist phase of capitalism , the response to the contradictions of a system that lives off financial speculation has been to put finance first , thus creating an ever greater need to bring more money to the financial sphere .
The directive before us forms part of this scenario .
The aim of this proposal is to create an internal market for payment services and it forms part of the financial services action plan aimed at integrating the EU 's financial services markets .
Once again , this area is characterised by private initiative , in this case from the banking sector , yet the intention is always the same , namely to promote the opening up of national markets to cross-border payment services , to water down the rules on prevention and to authorise operators not subject to the supervision of the banking sector to provide these services , whilst promoting the concentration of the sector at EU level .
Countries that , like Portugal , already have advanced payment operators and services , such as the Multibanco system , will be particularly badly hit , as the issue of the transmission of data to external information services has not been made clear .
We therefore voted against the report .
in writing . - ( FR ) EU citizens are interested in fast , affordable payment systems and in the creation of an internal market that is effective and functional when it comes to their making transfers and receiving payments .
We can be fully satisfied with the vote in favour of Mr Gauzès ' report , because , as far as the European Parliament is concerned , this is a piece of work that has been done well and done in everyone 's interests , proving to them that Europe makes their daily lives easier .
We could have obtained this result far quicker , however .
We actually finished our work in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on 12 September .
In spite of the goodwill of the European Parliament , it has taken the Council seven months to finally convince itself that our proposals are the best for protecting consumers , too .
It was also important to guarantee fair competition between the payment institutions that are created or recognised by this directive and the banks that are subject to strict regulations regarding capital .
It is important to maintain the good reputation of the payment services sector by keeping any dubious payments agencies in the background .
The payment execution time set by the Council is more rigorous than the one that we are proposing .
( The explanation of vote abbreviated pursuant to Rule 163 of the Rules of Procedure )
I voted for this report as the Directive should ensure that European citizens have their payments processed more quickly by banks , that their cards will be more widely accepted in other countries and that their rights will be better safeguarded in the event of disputes .
I believe that this will be an important improvement for European consumers .
Payments are the financial lubricants that allow the real economy to function .
Currently each EU citizen is making on average 138 non-cash payments per year and this is likely to grow .
I firmly believe that if European citizens and businesses are to reap the full benefits of this internal market , then they have to be able to trust in efficient , cheap and secure payments .
It is for this reason that I support the payment services report by Mr Gauzès .
Currently both consumers and retailers have to contend with the fact that goods can be physically moved across the EU in one or two days , yet the payment in relation to these goods can take between three and five days to clear .
The slowness of payments is no longer tolerable in an age when we can boast of nanosecond technology .
I firmly believe that European competitiveness will only improve when , in Ireland for example , businesses and consumers can make a payment from Dublin to Madrid as easily as from Dublin to Cork .
Mr President , I have voted in favour , because I believe that the internal market works , and that payment services do too .
If the Single European Payments Area initiative is properly implemented , it should lead to increased competition within a larger market , with higher levels of security , better services and attractive prices .
We could call this ' the best service at the lowest cost ' .
I have one reservation , though .
In countries with more advanced payment markets , such as Belgium - but we are not alone - there is the fear that the conversion from existing national payment schemes could lead to extra costs for businesses and consumers .
Reference is made in this context to the level of the so-called ' interbank settlement payments ' .
In response to a question in writing in relation to this issue , the Commission has assured me that it will monitor the respect for competition rule and will retain the right , if necessary , to take regulatory action .
I am relying on the Commission availing itself of the correction mechanisms that are at its disposal , should this prove necessary .
I hope , above all , that the bank sector will be smart enough to make this unnecessary and to lend its all-out cooperation to the further unification of the internal market for financial services .
( LT ) When Lithuania entered the European Union it was allotted a starch quota that allowed starch factories to work at only 9.32 % of production capacity .
Two years ago , in a session of the Council of European Union Agriculture and Fisheries , it was negotiated that the potato starch quota would be reviewed after two business years .
The consumption of starch is increasing in Lithuania .
At present it is 10 times greater than the permitted manufacturing quota .
Taking into consideration that as of January 2007 , according to Commission data , European Union starch production quotas are under-utilised by 5 % , an increase of the Lithuanian quota to ten thousand tonnes would not even amount to 0.5 % of EU starch production quotas .
Therefore , Lithuania requests that its starch production quota be increased to ten thousand tonnes .
This is essential not just for domestic consumption , but to provide a background for the renewal of potato starch production capacity , an increase in its consumption as well as ensuring a certain level of income for producers of starchy potatoes .
It is unconscionable to hand out privileges to other countries at the expense of Lithuanian starch production capacity and agricultural producers in general .
in writing . ( SV ) We are opposed to the common agricultural policy as it stands and object to changes of little fundamental importance within the current system .
We demand a total overhaul and review of the whole of the common agricultural policy , so it is difficult to isolate individual areas such as the one we are now to vote on .
In our opinion , the quota system for potato starch should definitely not be extended .
Instead , the EU must abolish quota systems of all kinds within the agricultural sphere .
As in May 2005 , Parliament 's federalist majority continues to advocate extending the quota system .
The June List observes that , in this situation , it is just as well that Parliament does not have powers of codecision in relation to the EU 's agricultural policy .
Otherwise , the EU would end up in the trap of protectionism and of providing heavy subsidies to all the groups within the agricultural industry .
in writing . - ( EL ) Even though we are clearly opposed to quotas on any agricultural product , why does the EU set so many barriers on the development of production that each Member State could achieve depending on its needs and abilities , but we agree to increase quotas for Lithuania and Poland regarding the production of potatoes ?
Because once more , we acknowledge a flagrant injustice against the new Member States in the quota status , regarding the production of starch out of potatoes .
It is a provocative injustice against new Member States to receive approximately only 10 % of quotas , while having approximately 30 % of production .

Today 's suggestion to increase duration and quotas is a partial remedy for Lithuania and Poland .
I will prove my point by saying that even though Poland is the top producer of potatoes in Europe , with its allocation of quotas it is forced to import starch for potatoes due to the restrictions to its production and this naturally puts medium-sized farming enterprises out of business .
There are similar problems in Greece with regard to other products , which force our country to import them , despite favourable climate conditions for the production of agricultural products , thus giving a surge of millions of euro to the commercial agricultural deficit and forcing medium-sized farming enterprises to die out .
- ( PL ) Mr President , this report raises two fundamental problems faced by the European Union .
The first is future enlargement , and the second is the new dimension of cohesion policy following the latest round of accessions .
Advancing negotiations with Croatia , and the need for the complete stabilisation of the Western Balkans means that we need to analyse the impact of this enlargement on the entire European Union .
What makes such an analysis all the more significant is that while we have had a long period of association , and are currently in negotiations , with Turkey , we should not forget countries such as Ukraine .
The report is a good foundation for work on the 2009 budget review .
It is good preparation for the future of the Community over the next 50 years of its existence .
The accession of 10 countries from Central and Eastern Europe in 2004 and of Bulgaria and Romania in 2007 has increased competition and energised the entire Community , as well as bringing about stability and security and firm democracy .
Cohesion policy means solidarity , and it is a tool for integrating less developed countries .
That is why this is such an important report .
( DE ) Mr President , I voted in favour of the Pieper report , since I am glad that the EU is at last appearing to recognise that Turkish accession would make excessive demands on us in financial , political and social terms .
Croatia , on the other hand , has already drawn so close to the EU that its imminent accession can scarcely be in doubt , particularly as it has been established that the financial effects of it would be minimal .
Existing disparities not only between Member States , but also between regions , have been accentuated as a consequence of the last wave of enlargement , of globalisation , of an ageing population , and also of migration from third countries to urban centres .
It may well be - as one does indeed read on the EU 's homepage - that cities such as London , Hamburg and Brussels are among the most prosperous places to be , but it must not be forgotten that in them , too , the gap has been widened and slums have already come into being .
We have already , from the French example , seen where that can lead , so it is past high time that we paid more attention to internal cohesion in order to prevent these social powder kegs from going off .
( SK ) European cohesion policy is the driving force behind lasting , sustainable development , especially in the less developed regions .
It contributes significantly towards raising the standard of living of the population .
The European Parliament , together with the ministers of the Member States , has the final word when the EU budget is approved .
In this seven-year programme period , a record 347 billion euro were earmarked for 84 regions in 17 Member States whose GDP is greatly below 75 % of the EU average , and 16 regions whose GDP , due to statistical averaging after enlargement , was only marginally above 75 % of the EU average .
These regions are viewing the Irish boom with enormous hope .
Ireland is the cohesion policy 's outstanding success .
By drawing successfully on the structural funds , it was able to transform itself from the poorest region of Europe into one of the richest and to send aid from the European Solidarity Fund to those most in need .
I expressed support for Markus Pieper 's administration because the European Parliament is very concerned that cohesion policy should also achieve successes in Eastern Europe .
For cohesion policy to be effective , we must reckon with the consequences of future enlargement , especially in the medium term as regards Turkey and Croatia , which already have official status as accession countries and with which the EU has already begun accession negotiations .
Then there are the seven East Balkan states which are potential candidates for IPA funds .
These enlargements alone would require the cohesion policy budget to be increased by EUR 150 billion .
If Europe is to become the most competitive economy ...
( DE ) Mr President , believing the Pieper report to be a good one , I did actually want to vote in favour of it , but , since both my amendments were rejected , I have ended up voting against .
My view is that the accession of Turkey would overstretch the EU 's capacity to integrate by means of its cohesion policy , and I am astonished that a majority in this House does not share it .
My second amendment reads as follows : ' believes that it is not possible , for financial and political reasons , to apply the principles of the EU 's structural policy to Turkey ' .
The majority may well have voted against this amendment today , but I am nonetheless convinced that my view will , in the longer term , be proved to be right .
in writing . - ( FR ) I was anxious to endorse the following amendments .
Amendments 25 , 20 and 28 , because adequate funding of regional policy is necessary in order to reduce the economic , social and territorial disparities between regions and to carry out future enlargements properly .
Amendments 22 and 39 , because I feel that it is unacceptable to talk about ' a special form of EU membership ' and ' a graduated approach ' to regional policy exclusively for this country and also not to envisage , from this moment on , any outcome to the negotiations under way with Turkey other than membership .
Amendments 14 and 24 , because the rapporteur 's proposal for an increase in national cofinancing in regions that have received structural funds over several programming periods would put an end to efforts to implement this policy in the most underdeveloped regions of the old Member States .
I am opposed to the overly penny-pinching approach of the rapporteur , who is proposing a maximum period of time during which regions may receive structural funding .
As I see it , it is precisely these regions that are suffering from natural or human handicaps or from a difficult process of economic regeneration and that are not really equipped to deal with international competition that we must continue to help through the structural funds .
This report is negative as regards future enlargement , and in particular Turkey 's possible membership of the EU .
I do not entirely agree , although I believe that any further enlargement will be unacceptable to the people of Europe for some significant time while we assimilate and integrate the twelve new Member States from 2004 and after .
As for Turkey , there is still much work for it to do by itself , including on the treatment of trade unionists and human rights for the Kurdish and Assyrian minorities before it would be in a political position to join , even if it manages to achieve the economic criteria required of new members .
On this basis , I will abstain on this report .
in writing . - ( FR ) Territorial cohesion in Europe aimed at reducing inter- and infra-regional disparities is a major objective of the European Union .
I welcome the adoption of this report today . It raises the issue of the European Union 's absorption capacity and specifies , in particular , that , given the current state of the Union 's own resources system , any further enlargements could not be funded without the effectiveness of the current cohesion policies being harmed .
From this perspective , regional expenditure needs to be rationalised .
An institutional , financial and political reform is desirable as part of a revision of the Community financial framework .
Furthermore , it is impossible to have an honest and effective cohesion policy without the European Union 's budget being increased .
We are delighted that some of the most damaging proposals have successfully been removed from this report following the adoption of our proposals and following the action we took . The proposals in question would have undermined cohesion policy and would have centred the debate around the interim review of the current financial framework and of cohesion policy .
The rejected proposals were as follows :
the increase in national cofinancing of cohesion policy ;
the establishment of a maximum period for receiving Structural Funds , regardless of eligibility criteria ;
making the award of funds conditional on compliance with certain criteria of economic and / or budgetary policy , such as the Stability and Growth Pact .
Furthermore , and regardless of prevailing opinion on the EU 's enlargement process , we welcome the removal from the report of proposals aimed at creating a different accession status for new countries whereby they would be completely integrated into the internal market but without any involvement in the institutions or in the decision-making process , thus creating a form of neo-colonialism in which the so-called aid would always be conditional on the countries concerned yielding to political pressure .
The report still contains some very worrying aspects , however , such as those relating to financial resources and the objectives of cohesion policy . We cannot possibly accept those points and accordingly are voting against the report .
I was concerned about the negative references to Turkey in this report and as they were supported by the plenary I had no alternative but to vote against this report .
Cohesion is one of the core principles and values of the EU , whether of 12 or 30 Member States .
This is based on the idea , firstly , that partners in the same project should all benefit equally , and , secondly , that the bigger and more widespread the economic development of the Community , the greater will be the success of the project as whole and of all the citizens .
For this reason , I share many of the concerns raised by the rapporteur , even if I do not agree entirely with all of the proposed solutions .
There are other aspects to take into account , however .
Given the type of economic challenge currently facing us , arising from the pressures of globalisation and from the accelerated modernisation of economic structures , we must seek the most appropriate instruments for changing the paradigms .
Accordingly , I feel that , whilst we must stick firmly to the values and principles that guide us , we must also be creative and innovative in our responses to the fresh challenges that face us .
Preparing the economically least privileged regions for the 21st century is no longer a visionary gesture , it is a current priority .
Times have changed , and responses need to be innovative .
I voted in favour of the report because , first of all , it draws attention to the budgetary difficulties that the Member States are expected to experience , given the demographic changes predicted to take place in the EU .
This point is of major importance because , with EU enlargement , expenditure on cohesion policy will , from a political perspective , reach unrealistic proportions .
Secondly , it would be unacceptable if some EU regions no longer benefited solely because of the statistical effect caused by a fresh round of enlargement . Globalisation , moreover , will have a detrimental impact on some European regions .
This is an issue that requires a great deal of prudence , and I therefore support the call to the Commission to calculate the expenditure on regional policy likely to occur in relation to the forthcoming rounds of enlargement if the current criteria were to be applied , together with the consequences that such likely expenditure would have on regions that have so far been considered eligible for funding .
Lastly , I agree that there is a need to develop graduated models that will permit further differentiation between pre-accession assistance and full membership of the cohesion policy .
The EPLP attempted to modify the Pieper report by removing the most contentious amendments .
However , those amendments were carried and our efforts were unsuccessful .
The EPLP voted against a very negative report in terms of its general view on future enlargement and its specific references to Turkey .
( DE ) Mr President , I voted against the Virrankoski report , and my reason for doing so is that the control of the Budget should be organised more efficiently in view of the imminence of the revision of the EU Budget heralded for 2009 , which is intended to create greater transparency by , among other things , clearing a path through the rebate jungle .
What is needed above all else is something for once to be done about recovering sums of money paid out in error , since fraudsters will otherwise keep on getting away without penalty and Member States will have no incentive to tighten up their excessively casual and lax controls .
The presentation of the Commission 's strategic policy for 2008 is the start of the process of negotiating the Community budget .
Against a backdrop of attempts to revive the already rejected Constitutional Treaty and of the debate on the Community budget for 2008-2009 , 2008 is intended to be viewed as the penultimate year of Parliament 's sixth legislature and of the Barroso Commission .
Among the political priorities put forward by the Commission , I should like to highlight negative aspects such as the liberalisation of the labour market by means of so-called flexicurity , the financing of European infrastructure supporting the liberalisation of gas and electricity , the creation of the European patent and the strengthening of the EU 's military element .
The Commission states that ' the 2008 budget will build upon the 2007 budget ' - once again , it appears , falling short of the budgetary ceiling in the financial perspective for 2007-2013 . This will clearly be insufficient to address the needs of economic and social cohesion in the enlarged EU .
We reject proposals of this nature and emphasise the need to adopt policies that promote sustainable economic development and employment , that combat unemployment , poverty , social exclusion and salary inequality and that reduce regional imbalances and promote genuine convergence .
in writing . - ( EL ) In the report on the annual strategic priorities of the Commission with regards to the 2008 Budget an effort is underway to make the EU capital budget more efficient in order to serve better its anti-grassroots policies .
Research studies are sought to confirm how efficiently resources were used with regards to the priorities of the regional imperialistic EU .
Nobody tries to obtain data , however , on unemployment , the ' extinction ' of medium-sized farming enterprises , other problems of the people with regards to health , education , social security , which have emerged due to the anti-grassroots EU policies .
They are pursuing more room for manoeuvre in the budget for ' emergency situations ' .
This is a step towards satisfying the emergency needs of capitalism .
All anti-grassroots EU policies are being promoted intensively , while at the same time funding for the promotion of the anti-labour Lisbon Strategy is being increased and research studies are expected for the review of the CAP , in order to speed up the extinction of the medium-sized farming enterprises .
Measures to suppress the resistance of workers are taken on an intensive basis ( with the increase of Eurojust expenses ) as well as steps for their subordination through the strengthening of propaganda mechanisms .
The funding of imperialistic intervention by the EU is given priority openly .
The peoples have experienced ' peace ' efforts aimed at their subordination in the interest of capitalism .
To conclude , the 2008 budgetary plan fortifies the aggressiveness of capitalism against the peoples .
We are voting against it and are calling on people to fight against it , because the allocation of resources shows the reactionary policy of the EU .
in writing . ( PL ) I am voting in favour of Mr Virrankoski 's report on the annual strategic priorities of the Commission regarding the budget procedure for 2008 .
This report is a first step in the annual budgeting procedure .
It defines the strategic priorities of the European Parliament for 2008 and serves as a pointer for the Commission in preparing the draft budget for 2008 .
The report covers most of the major issues .
It raises the issue of increased integration between the legislative works programme and the budgetary procedure , and underlines the need to respect the basics of the financial perspective for 2007-2013 .
In addition , the Members of this house have stated that during work on the budget for 2008 , priority will again be given to the principle of a ' results-based budget ' , as was the case in the budget for 2007 .
Mr President , obviously I voted against the discharge of the Commission 's accounts , as I always do .
It has been such a long time that I cannot even remember when the Court of Auditors last gave a positive statement of assurance on the Commission 's accounts .
I found it quite amusing that , on the day that this House 's Committee on Budgetary Control was voting to wipe the slate clean and pass the accounts , the Belgian police were piling into Commission offices to arrest individuals .
They obviously thought there were some problems .
I did a massive survey in the region I represent .
In one particular part , in the wonderful constituency of Daventry , I sent 15 000 surveys out and asked people whether they thought that Britain should continue with its contribution whilst the accounts have not been signed off .
Over 10 % of people returned that survey and 95 % of those that returned it said we should not be paying any money in whilst this problem still goes on .
In today 's vote on the discharge to the Commission for the 2005 Budget , I voted against it being given discharge on the grounds that the Court of Auditors has issued no Statement of Assurance in respect of this year , any more than it did for the years before it .
This amounts to a statement that prudent and efficient use of funds is no more guaranteed than it has been in previous years .
As is well known , Mr Barroso , the President of the Commission , has stated his intention that an unconditional Statement of Assurance should be achieved by 2009 , and it is clear to me from the discharge given today that no visible steps have been taken to that end .
( SV ) Mr President , I should just like to take this opportunity to thank my fellow MEPs for supporting the two amendments I tabled .
I have been trying for a long time to find out what the travelling circus to Strasbourg really costs , and what is embarrassing is that no one has been able to give me an answer .
No one knows , then , what the travelling circus costs .
It is , in any case , not our own but taxpayers ' money that we are spending .
The least that we and the taxpayers are ultimately entitled to demand is that a serious investigation into the costs be carried out - a view I put forward in the two amendments I tabled today .
According to the only information I have found , the travelling circus costs SEK 2 billion , but that is a figure from the year 2000 when we only had 15 EU Member States .
My hope is that we shall now obtain new figures and new fuel for this debate so that , following today 's vote , we might hopefully be able to take the first step towards abolishing the whole travelling circus .
in writing . ( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats have voted in favour of report on granting discharge to the European Parliament for 2005 .
The vote must be seen in part as a success , in spite of the fact that a number of amendments concerning increased scrutiny of MEPs ' pension conditions - amendments that we supported in the vote - were rejected .
We Swedish Social Democrats have chosen not to become members of the European Parliament 's pension system .
We believe that the system is unethical in the way that it is designed and we have therefore chosen to remain outside it .
Because only a very small part of Parliament 's activity relates to pensions , we think it unnecessary , however , to vote against the whole report on the grounds that precisely these amendments were rejected .
in writing . ( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats chose to support Amendment 1 about the need to debit the Council for the costs of the European Parliament 's activity in Strasbourg , because the Council denies Parliament the right to decide for itself about the location of its seat .
The best solution , however , would be for Parliament itself to be allowed to decide and for Parliament to choose to carry on its activities only in Brussels .
Mr President , ordinarily , I would just give one speech or explanation of vote on the discharges , saying why I voted against them .
But in this particular case , I can imagine the champagne corks are already being popped in the Committee of the Regions because this House has quite happily swept under the carpet all sorts of problems that have been ongoing there for a number of years .
In this House , two or three years ago , we asked for an apology to be made to the Committee of the Regions ' then internal auditor , Mr Robert McCoy , who had made a plea to us for help in asking Parliament and the Committee on Budgetary Control to force the Committee of the Regions to change and to look after public money properly .
We ignored that .
We passed a resolution saying he should get an apology but the Committee of the Regions ignored that and , to this day , Mr McCoy has no apology and the Committee of the Regions knows it can flout whatever the Parliament decides because no one cares .
It is a great shame .
Conservatives will be voting against Parliament 's main reports on the budgetary discharge of the European Parliament , the Commission , the Council , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions on the grounds that for the 12th year running , the Court of Auditors has been unable to give a positive statement of assurance of the overall EU accounts .
Conservatives believe that this situation must be resolved as a matter of urgency by the Commission and that there must be zero tolerance in all cases of mismanagement and fraud .
Apart from the implementation of the new accountancy systems and encouraging whistleblowers to come forward , Conservatives are focused on the key priority area of the 80 % of the budget that is spent in Member States which concerned the Auditors .
Through the concept of ' shared management ' , the Union system splits power from responsibility : the Commission is responsible for the expenditure of all EU funds but , in reality , the power is delegated to paying agencies in the Member States .
Some progress has been made by including in the agreement on the 2007-2013 financial perspectives a commitment that a certification of expenditure by Member States will be required in future .
It is essential that this is implemented in full .
There must be greater transparency of the use of EU funds by Member States ...
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 163 )
I supported the Court of Auditors ' view that discharge can be given to all seven institutions .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like it to be noted that in the Andrejevs report , when voting for point L of the preamble ( it was a roll-call vote ) I accidentally voted in favour when I meant to vote against .
( LT ) The first occurrences of HIV infection were identified 25 years ago .
The disease has spread all over the world .
The exact number of people suffering from the disease is not known .
Treatment is expensive and it is not accessible to all , especially in the new EU Member Countries .
A very important observation was made in the report concerning the complex relationship of the HIV / AIDS issue to migration processes .
Streams of migrants , especially from countries where HIV / AIDS is widespread , and from Eastern countries , about which we have very little information , constitute a threat of the further spread of HIV / AIDS .
Research shows that migrants are becoming the largest HIV / AIDS risk group in the European Union and its vicinity .
Health testing of twelve thousand migrants in Moscow revealed that 10 % are suffering from HIV / AIDS and other infectious diseases .
I support the proposal to use the framework of neighbourhood policy to provide aid for HIV / AIDS prevention and treatment in vulnerable groups , especially migrants .
It is essential to give more attention to this problem .
My vote on the Andrejevs report on combating HIV / AIDS within the European Union and in the neighbouring countries , 2006-2009 is a vote in favour of a coherent strategy aimed at tackling such a large and tragic problem .
I would like to make it clear that my vote should not be interpreted as approving abortion practices .
in writing . It goes without saying that I and my colleagues from the Fianna Fáil delegation are very much in favour of the eradication and combating of HIV / AIDS within the EU and the neighbouring countries .
We and the Irish Government have concerns regarding references to a strong linking of HIV / AIDS prevention and sexual and reproductive rights in policies , programmes , strategies and public education .
It is the Irish Government 's position that such references should be contextualised by linking such rights to the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development ( ICPD ) , held in Cairo in 1994 , and the Beijing Platform for Action ( 1995 ) and the UNGA reviews of these in 1999 and 2000 , so as to ensure that Irish national legislative / regulatory regimes are respected .
Both the ICPD in Cairo and the Beijing Declaration refer to the need to grant sexual and reproductive rights to women but these rights are qualified by the need to respect national legislative processes when considering the issue of abortion .
' Any measures or changes related to abortion within the health system can only be determined at the national or local level according to the national legislative process . ' ...
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 163 )
We voted in favour of this report , as it contains many positive aspects , of which I wish to highlight the following :
urges the Commission to allocate resources to prevention measures within the framework of the Public Health Action Programme to combat HIV / AIDS and to require that the beneficiaries of public funds devote a certain amount of their research to such diseases ;
highlights the fact that palliative care has an important part to play in the care of people with HIV / AIDS and urges its development and expansion throughout the European Union ;
asks the Commission to pay particular attention to the promotion of sexual and reproductive health programmes for women , in order to counter the increasing spread of the epidemic among the female population ;
encourages the Commission and the Member States to subsidise and provide money for research and development of microbicides and female condoms which give women the power to protect themselves and a male partner from HIV / AIDS with or without the partner 's agreement , since condoms continue to be the most well known and widely available protection against HIV / AIDS and sexually transmitted diseases ( STDs ) , but require a male partner 's agreement .
in writing . ( PL ) I am voting in favour of the report on combating HIV / AIDS in the European Union and neighbouring countries in the years 2006-2009 .
Mr Georgs Andrejevs ' report is an excellent response to the European Commission 's Programme for 2006-2009 to combat HIV / AIDS in the European Union and neighbouring countries .
The rapporteur rightly sets out the need for a comprehensive public information campaign which will help both to increase awareness of how to avoid AIDS , and to start fighting the stigma and discrimination suffered by people suffering from the disease .
The latest trends show an increasing numbers of people infected with the virus .
Georgs Andrejevs has underlined the role played by international organisations in combating AIDS , noting at the same time that they do not have sufficient funding to play that role properly .
The rapporteur 's initiative encouraging the Commission and the Member States to assess their methods of supporting their health services , which are at the forefront of the difficult situation of ensuring general accessibility to costly anti-retroviral treatment , deserves our support .
in writing . - ( EL ) The 2006-2009 report on treating HIV / AIDS in EU and neighbouring countries highlights some correct aspects of the issue .
It omits , however , to refer to the need of the people for prevention , treatment of HIV / AIDS through common , public and free of charge modern health systems of the Member States .
It does not provide any answers to the demand of the people for the free provision of all necessary medications to patients .
The research on HIV / AIDS treatment is part of the anti-grassroots 7th framework programme on research , tailored to the needs of multinational corporations .
The treatment of HIV / AIDS requires a comprehensive plan by Member States .
NGOs cannot play such a role .
The request to reinforce NGOs aims to disorientate the work force away from the responsibilities of Member State governments , away from the current needs of people in the health sector .
Workers are once again being forced to carry the burden through volunteer work .
The responsibility for the treatment of HIV / AIDS does not lie in the hands of one and joining forces with corporations will not prove effective , because they are only interested in making profit .
It is an issue concerning all workers , for they have to fight and force governments to take comprehensive measures regarding prevention and research as well as access to medications and treatments which are currently overpriced ..
in writing . I voted for this report , which seeks to strengthen the fight against HIV / AIDS by promoting prevention through education and information and by combating discrimination and inequalities with regard to access to treatment and drugs .
I have abstained because I do not feel this is an initiative that has any hope of reversing the upward trend in HIV / AIDS infection in the EU .
HIV / AIDS causes great suffering and yet Parliament at committee stage refused to include all approaches known to be effective .
I want to save lives and I will wait and give a positive vote to any truly positive initiative .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 1.20 p.m. and resumed at 3.05 p.m. )

Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Moving the inadmissibility of a matter ( homophobia in Europe ) : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 7.35 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m. )
Galileo ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on Galileo .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am grateful to Parliament for having taken the initiative for this resolution .
The content of the resolution assists the efforts of the Commission .
Its adoption in plenary is further testimony of the European Community 's clear and unwavering desire to bring to a successful conclusion this great European project that is Galileo .
What is the situation ?
In the face of a standstill in the contract negotiations with the consortium candidate and in the absence of progress on the conditions that I laid down a year ago , I have issued an ultimatum with precise deadlines in order to break this deadlock .
On the basis of this ultimatum , supported by the Council , I have received a mandate from the Council to work on all the possible options .
The work of the Commission on the basis of the Transport Council 's mandate of 22 March 2007 , to which your resolution gives invaluable support , is progressing satisfactorily .
The result of this work will be the subject of a communication to Parliament and to the Council , which the Commission intends to adopt on 10 May 2007 , that is , a month before the next Transport Council in June 2007 .
This communication will respond to all the demands made by the Council of 22 March 2007 and by Parliament in the resolution that you are going to adopt .
This communication will include an examination of the current situation , of the difficulties faced by the programme , including the reasons for the deadlock in the concession contract negotiations , then an analysis of the chances of a rapid conclusion of the concession contract and also alternative solutions to the plan adopted until now .
There will be no taboos , whether on the causes of the current difficulties , on the possible timetable , or on the issues relating to finance or to governance .
As far as alternative solutions are concerned , several options are possible .
They range from retaining the project in its present form to , obviously , ending it , which I do not envisage , of course .
An intermediate solution could be for the public sector to assume responsibility for the deployment of all or part of the satellite infrastructure , then , for its operation to be taken on by a private partner .
That is one of the alternatives .
Each of these alternatives , however , will be the subject of a detailed examination looking at their technical and financial implications , including in terms of governance .
The Commission 's concern is still to ensure the best cost-benefit ratio for the project while avoiding further delays . Avoiding fresh delays is crucial in the face of the risks that would arise from the modernisation of competing systems .
Of course , should the current plan be pursued and the concession contract negotiations resume very actively over the coming weeks , I will inform Parliament of the progress achieved .
I should like now to speak to you about the European Geostationary Navigation Overlay Service ( EGNOS ) programme , which improves the global positioning system for European users .
The European Space Agency will complete the operational readiness review of this system by March 2008 .
EGNOS will then be ready for full operation , and an economic operator able to use the EGNOS applications will have to be found before March 2008 .
The European institutions will also be in a position to provide funding for the system from that same date .
I am insisting on this slightly because EGNOS will give us the opportunity , already , to evaluate some applications for satellite navigation , and it is therefore of great interest , because it is the first step that will pave the way for Galileo .
Concerning the funding for the European satellite navigation programmes , you know that the Commission proposed from July 2004 a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council .
This proposal provided for a specific legal instrument for the Galileo programme that was consistent with the future European Space Programme and that responded to the concern for sound financial management within the financial framework 2007-2013 .
This proposal mentions provisional arrangements for financial aid from the European community amounting to EUR 1 billion .
The Council reached a partial general approach on this proposal on 21 April 2005 .
Parliament also adopted a positive opinion at first reading on 5 September 2005 .
The definitive costing will depend on which options are taken up and , of course , it will be submitted in good time to the budgetary authority .
Concerning governance of the Galileo programme , the Commission is currently considering ways that are likely to enable more effective coordination between the different actors in the programme : the Commission itself , the Supervisory Authority and the European Space Agency .
A word now about external relations .
International agreements concerning the Galileo programme are negotiated on the basis of Article 300 of the Treaty .
The procedure laid down in this article still includes consultation with Parliament prior to the conclusion of these negotiations .
I am , of course , aware of Parliament 's concern to be closely involved in the monitoring of governance .
With regard to the applications of Galileo and to the Green Paper on these applications , the public debate phase is about to come to an end .
More than 70 contributions have been received , from a wide range of actors .
The Commission must now analyse the results before working out the plan of action to be implemented from 2008 .
You know , ladies and gentlemen , that Galileo is the most ambitious industrial project that Europe has ever undertaken .
Naturally , I am keen this evening to seek the support of Parliament , taking into account the difficulty of the undertaking , but also our desire to make it succeed .
It is true that the month ahead is going to be a time of extremely hard work for the Commission and for the competent services , in order to find the best solutions that will enable us to emerge from the current situation and move the programme forward in due time .
That is what I wanted to bring to the attention of Parliament this evening .
Of course , during the course of the studies under way , I shall make it a point of honour to keep Parliament informed , and I would thank it in advance , Mr President , for agreeing , in the proposed resolution to be voted on tomorrow , to give us the assistance we need to convince the Member States that a project such as this is too important for the future of Europe not to be pursued with determination .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( HU ) Mr Vice-President , thank you for the detailed information .
This afternoon at the opening of the Airbus photo exhibit we heard of the impressive achievements of 21st century European developmental engineers .
But we have also heard from the representative of Airbus that the problems arose with manufacturing , that the delay has caused irremediable damages , and also that Airbus was not European enough but was governed by considerations of the Member States .
Now Galileo has also embarked on this road , but since the spring Council , it seems the Council , the Commission and Parliament have agreed that these errors can still be avoided in time .
Last autumn , Parliament drew the attention of the Commission and of the Council to the growing number of unsolved problems and delays , and therefore we welcome and are pleased , Mr Vice-President , with your bold move and decisive action .
I can assure you , Mr Vice-President , that you will have the support of the European Parliament in the resolution of the most difficult questions if a transparent , clear and feasible timetable and affordable financing are finally worked out , either by means of negotiation or by an alternative solution .
This is what we are waiting for : effective , better public governance , clear political lines of responsibility for the acquisition of the necessary tools .
We are looking for an unambiguous response regarding the overall need for Community financing and responsibility .
We are awaiting a clear answer at last from the players in the European space industry , regarding financial participation , the mode of funding based on a 2 / 3 formula , since this is what was stated in the call for tenders .
Galileo is the first Community infrastructure , and this is why the European Parliament is following it with great interest .
Mr Vice-President , you mentioned that the EP voted almost 1 billion euro for the Galileo programme in its seven-year budget .
The amount is available as of 1 January , and we would like to know what we will spend it on and how we will make use of it .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner Barrot , ladies and gentlemen , it is certainly a bit frustrating to see the pretty pass we have gradually come to because of the delay in the Galileo project .
It is unquestionably an ambitious venture to conduct a PPP project on a European scale for the first time .
However , the small and medium-sized enterprises that took part in the survey conducted through the Green Paper are waiting for the go-ahead to devise , produce and market their applications , so that the jobs they all expect to create can actually materialise .
The business community expects us to keep it free from political interference .
' Business does business ' is a familiar saying .
Time and again , however , although I personally am always very business-friendly , I get the feeling that , whenever the business community hits difficulties , it reverts to appeals for political assistance and shies away from taking risks .
Fair sharing of investment , risks and profits is of paramount importance in the PPP model .
The proposal in the opinion delivered by the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy that funds be held in reserve for the Supervisory Authority in the first instance was intended by us as an admonition to all parties to move forward and make up for lost time .
We know full well that this is rather like kicking the dog and meaning the master , to quote an old proverb , but unfortunately we have no other means of exerting pressure .
We remain optimistic , and our Socialist Group in the European Parliament also continues to support the project , but our patience is not inexhaustible .
I hope the time limits and deadlines that have been set will now serve to bring together the business participants and the requisite consortium .
To close with another proverb , actions speak louder than words .
It is time to let them speak .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , Commissioner , I welcome the opportunity to have this discussion tonight on Galileo , but it gives me a very strange sensation of being in a time warp .
It was seven months ago that we last had a plenary discussion on this topic and it is very alarming to realise that no progress has been made since then .
On that occasion in September I expressed my concern , as did other Members , at the spiralling cost of the project .
We need to be brutally honest : no taboos , as the Commissioner said .
Galileo has the potential to be a great European project , but technology moves very fast .
There has been so much delay that the point could be reached where it is simply not worthwhile doing any more .
Galileo is dependent on revenue and , if it offers no added value , then no one will pay to use it .
I listened with great interest to what Commissioner Barrot said .
It seems that something which has at last changed is the Council and Commission 's willingness to take firm action .
I very much welcome the 10 May deadline and the insistence that substantial , immediate progress be made by then on the heads of terms .
I also welcome the undertaking to explore alternatives for delivering the project , but I am alarmed at the possibility of an interim solution dependent on the public purse .
Finally , the Commission has said that it may have to revisit some fundamental aspects of its earlier assumptions and approach .
I would ask the Commissioner whether with hindsight he would concede that it was a mistake to agree in July 2005 to the merging of the two consortia .
It seems to me that this was the point when the Commission lost all leverage .
Would he now agree that it is the spur of competition and the existence of alternatives which is most likely to keep a public / private partnership on schedule and in budget ?
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , in its financial perspective , the European Union is making a significant effort to launch this Galileo programme .
We now have an obligation to ensure that the Union 's money is spent and managed properly .
If the programme 's private partners are not fulfilling their obligations , they must be replaced immediately .
We trust that the Galileo system will be operational as soon as possible and will become a key element in helping transport and improving the observation of our environmental problems , such as climate change .
We would like the Galileo project also to be compatible and interoperable with the conventional navigation systems , such as the GSM , and others .
It is important that they are interconnectable and complementary .
Together with the US GPS and the Russian GLONASS , they must contribute to improving our navigation system .
At the same time we must continue to monitor the programme in order to ensure that Galileo 's applications respect the strictest ethical and human rights standards .
We are now asking ourselves , however , whether Galileo is simply an illusion or whether it will be a reality .
I wonder whether the European Commission 's capacity for management is sufficient for the circumstances and challenges of Galileo .
The European Union 's prestige is at stake .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , there is a perfectly good existing satellite system available for EU citizens ' use .
But we all know that Galileo is really about extending the power and dominion of the European Union and it is eventually intended to be used for military purposes by the planned EU armed forces .
Meanwhile , the funding plans of this grandiose project , which will run into billions of euros , are encountering severe difficulties .
The British Government , ever with an eye for an additional taxation opportunity , plans to use it to implement road-charging schemes so that British citizens can help pay for it by being charged for the privilege of driving on their own roads .
Galileo has all the makings of an Airbus in space and , as Galileo Galilei pointed out , what goes up must come down .
In this case it would be much better if it did not go up in the first place .
( PL ) Mr President , the GALILEO satellite navigation system will secure the European Union 's place in global civilisation in the coming century .
The selfish interests of individual corporations and countries will not succeed in undermining the entire Union 's justified interest in this .
The European Parliament is concerned by the delays in implementing the GALILEO project and demands that the Commission submit a plan which will guarantee that the European Union 's own satellite navigation will actually take off .
The European Parliament must support the Commission in its drive to get GALILEO built in an alternative way by a group of contractors different to the consortium set up in 2005 .
We have to remember that Europe may be overtaken by the Russian GLONASS or the Chinese BEIDOU system .
The GALILEO system will guarantee the European Union 's future place in civilisation .
Mr President , first of all I should like to thank Mrs Barsi-Pataky for the support she has given to this programme , at the same time as being very vigilant , because she has always asked the right questions about it .
I should like to be very clear before Parliament : I do not think , Mrs Hall , that the problem is due to the fact that there is only one consortium .
The real problem is that the Galileo programme was launched with a public-private partnership that perhaps was not worked out as well as it might have been .
The public-private partnership is still based on a very precise business plan , and I would add that , in the United States , independence in space was acquired from the Army 's military budget , which later allowed NASA to develop its services .
I think , therefore , that we have to ask ourselves the fundamental questions now .
Does the public-private partnership - even if we keep it - have to have exactly the same dimension ?
That is the problem .
I do not believe , in all conscience , that there being one consortium or two is really the problem .
The real problem now is knowing whether the applications of Galileo offer an added value such that they justify a commitment from the Union at the level at which this commitment is envisaged .
I heard also that Galileo could be useless .
We have to know whether we want for the European Union not only independence in space but also a whole series of advances in everyday life for the benefit of the citizens .
This is not merely a prestige programme , but a programme that is intended fundamentally to meet needs , and I am in a good position to know how much , in the field of transport , we could benefit from the Galileo programme .
I have promised , Mr President , to keep Parliament regularly informed about the progress of our deliberations .
I have to tell you that I have personally taken this issue very much to heart ; I really want to take a very close look at things in order to make it clear that , if we have to modify somewhat the scenario that was conceived at the outset , it is so that we can be sure of its success .
Mr Glante in particular spoke of the benefits that could be gained by the citizens , as well as by small and medium-sized companies to which Galileo will offer new opportunities : you are right , that is indeed the heart of the matter .
We need to know what added value Galileo will provide and what all the applications that it will be possible to implement consist of .
We are in the process of studying all that very carefully .
That is all I can say this evening , but I shall remain at Parliament 's disposal to talk about this fascinating , but difficult , subject .
I have received a motion for a resolution tabled in accordance with Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon .
Common rules in the field of civil aviation security ( debate )
The next item is the recommendation for second reading , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the Council common position for adopting a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on common rules in the field of civil aviation security and repealing Regulation ( EC ) No 2320 / 2002 ( 14039 / 1 / 2006 C6-0041 / 2007 ( Rapporteur : Paolo Costa ) .
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Mr President , Mr Barrot , ladies and gentlemen , I am disappointed that the ' Transport live night show ' is not the Council 's favourite , since it was the Council in particular that I wanted to address .
I believe , in fact , that what I am about to repeat to my colleagues and the Vice-President of the Commission is well-known to them and I think they support my views , while we know that we have some problems with the Council .
Parliament has welcomed with great interest and considerable understanding the Commission 's proposal to review the rules that attempt to tackle the problem of security with regard to any attack on airports , aircraft and the aviation system .
The Commission has tackled the issue with great openness , keeping in mind that we are setting about performing an important task , namely the creation of a single security system that will reduce inconvenience for passengers and make it possible to increase security and organise ourselves better to achieve that aim .
I think I can say that we have also brought about some improvement by seeking to define the limits within which it is possible to authorise armed personnel on board and by attempting to resolve the technical problems of the difference between carrying standard cargo and mail , identify procedures for organising inspections in airports , and deal with many other technicalities .
We got stuck , however , on one problem with regard to which I have still not managed to understand the logic behind the Council 's opposition .
The issue is very simple : security is both a private matter and a public matter .
Each of us , when we travel , wants to travel safely .
When security can be affected by terrorist attacks , however , it is clearly in everyone 's interests to defend ourselves collectively against such attacks .
In the United States , for example , this matter is considered to be an entirely public concern and the costs are borne wholly by the taxpayer .
On this point , I would like to repeat the idea which we have already put forward - and which we continue to put forward , perhaps obstinately - that we should accept the principle that the costs of security ought to be borne both by the citizen who travels and by the States that are protecting themselves , not least in airports and in aircraft , particularly since all we were asking for was for this principle to be accepted , leaving each Member State free to decide how to balance the contributions from the two sources .
As a second principle , we were asking that the security costs borne by the citizens should be transparent and clearly defined , and as a third principle we were asking for a guarantee that every surcharge paid for security should be actually spent on security .
We only asked for these three principles to be accepted , and gave up on the interinstitutional agreement signed back in 2001 , on the basis of which the Commission was supposed to put forward much more detailed proposals to tackle the problem of funding security , which would have then , obviously , been approved by the Council too .
On this point we have not had a response and we have not been able to reach a conclusion .
I hope that , if the Chamber cannot recreate the unanimous vote in committee tomorrow , it can at least provide a substantial majority that will demonstrate not the power but the good will of Parliament to find a real solution to the problem for all European citizens .
I would like to stress the fact that unfortunately security is a subject that we will have to live with .
Hiding our heads in the sand and pretending that the funding problem does not exist is not a response worthy of the times , the problem and our expectations .
We therefore fully back more technically sophisticated organisation on the security front , but we ask that this issue be resolved , at least in principle .
If we succeed in achieving this objective as soon as possible , I think that we will certainly have acted in the interest of our citizens .
Mr President , Mr Costa , it is true that this proposal is important .
The fight against the terrorist threat clearly remains a priority for all the European Union institutions .
Aviation security requires constant adaptation .
We need to continue to seek ways to provide greater , effective protection for European citizens .
We need to draw lessons from experience and to reconcile the demands of security with the operational necessities of the parties involved : the administration responsible for the implementing rules , airport managers , airlines and , of course , passengers .
The existing regulatory framework on aviation security was established after the attacks of 11 September 2001 .
It was developed as a matter of urgency , which probably explains the excessively detailed nature of the annex to Regulation ( EC ) No 2320 / 2002 .
The prescriptive and detailed nature of this annex is a handicap that prevents us from introducing new , more effective , technologies or from providing security systems better adapted to the actual risks to be accounted for .
Finally , it does not allow us to fill the regulatory gaps concerning air freight and the handling of flights from third countries .
Therefore , this new proposal , the purpose of which is to replace Regulation ( EC ) No 2320 / 2002 with a new regulation that is better because it is both simpler and clearer , is obviously altogether desirable .
The adjustment of the rules on aviation security will improve the protection of citizens ; it will make it possible to satisfy the legitimate interests of stakeholders because there will be a better balance between the risks to be taken into account and the extent of the checks to be carried out .
I admit , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , that I would have preferred this proposal to have been adopted at first reading .
This delay is all the more regrettable when one realises , as I am doing today , that Mr Costa 's draft report completely validates the necessity for this initiative , and we agree , Mr Costa , with most of the actual operational suggestions .
Mr President , I come now to the amendments that have been tabled .
More than half take up the amendments adopted by Parliament at first reading .
Obviously , the Commission 's position remains identical with regard to them .
I should like to make a few comments regarding some of the new amendments that have been tabled .
Firstly , Amendment 46 seems timely to me .
It will allow the Commission to cooperate more closely with the ICAO for the purpose of exchanging information and mutual support in connection with audits and inspections .
Therefore , Mr Costa , we welcome the approach set out in this amendment .
Amendment 33 includes a sunset clause for all the implementing measures that are to be reexamined after six months .
However , in a joint declaration annexed to the new decision on comitology , Parliament and the Council have nonetheless recognised that good legislation demands that the executive powers conferred on the Commission should be without time constraints .
I do , of course , understand the argument whereby a text that has come into force as a matter of urgency subsequently has to be reexamined , but nonetheless I am worried .
The systematic application of this principle could cause legal uncertainty , and the aviation sector may then be led to amend its procedures or to create new ones with disastrous consequences for the effectiveness of the procedures , passenger information and costs .
That is why I would prefer to reject Amendment 33 as it stands .
Having said that , I am inclined to accept the inclusion of a commitment to revise the text .
I shall take advantage of this opportunity to emphasise that the Commission constantly reviews the good functioning of measures adopted and that it does not hesitate to amend them if necessary .
Last week , as part of a half-yearly review , the Commission postponed by a year the introduction of a restriction on the size of hand luggage in order to be able to review the merits of this measure and , if necessary , to ensure that operators are better prepared to implement it .
Amendment 37 gives Member States the opportunity not to implement measures that they consider to be disproportionate .
This provision , if it were adopted , could undermine the system of EU-wide harmonised basic standards on aviation security .
We would be in danger of going backwards , to a patchwork of 27 uncoordinated national regulatory systems , and of reducing to nothing five years of work towards harmonisation .
This amendment is also liable to undermine the system of ' one-stop security ' for intra-Community flights .
A series of amendments - Amendments 10 , 67 , 77 , 79 and 81 - is intended to make it easier to draw up security agreements with third countries .
The intention of these amendments is good , but unfortunately they are not linked with a mandate .
They have the effect of making the task more difficult , contrary to their objective .
Therefore , we must reexamine chapters 4 and 5 of the annex to the proposed regulation on the basis of the Council 's common position , in order to ascertain the aspects on which the Commission could reach an agreement .
These amendments , however , do not seem to me to be necessary to achieve the intended objectives .
That is why the Commission would prefer to reject them .
Mr Costa , you have identified , for the Council in particular , what the main stumbling block is : namely , funding for security in the field of aviation .
Clearly , this is an important debate .
For my part , I shall content myself with a more pragmatic approach to this issue .
Europe needs an instrument that helps ensure that standards adopted in relation to aviation security are implemented in accordance with rules guaranteeing fair conditions of competition .
This level playing field must apply both within the European Union but also with regard to global competitors
Having said that , it is true : who pays the bill ?
I should like to take as an example one proposed amendment . It says that Member States that introduce security procedures that are more numerous and more stringent than those required by European Union legislation should indemnify the operators for the extra costs that those stricter measures entail .
I understand very well the underlying logic of this viewpoint .
It is also true that the Commission has a tool in this field , and that is the Treaty rules on State aid .
Therefore , we ourselves will look at how these rules can be used properly in the context of the financial support measures for service providers in the field of aviation security .
I fully understand what Mr Costa said in his address to the Council .
I should like , however , to draw Parliament 's attention to the drawbacks of a delay in introducing an improved technical regulation on aviation security .
There is somewhat of a danger that we will take this draft Community regulation as a kind of hostage against the financial decisions to be taken at Member State level .
I would therefore like it if Parliament were to separate the technical standards of the security funding issue in order to clear the way for the swift implementation of a better regulation .
That is my wish , but the decision is yours .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , firstly I would like to make one point .
I would like to put on record my objection to legislation of such importance to European citizens being put on the agenda in the late evening .
It seems to be common practice that codecision legislative proposals are discussed when the fewest MEPs and members of the public are present , and that is wrong .
The core issues being discussed in this graveyard slot are the revisions to the 2001 aviation security rules , which are very much welcomed .
Having common regulations on this issue , as well as a common interpretation of the rules around all of the EU 's airports , means that security and passenger safety can be improved at a time when it is most needed .
However , we cannot expect the travelling public to have to foot the bill yet again .
I refer here to short-term special security measures such as the ones we saw last year at Heathrow airport in London .
These measures are a direct result of Member State decisions and therefore should be funded by general taxation , not by the passenger , who is already fleeced when travelling by air .
This issue has been the most contentious with Council .
Parliament , however , stands united .
This should send a strong message that the issue is not for negotiation .
Also , when looking at our previous aviation security legislation , we see that problems have developed , especially in the context of implementation .
As we say , the devil is in the detail .
For example , tons of in-transit duty-free goods are being confiscated from consumers .
I now hear that this issue is being addressed and that the Commission will be coming forward with proposals to alleviate this problem .
I must pay tribute to Commissioner Barrot and to Commission President Barroso for taking action here and I hope to see Commission officials follow their political lead and come up with speedy and workable solutions .
I must also insist that Parliament be kept informed of developments in this and other areas , as it is MEPs who have to answer to their citizens when things start to go wrong at Europe 's airports .
I do not want to see a delay to the implementation of these proposals over relatively minor issues .
To conclude , we must not play politics with passenger safety .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , I should like to start , on behalf of my group , by thanking the rapporteur for the good work , and express our support for the strategy he has proposed , namely to stand firm as long as the Council refuses to change its position .
The issue in question is an important one for Europe 's citizens , and Parliament has its role to play .
For my group , there are two key aspects in the negotiation process .
Firstly - and this is something to which the rapporteur has already made reference - anything related to funding .
Let me give you a brief outline .
There is , actually , not a problem with regard to funding the measures that are issued by the notorious committee of experts , because it is only logical that industry , passengers and the government should all contribute towards the costs .
What is important is that this is done transparently , that , in other words , the consumer is informed of the cost of safety , and that what is set aside in terms of safety costs is also actually spent on safety and not on something else .
There is , of course , the problem of additional costs which , as we see it , should be covered by the states , provided we can assume that the safety measures are of a high level and are commensurate to everyone 's safety .
A second aspect , which is not unimportant either , Commissioner , is democratic control .
You have to understand that we can hardly give this committee of experts some kind of carte blanche .
It is not that we are in any doubt as to their competence , but when these measures have such an impact on the way our citizens move , then we have a duty to do our job , namely to check whether the decision is sound , whether it is proportionate to the threat , whether it is efficient , whether the people are sufficiently informed , etc .
This is why we would like to find a way of assessing these things and the impact they will have . We have tabled an amendment to this effect .
We are prepared to thrash this out in a debate , but I think it is important that in the ultimate scheme , Parliament has a role to play .
I should like to make one final point , Commissioner , and it is that a few weeks ago , you announced that an evaluation of the liquids regulation was in the offing .
I should now like to ask you when we can expect it .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , first of all I should like to pay tribute to the work of the rapporteurs .
The document before us is a complex one and it was certainly not easy to seek and find compromises , as the debate has ultimately demonstrated .
Despite this , the report that has emerged is in my view a solid one , and as a shadow rapporteur I should like to thank both the translators and my colleagues for their cooperation .
I feel that it is possible to support the report in principle , although it does contain around four issues on which , following consultation with a number of experts , I still have reservations , and about which I should like to speak in more detail .
First and foremost is the question of the funding for safety measures in the area of civil aviation , as has already been mentioned .
I feel that it would be difficult to resolve the funding issue within the framework of this regulation .
For example , in the case of road and rail transport it took a parallel directive to resolve similar issues .
In the case of civil aviation we do not have an adequate statutory act and we are proposing a different course of action .
Another controversial part of the report is , in my view , the proposals on incorporating transparency of the cost of safety into the price of plane tickets .
This is difficult to accomplish because companies selling plane tickets do not have the necessary overview of security costs for airports .
Those who do know what the costs are incorporate them into airport fees .
Similarly problematic is the use of the expression ' that protect the safety of civil aviation ' .
This phrase applies mainly to the protection of civil aviation from terrorism , which is important but forms only part of the package of measures on protection against unlawful acts .
I believe that there is a danger of inaccurate interpretation here and of the problem being narrowed to include only terrorism , whereas there are many other unlawful acts in the area of civil aviation .
In referring to the controversial points of the report before us I would not like in any way to call into doubt the overall quality of the work and of the document as a whole .
I will conclude , however , by warning that Amendments 4 and 45 will lead to the Commission 's position being very much strengthened , which , in my opinion , is not necessary at this time .
Ladies and gentlemen , I am aware that these comments include more than the usual level of detail , which is due to the fact that the proposal has , to a certain extent , the character of a technical regulation , the objective of which is to establish basic parameters for safety standards in the area of civil aviation .
I have attempted therefore not only to incorporate these into the proposed Amendments but also to express my views as a former pilot , where I considered it necessary , in respect of the document as a whole .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr Vice-President , my group stands four-square behind the rapporteur .
Let us make no bones about this .
Our Parliament reminded the Member States back in 2002 that they had to meet their share of the cost of measures for the protection of public safety and order .
We asked you to formulate a strategy for resolving the issue of funding the security measures without distorting competition between airports .
You then presented a report , but in that report you neither said , ' Here is a way we could resolve the issue without distorting competition ' , nor did you say there was no point in making a proposal .
So we still await a proposal .
We told the Council last year that we expected it to acknowledge clearly its financial responsibility .
It stated once more that it was not prepared to do so .
We are no longer prepared to play these games , which have been going on since 2002 , in other words for five long years .
There is no real pressure to carry out this revision , because you were able to enact the basic regulations we now have - the measure regarding liquids in hand baggage being the prime example - on the strength of these rules .
I am not entirely sure whether this measure will remain in place for long .
There is no reason to say that it has to be scrapped now because it is blocking some other security measures .
If you want to propose new security measures , bring them before Parliament .
We are open to new proposals .
What we mean is that , besides the issue of liquids in hand baggage , on which the Committee on Transport and Tourism is to hold a hearing , we must tackle risk analysis as a matter of priority , and I hope we can do that together with you .
I have serious doubts as to whether the present Regulation actually enhances security or whether it is too heavy-handed .
But let us discuss that openly .
Please do not say , ' The intelligence people have information that they cannot pass on to us ' .
We have a responsibility to the public to provide straight answers .
Your departments , and more particularly those of the Council , must be prepared to lay their cards on the table , for we will no longer tolerate the present tactics .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , the revised version of Regulation 2320 / 2002 is good and should be applied as quickly as possible .
First of all , let me make two points about the sunset clause .
We are confronted here with a dilemma .
No politician , and indeed no civil servant , will take responsibility for rolling back inefficient security structures .
Accordingly , the burden of proof must lie with those who seek to extend an implementing regulation and not with those who want to let it expire .
That is the main argument .
Secondly , there is sometimes a need to respond very quickly , as you did in the case of the liquids , but the fact is that the risk assessment and cost analysis must follow , so that the process takes its right and proper course .
The sunset clause is also a good means to this end .
Now to the main issue , the dispute about funding .
We should refocus on the problem that exercised us at the beginning , namely how we can eliminate distortions of competition and obtain transparent and , as far as possible , uniform funding models in Europe .
The Commission must intervene here in a mediating role .
We should not focus so sharply on the question whether taxpayers or passengers should foot the bill .
That discussion , I believe , has become unproductive and no longer addresses the real issue .
We need proposals on ways to achieve transparent funding models in Europe that are as uniform as possible .
Mr President , while there is a lot of huffing and puffing about aviation security and its restrictions on international travel and inconvenience to passengers , the reality is that there is a real international security problem .
9 / 11 did happen ; thousands of people died .
The threat to British aviation was a real and not an imaginary threat .
The people who perpetrated 9 / 11 as well as those responsible for the foiled attack on Britain are not only still in existence but they have also publicly stated that they intend continue their campaign of international terrorism .
Let us be real .
The Committee on Transport and Tourism and the Council have a common cause here , and what is it ?
It is the protection of the aviation sector and the protection of the millions of passengers who travel annually .
Looking at the standoff between the Council and the Committee on Transport and Tourism , one would imagine that we had a polarisation of two ends of the planet , representing two different interests , instead of two parallel political participants here in Europe who are supposedly looking after the common interest of the travelling public .
If there is to be conciliation , let us get on with it right away .
What is needed is a civil aviation security agreement that guarantees security and safety .
What is needed is a civil aviation security agreement that allows individual Member States to decide to opt out of certain proposed measures such as the sky marshals .
What is needed is a commonly agreed set of measures designed for passenger security which - and this is a crucially important point - firstly , will be subject to a review every six months , secondly , to see if they are successful , thirdly , if they need modification and fourthly , how much they cost .
What is not needed is the kind of standoff that we are debating here this evening .
We all have one common cause - passenger security- so let us get on with it .
Is it any wonder that the people of Europe are , to put it mildly , sceptical about the way we operate in this Parliament when we have this kind of standoff between the Commission on the one hand , the Council on the other and Parliament , while we all have a common cause ?
Mr President , I would also like to commend Mr Costa on his report .
As he said in his introduction , we all want to travel safely and securely .

Both Mr Higgins , just now , and Mr Bradbourn , before him , referred to the alert over liquids in the UK last summer .
Unlike Mr Jarzembowski , most of us think that this threat is not just ever-present , but that it is one that is changing all the time .
We cannot let up or compromise where aviation safety and security is concerned .
European countries need to work together to achieve the highest possible standards , and yes , that does mean that some countries may wish to go further and put additional measures in place .
But on other aspects passengers are confused .
Why are some airports seemingly more secure than others ?
Why is there no European agreement yet on hand baggage allowances - on what is permitted and what is not ?
Mr Barrot , you said that we need to guarantee that safety rules are applied , and that is crucial .
But you also spoke about fair competition , and I am not sure where competition comes into this debate .
Competition could mean compromise and , as others have said , there is no compromise when talking about aviation security .
We all have to work together in this field .
( DE ) Mr President , we all want the highest possible standards .
The only question is who should decide what will guarantee the highest possible level of security .
To a certain extent , all of us here can regard ourselves as experts , simply because we are almost daily air travellers .
One thing we do know is that every single one of us can easily circumvent the new rules on liquids at any checkpoint .
What is on the table here is a placebo , designed to ensure that people feel safe but certainly not increasing security .
That is the real problem .
We have to tackle it , which is the purpose of the two amendments tabled by Mr Stockmann and myself , through which we seek to ensure that this House debates what constitutes a genuine security-building measure and what is merely a placebo .
On this point we can truly regard ourselves as experts , and so we say in all clarity that , six months after the introduction of this provision , we have no need of special rules ; what we need is a more rational consideration of this issue than it has previously been given .
In actual fact , what we have here is a kind of extraterritorial US law , enacted jointly with Britain .
That is how we see it .
The British or even the American tail is wagging the European dog .
That will not do .
We therefore call for the most rapid possible review , and if that review does not result in a real increase in security , the measures must be allowed to expire .
That would compel us all to think seriously again about real potential remedies to the present problem .
Mr President , I should like first of all to thank all of the speakers and , in particular , to thank Mr Costa for his report .
It is clear that a better balance between security demands and operational aspects is a real challenge for all of us .
That is why we need a new framework regulation that is simpler and more flexible ; I must insist on that .
I am going to answer a few questions before turning to financing .
Mr El Khadraoui , the Commission is endeavouring to keep the European Parliament regularly informed of developments , and in a few days ' time you will have a hearing of experts , for which Mr Costa has kindly taken the initiative .
I believe that this is the right method for trying to understand and to have some information from those who were behind these provisions .
Mr Bradbourn , I must say to you that we are actively working on the problems relating to duty free goods .
I hope that , in a few weeks ' time , I will be able to give you some answers on this point .
He is not here , but I am speaking to all Members .
I come now to the problem of funding .
Firstly I should like to say that I understand very well the position of the Commission and of Mr Costa .
I think first of all that we must try to avoid distortions of competition .
That seems perfectly logical to me .
I realise , like Mr Jarzembowski , that we have to try to find a compromise .
Nonetheless , together with the Council , we have to take account of the finance ministers .
The transport ministers do not entirely lay down the law in this field .
That , then , is where we come up against a problem .
What stays in my mind from this discussion between us , is your desire for transparency over the cost of security .
On that point , I cannot contradict you .
I think , in fact , that it is essential for the cost of security to be made transparent ; this should at least be a first stage .
What I can say to you is that we need this regulation , as I have explained to you .
I would not want all that to fall apart because of a total lack of understanding on both sides between the Council and Parliament .
That being so , the Commission will play its role as mediator and we shall try , as far as is possible , to find a solution , Mr President , because , in the field of security , we must have the right tools and the appropriate tools .
That is why I am insisting somewhat on the adoption of this revised proposal , recognising at the same time the validity of Parliament 's approach , which , on the subject of funding , requires greater transparency , more fair competition and , insofar as is possible , an effort towards harmonisation on the part of the Member States .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 11.30 a.m.
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - Aviation security issues are of the utmost importance to our safety and need to be dealt with in a swifter manner than has so far been the case .
A common minimum standard of security is needed not only because of the real threat of aviation crime , but also for the perceived threat that a lack of security shows the public .
It is essential that Member States pay for the cost of new security mechanisms and short-term special measures .
Passengers should not need to pay for security .
Smaller regional airports might have a hard time paying for new expensive measures , while airlines cannot be asked to increase their ticket prices .
This is not a matter of passengers paying for the privilege of safety ( this is no privilege but a given right ) , it is a matter of states keeping aeroplanes from crashing into populated areas on the ground .
An effective evaluation of the measures we put into place is essential .
Some measures might turn out to be superficial ; others might need to be more efficient .
New mechanisms might need to be put into place .
Assessment and management of flood risks ( debate )
The next item is the recommendation for second reading by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety on the Council common position with a view to adopting a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the assessment and management of flood risks ( 12131 / 6 / 2006 C6-0038 / 2007 ( Rapporteur : Richard Seeber ) .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , let me take a moment to thank my friend Jacques Barrot for repeatedly confronting the problems involved in transalpine freight haulage and for being our comrade-in-arms on the long march towards the solution of these problems .
Today , however , we are speaking about floods and what can be done about them at the European level .
At this juncture I wish to thank Commissioner Dimas and his staff , the shadow rapporteurs and the German Presidency , all of whom have worked very constructively with me to achieve an agreement at second reading , a far-reaching agreement that covers all the key issues .
I need hardly remind you that floods have become the commonest form of natural disaster in Europe .
In 2002 and 2005 we had raging floods with devastating effects .
They claimed people 's lives and caused serious damage to housing and infrastructure .
Those floods hit us hard .
There is sound scientific evidence that heavy rainfall is becoming increasingly frequent and severe and that this trend is directly linked to human activity .
The first reason lies in concentrated urbanisation , especially in high-risk areas , with the development of built-up areas and streets , river realignments and ill-considered construction schemes on flood plains .
The second reason is deforestation , especially the authorised clearing of river valleys for developments such as the construction of holiday chalets but also for industrial estates and shopping centres .
Thirdly , highly intensive farming practices result in topsoil being sealed in concrete and reduce the availability of meadows and flood plains .
Fourthly , we have the phenomenon of soil erosion , which is also a contributory factor .
Following the catastrophic floods in 2002 , the Commission presented a flood-response programme , which included provision for improvements in research and information .
The Commission also presented a Communication on flood-risk management , which analysed the situation and proposed a concerted EU action programme .
One of the components of that programme is the present proposal for a directive that has now culminated in the compromise package on which we shall vote tomorrow with a view to reducing the flood-related risks to human health , the environment , the infrastructure and the economy .
In view of the increased risk of flood-induced damage , it is truly essential to create a European regulatory framework alongside the national rules , because the great majority of rivers flow across national borders .
A total of 80 % of Europe 's rivers are not confined to a single country but straddle national borders .
It therefore went without saying that Europe had to respond to the flood problem .
This also means , however , that due consideration must be given to the subsidiarity principle in this legislation .
The fact is that conditions in a narrow Alpine valley differ from those on a Greek island or in the Finnish lowlands .
We must take care to avoid the adoption of blanket provisions that cannot be applied in the real world .
The package on the table wisely provides for three steps .
The first is an initial identification of the places where flood risks actually exist .
It would , of course , be pointless to establish flood defences in places where there is no specific risk .
The second step is the production of flood maps , and the third is the formulation of flood-risk management plans , but only where these are absolutely necessary .
Many Member States have already made great progress in the realm of flood prevention , and we also had to take care to avoid any duplication of effort .
This is why there are very comprehensive rules designed to safeguard existing arrangements , and Member States need have no fear of being compelled to implement a second set of measures .
Their own chosen measures can , of course , be implemented in full , as long as they are consistent with the aims of the Directive .
The Council 's common position contained a few points which , in our opinion , required improvement .
In particular , we could not figure out why the phenomenon of climate change had received so little attention .
In our negotiations with the Council , we have succeeded in incorporating the issue of climate change , which now runs like a thread through the entire package .
That is only right and proper , for we must be seen to respond to public concerns .
To sum up the remainder of our efforts , there have been some changes in time limits , we have placed stronger emphasis on flood plains and other natural retention areas , and we have made the case for sustainable land use and asserted the principle of solidarity from start to finish .
The rule is that those on the upper reaches must not take any action that is detrimental to their downstream neighbours .
We managed to achieve this in a spirit of good European solidarity .
I can now present the report to the House with a clear conscience tomorrow , and I commend it to you .
Member of the Commission .
( EL ) Mr President , I would like to thank and congratulate the rapporteur Mr Seeber for his exceptional work in the flooding directive , as well as the Committee on Environment , Public Health and Food Safety for its positive contribution .
I am extremely satisfied with the rapid progress in the first and second readings .
The European Parliament played a significant role in order to achieve agreement on an exceptional text and I would like to praise these efforts .
The aim of the proposal is to minimise the risks of flooding for human health , economic activities and the environment .
The text , in its current form , reflects these goals and allows the European Union to fulfil them .
The main characteristics are as follows : the directive introduces a procedure as previously mentioned by Mr Seeber in three stages , which begins with identifying the areas at risk of flooding .
The next step is mapping imminent flooding in the context of intermediate and extreme scenarios .
The third stage refers to the drawing up of flood risk management plans .
They will be coordinated across river drainage basins , basins shared by more than one country as well as coastal areas .
Within the framework of flood risk management , a possible increase in the frequency and intensity of floods due to climate change has been provided for and I agree with Mr Seeber I am very pleased with the fact that Parliament insisted there should be strong mention of climate change .
As the climate is already changing , it is clear that besides facing and abating the phenomenon , we will have to adapt to it .
The European Union will have to be prepared for unexpected floods on a larger scale that will be accompanied by intense and unforeseen rainfall .
Coastal floods due to storms , together with the increase of sea levels , might pose more risks from floods in coastal areas .
The European Union must be ready to face dangers posed by the said natural phenomena .
The improvement of coordination through the water framework directive is an important step forward .
The comprehensive management of the river drainage basins must include both elements : controlling water quality and flood risk management .
I am very pleased that the European Parliament has stood by the Commission on this issue and also for the fact that the scope of coexistence of both procedures has been expanded .
The basic points raised at first reading remained .
Namely the implementation of the directive across the European Union and especially the emphasis on river drainage basins shared by more than one Member State .
With this new and significant legislative act the European Union will be ready to decrease and minimise the potentially destructive consequences of floods .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , let me begin by thanking the rapporteur , Richard Seeber , for the cooperative spirit in which our discussions took place .
He has negotiated a robust compromise with the Council Presidency , a compromise that makes significant improvements to the proposal from the Commission .
It is important to adopt a European approach to the prevention of flood damage .
Rivers and floods are no respecters of national borders .
The measures taken by the government of a country on the upper reaches of a river have specific effects on territories further downstream .
In many cases these territories belong to another country .
For this reason I consider it important that each and every Member State of the European Union should take preventive anti-flood measures rather than waiting until a disaster occurs .
As with other proposals from the Commission , it is our parliamentary duty to ensure that unnecessary red tape , excessive administrative input and pervasive reporting obligations are avoided .
We managed to prevent and considerably improve a number of excessively bureaucratic provisions .
I particularly approve of the compromise safeguarding flood plans and maps that already exist or are being prepared .
Thanks to our intervention , all maps and plans already compiled by the Member States are now recognised along with those that are in the course of preparation , provided they are completed by the end of 2010 .
The process of drawing and producing these flood maps is in full swing in some countries .
Moving the goalposts at this stage would have caused unnecessary duplication of effort , and the new tendering procedure would have generated a great deal of additional expense without any recognisable benefit in terms of better flood prevention .
For this reason I am pleased that the compromise provides for the possibility of recognising these maps and plans in the framework of the Directive .
I shall therefore vote for the compromise , and may I once again thank the rapporteur for our constructive cooperation .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by congratulating Mr Seeber on the manner in which he conducted the informal negotiation process .
The negotiations were most fruitful and led to a package of compromise amendments that demonstrated broad consensus and that the Council should accept .
The Socialist Group in the European Parliament supports the compromise that has been reached as it corresponds to the key objective of this directive , namely to protect human health , the environment , cultural heritage and economic activities , while taking account of the impact of climate change on the occurrence of floods .
There are increasing periods of extreme drought followed by heavy rainfall , which results in more flooding .
The proposal before us will ensure greater environmental protection by promoting the inclusion in risk maps of information on potential sources of environmental pollution arising from floods .
I also welcome the idea of making the Member States responsible for promoting the sustainable use of soils . In other words , the Member States should take more care in their spatial planning policies .
The report also calls for solidarity , dialogue and coordination between neighbouring countries .
We know that there is a cycle of natural disasters leaving a trail of death and destruction .
According to the World Health Organisation , hundreds of people die each year on account of natural disasters .
In order to prevent worse evils , the time has come to move from a culture of reaction to one of prevention .
Prevention is better than cure .
It is more effective and less costly .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would naturally like to thank Mr Seeber for the collaboration that we enjoyed while debating and drafting this document .
I would also like to thank Commissioner Dimas , because his presence at such times is always very valuable and highly appreciated .
This is a directive that I believe to be very important , partly in the context of other directives , such as the directive on water , the directive on waste and the directive on soil , which is yet to be debated .
These directives form a very important framework of prevention , particularly with regard to climate change , which is a phenomenon with its origins in global warming and which consists , basically , in a worsening of extreme events , such as an increase in rain intensity .
We therefore need to adopt a preventive approach across the board , particularly in the conservation of our land .
The directive in question is directed at this aim , since it has attempted to stress good practices that can be disseminated , as well as all the infrastructure and knowledge that can contribute to the long-term prevention and the short-term forecasting of floods , with a view to providing significant assistance to civil protection bodies in the management of emergencies .
This is a directive which I believe can easily be supported and I also welcome the compromise reached at trialogue .
On behalf of my group , I too therefore call on you to support the text under consideration .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the Directive on the assessment and management of flood risks underlines the need for action which unfortunately is not always respected in business activity in practice .
Flood risk assessment and management should be the basis of long-term plans for engineering works , information systems and other means of flood damage limitation .
This directive should be tied to the provisions on assessing and avoiding the risk of drought , which also causes great economic and environmental damage .
Both these issues are related to water management and conservation .
If flood water were collected , it could be used to offset the impact of droughts .
Both systems should operate over entire river basins and take into account the interests of all the countries and regions involved .
I would like to thank Richard Seeber for his very competent report .
The proposed amendments enhance and supplement his document .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the seasonal and regional differences in precipitations , long-term climate change and lack of coordination between some countries have resulted in catastrophic floods which account for 43 % of all natural disasters in Europe , and are often of a trans-border nature .
Human activity has played its role in this .
It includes felling trees in forest regions , which has led to soil erosion and faster run-off of rain , or urban development in flood plains .
The increasing frequency and intensity of flood events will probably be closely linked with meteorological conditions and climate change as well as changes in river flows .
This makes it imperative to take measures to prevent flooding and to minimise its effects .
While preventing global warming is an important element in this , planning and coordination among Member States on the construction of retention reservoirs , dams , warning systems and disaster relief are just as important .
In the past , emptying reservoirs in one country have resulted in flooding disasters in the next .
Because of the trans-border nature of these events , we must ensure effective international cooperation , both regional and with neighbouring countries , including third countries , which will help us to prepare better and will lead to a reduction in the effects of flooding .

on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Seeber , it may be the case that we suffer less frequently from floods than we used to because of increasingly effective preventive measures , but their effects are nevertheless disastrous .
Regrettably , technical progress has made us grow careless , with the result that buildings are ever more frequently erected in ever closer proximity to flood-prone areas .
Together with what is often reckless interference with river alignments and the loss of natural retention areas such as flood plains , these actions have created a self-inflicted problem .
The agricultural support provided by the European Community over the past few decades has no doubt done its bit too , and the interaction between agricultural use and changes in soil structure are one more reason to rethink the common agricultural policy with a view to focusing more support on organic cultivation .
As part of the planned common system of flood-risk management , consideration must also be given , of course , to measures such as river restoration , the creation of links between flood plains and exposure of enclosed soil .
If we are serious about pursing the aims of preserving natural habitats and coping with climate change , we shall also have to adopt new , innovative approaches .
( HU ) Hopefully tomorrow we will reach the end of a long journey .
Two years ago , when we began debating this directive , we experienced flooding throughout Europe , water sweeping away houses and destroying dams everywhere .
My country , Hungary , is a downstream country , a basin into which a great deal of water flows from many sources .
Two of Europe 's five largest rivers flow through my homeland , and so it is not surprising that it has the largest amount of water per capita .
Naturally the damages , too , are enormous .
In 2005 , at the time of the great flood that has already been mentioned , we were obliged to invest more than EUR 200 million in flood protection .
There was a lot at stake for us .
If I had to stress a particularly important element of the new directive , I would definitely speak of cooperation .
I feel that joint , planned preparation , sharing of information , and the provision of mutual assistance are all elements that appear in this regulation , and make it clear that we can only deal with and resolve the problem of flooding if we work together .
I agree with Mr Dimas : the future , global climate change , and the responses to these challenges constitute one of the most important questions .
It is probable that there will be more frequent and more unpredictable floods across Europe , along with more significant rises in water levels and greater destruction .
I feel that this directive will soon be put to the test , and I am absolutely sure it will come through with flying colours .
Fewer human lives will be lost and less damage caused thanks to this directive .
I am completely satisfied with the compromises reached , and congratulate Mr Seeber for his excellent work .
I feel that we have really succeeded in drafting a directive that will protect human lives and increase physical safety in Europe .
( DE ) Mr President , in the wake of climate change , inadequate river management and building activities in flood-prone areas , floods are set to become an increasingly frequent occurrence .
Population growth and the accompanying increase in the number of economic assets in these areas give rise to higher risks and more costly damage .
Besides their economic and social impact , floods can have serious environmental consequences , for example if they hit industrial plants where large volumes of toxic chemicals are stored .
Our rapporteur has fully explained all of this .
The compromise package that our rapporteur has negotiated will enable us to pursue the aims of this Directive more successfully .
I would like to offer him my warmest congratulations .
Major points in his report have already been incorporated into the common position and can be put into even sharper focus through this compromise package .
It is important to the European Parliament that the impact of climate change is to be taken into account in the assessment of flood risks .
It would have been very difficult to explain the decision to leave climate change out of the equation when assessing flood risks .
One very important demand is that , in each of the three steps prescribed by this Directive , namely the flood-risk assessment , the production of maps and the formulation of management plans , best practices and the best available technology should be used .
( NL ) Mr President , Mr Dimas , ladies and gentlemen , the Netherlands has played a major role in the development of the High-Water Directive as it is now before us .
It is important to have a legislative framework for assessing and managing flood risks , taking into account the principle of subsidiarity .
What can be done at local level is done locally , such as measures to prevent sewage systems from overflowing .
This is a way of protecting the environment , public health and the economy .
Since a low-lying country such as the Netherlands relies on many of its neighbouring countries where water management is concerned , it is important for Member States not to take measures that lead to increased flood risks in other countries .
It is for this reason that a coordinated approach is called for , and I set great store by the concept of solidarity which is included in this proposed directive and mentioned more explicitly in Amendments 48 and 61 of the compromise package , which I wholeheartedly support .
In addition to the term ' solidarity ' , it is also important to involve the expected climate change and its potential implications in drafts of risk management plans for floods , so as to prepare ourselves for the future in the best way we can .
All that is left for me to do now is to extend warm thanks to the rapporteur , Mr Seeber , for the excellent cooperation and to congratulate him on this result .
Mr President , I would like to thank all the speakers in tonight 's debate for their positive contributions .
A number of key elements have been included in the overall compromise package that is now proposed .
Most importantly it contains : a clearer and earlier attention to the impact of climate change in the preliminary assessment of flood risks ; an agreement on the earlier date of 2011 for the first preliminary flood risk assessment , thus leaving Member States more time to prepare the flood maps ; a strengthened role of flood plains and the promotion of sustainable land use practices in flood risk management ; sound coordination - also in relation to implementation - with the water framework directive and a link to the cost recovery principles in that directive ; a further strengthening of the language on solidarity in river basin districts ; and last but not least , a requirement to set clear priorities for the implementation of measures included in the flood risk management plans .
I know that these elements were all important to Parliament at first reading and in the committee this time around .
I believe that the proposed current compromise will satisfy Parliament , as important ground has been won on key principles of sound flood risk management practices .
I am also particularly pleased to note the importance placed by both Parliament and the Council on this directive , which was only proposed by the Commission 13 months ago .
It shows that , faced with the serious challenge of preparing Europe for the risks of possibly increased flooding , agreements can be reached relatively rapidly .
To conclude , the Commission is very pleased with the outcome of negotiations .
The Commission can accept the proposed compromise amendments in full and I wish to thank and congratulate once more the rapporteur , Mr Seeber , for all his efforts to reach an agreement at second reading .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 11.30 a.m.
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( HU ) It is extremely important for Hungary that the European Union enact a directive regulating a common defence against flooding .
My country is typically a downstream country to which 95 % of fresh water comes from rivers outside its national borders .
Therefore , it is important that within a flood plain area the downstream countries be involved as well in the tasks of prevention and defence .
I trust that the Austrian , Slovak and Romanian experts will collaborate smoothly with Hungarian water officials in this task .
Likewise , I consider it important that flood protection plans contain those potential sources of danger which can cause environmental pollution in the event of a flood .
In such cases there is often a flooded industrial plant or another factory that causes more harm than the water damage itself .
Since just like air pollution , flooding knows no borders , third countries , such as the Ukraine , should be involved in implementing the directive .
in writing . - Through an organisation I chair in Ireland called Hope Project , I have been participating in Commission research entitled Rescuing Disabled People in Emergencies .
In this research we have identified flooding as a most significant risk for elderly people , children and people with disabilities .
We have just embarked on follow-up research that looks specifically at flooding .
There are two reasons why flooding is becoming such a problem .
First is climate change , with the possibility of rising sea levels , and in Ireland , increased rainfall .
Secondly , throughout Europe , but especially in Ireland , there is a trend of building on flood plains .
It is not uncommon to have fields that were under water for several weeks every year to now be the site of estates with 200 houses .
Eventually this practice will catch up with us .
I encourage the House to establish common sense and preventative action in the area of floods and flood control .
Thematic Strategy on the sustainable use of natural resources ( debate )
The next item is the report by Kartika Tamara Liotard , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on a thematic strategy for the sustainable use of natural resources .
rapporteur . - ( NL ) Mr President and all those present at this late hour , I think that these are times when it is quality that matters , not quantity .
This is , I think , how you should look at it anyway .
The Commission has taken five years to produce a strategy for the sustainable use of natural resources .
That is a long time , and so it is very regrettable that the proposal it has submitted is so lacking in ambition .
To be fair , the Commission has clearly identified the problem , namely that if we carry on in this way , we will be irrevocably faced with exhaustion of our resources , and , along with it , a serious threat to our economy and our quality of life .
Thereupon , though , it also fails to come up with concrete measures .
It calls , inter alia , for more research and more data .
This is all well and good , but we cannot afford to wait for much longer .
Like climate change , the problem of natural resources is acute now , and now is the time we need to take concrete action .
When you read the proposal , there is a vague lack of urgency on the part of the Commission .
It does not invite the citizens to think about this issue all that much , although they are the people eventually who will bear the brunt of it all .
The heart of the matter is simple .
Our ecological footprint , in other words the environmental effect of our consumption , is much greater than what the earth can cope with .
By way of illustration , if this children 's shoe is the ecological footprint we would be allowed to have in order for our natural resources to be in balance , this large men 's shoe represents the current consumption level .
As you can see , it is really far too big .
This is , therefore , a good illustration of what we are doing at the moment .
I will be very honest , Commissioner .
The gut reaction in our Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety was that the entire document should be sent back to you and the Commission asked to rework it .
This , however , struck us as not very constructive and besides , we cannot afford to wait for another five years for action .
This is why I decided to commit to producing a sound proposal and called on all my fellow Members to help me in this task .
I can tell you , my fellow Members had a few amazing brainstorming sessions .
Working together , we came up with a large number of ideas to improve the Commission 's document , and that took us not more than three or four months .
I would like to thank them , because we have really achieved a great deal .
On account of all these sound amendments , the lay-out of the report may not be anything to write home about , but I hope that the message is clear .
Parliament wants to see concrete measures rather than deferral .
I should like to single out a few proposals , the first of which concerns agriculture .
Agriculture does not feature in the thematic strategy , which is quite bizarre to my mind , if you consider that the agricultural sector is one of the largest users and consumers of natural resources .
This sector is therefore being denied a great opportunity .
I understand that the reason for this lies in the fact that DG Agriculture and DG Environment failed to see eye to eye on this .
It is unacceptable , though , that mutual bickering between European officials would lead to the strategy lacking a wide support base .
I would also propose linking European agricultural subsidies straight to sustainability .
To give you an example : subsidies for corn should be suspended if large-scale irrigation is needed and thus if water is being wasted , but subsidies should instead be given to farms that commit to using alternative energy sources , such as wind energy .
In addition to agriculture , there are also other sectors , including transport , fisheries and construction , that are not included in the strategy - wrongly so .
We will need to do something about that too .
In short , the strategy should cover all areas of policy .
The structure of the strategy is largely determined by the consumer and manufacturer .
Other proposals include a lifecycle approach , a top-10 list of priorities of threatened natural resources , tax incentives , the provision of information , the involvement of NGOs and experts , making use of alternative recycling and re-use .
Too many to mention , really .
I suggest that the EU , in general , seeks to halve the use of resources by 2030 .
This is not science fiction , but a real necessity .
Needless to say , European policy should not stop the Member States from performing even better .
By setting the highest achieving Member State as an example to others , this trend can be promoted further .
During his most recent visit to the Committee on the Environment , Commissioner Dimas spoke about the importance of natural resources , and I was delighted to hear him do that .
I have sent him a letter , asking for his cooperation .
I live in hope , therefore , that this Commissioner will stand for a more ambitious policy than what the Commission 's current document suggests .
If that is the case , a critical report from Parliament can only be something to which they can look forward .
Mrs Liotard can be sure that this Parliament has listened to her to the best of its ability at this time .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , the Commissioner says that these are ' ambitious goals ' .
I think not , Commissioner !
The Commission 's report came under a lot of fire when the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety first discussed it in October , as the document is seriously limited in its ambition after five years of gestation .
At best , it could be described as a reasonable basic document with which to start the discussion , but it lacks any concrete objectives and , as I said , any ambition .
This can probably be attributed to a turf war between the Directorate-General for Agriculture and Rural Development and the Directorate-General for the Environment - guess who won ?
DG ENVI 's strategy has been mainly restricted to knowledge-gathering and fails to address some key problematic sectors such as - unsurprisingly - agriculture , forestry , transport and many others .
Whilst some new initiatives are mentioned , such as a data centre for natural resources , a high-level forum and an international panel , the proposed time horizon of 25 years is totally unacceptable .
By contrast , the rapporteur Mrs Liotard has worked hard to add some substance to the proposal .
She correctly makes the point that the Commission communication does not comply with the requirements laid down in the Sixth Environmental Action Plan for concrete targets and timetables .
The report calls on the Commission to replace this non-strategy with ambitious proposals , including clear targets and binding timetables .
I welcome the emphasis on an integrated policy approach and on the external impact of EU policy on sustainable resources .
The only problem is that the rapporteur may have done too good a job .
There is such a broad consensus for her report in the ENVI Committee that practically all amendments tabled were adopted , making the report somewhat long and repetitive in places .
In my view , this takes away from the message .
For this reason I have indicated on my group 's voting list a negative vote on certain paragraphs that duplicate points mentioned elsewhere in the report .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , we have inherited natural resources from nature or the Creator , but we are responsible for them with regard to future generations .
We hear increasingly varying information on the threat to the balance of nature .
Two-thirds of the ecosystems on which human beings depend are in decline .
Europe 's demand on natural resources has risen by almost 70 % since the early 1960s .
This dangerous trend must be stopped .
We want economic growth , because many people are still in need , but without increasing the use of natural resources and with less environmental impact .
This decoupling of economic growth and the increasing use of natural resources is the main message of this report .
The strategy proposed by the Commission is rather weak and has no deadlines or targets .
That is why I tabled around 25 amendments on behalf of the PSE Group .
I am happy that all but one of them has found favour with the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety .
My fellow parliamentarians and I have proposed concrete targets to improve our commitment to the future .
I propose specific targets regarding food , housing and the transport sector .
In a market economy , taxation is the proper tool for regulating the use of resources .
That is why it is so important to set up a European eco-taxation system .
This report should be followed by specific regulations and directives to stop the self-destructive over-use of natural resources .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( SL ) Greater efficiency in using energy and raw material resources is the objective of the thematic strategy being discussed here .
This strategy is probably the most important partial strategy of the Sixth Environmental Action Plan .
Its main objective is to prevent the unnecessary squandering of renewable and non-renewable sources which is threatening the environmental balance .
Product lifecycles is a philosophy which occupies a special place amongst the measures designed to limit excessive consumption .
It is possible to increase significantly the volume of products that are channelled back into the economy at the end of their lifecycle and to reuse them .
In this regard , the strategy is closely related to the process of revising EU legislation on waste management .
The ambitious goals that we want to see in this thematic strategy are not unrealistic .
In fact , the priorities of the political debate on the economical use of natural resources have already enhanced the willingness of citizens to participate in the beneficial reuse of waste .
Our cities , for instance , are potential mines of raw materials .
Just as we extract ore from mines , we can use advanced waste collection and separation methods to extract iron , zinc , copper and plastic , and in the process we will use three times less energy than we would by producing them from fresh raw materials .
Urban mining offers a promising vision of the modern city as a lucrative cache of recycled materials .
And it is not the only method that considerably improves efficiency in using natural resources .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , almost half a century has passed since the first report was delivered in Rome .
Since then , natural resources have diminished , but we made great technological advances and learned to make more efficient use of raw materials and energy , harnessing resources which we could not have dreamed of fifty years ago .
Have we done everything our knowledge , technology and experience are capable of ?
Definitely not .
This is what this report clearly shows .
I am wholly in favour of the report , but I also see that the European Union is doing a great deal , much more than other countries , to protect the earth , air and water .
It is doing a lot to recycle and re-use its raw materials .
However , we need to intensify our activities for the better utilisation of manufacturing waste , which will not only reduce environmental pollution , but also make our use of natural resources more efficient .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my thanks go to the rapporteur , Kartika Liotard , for her excellent work .
These days mankind lives on an ecological credit card which goes over the limit of ecological funds .
Mankind as a whole uses 25 % more than the sustainable level of natural resources , which means that we are using up our children 's capital .
According to the European Environment Agency , the consumption of natural resources in Europe exceeded Europe 's own biocapacity back in the 1960s .
If the current trend continues , by 2050 we will be using double the level of sustainable natural resources .
The need to cut climate emissions is only part of the more universal challenge of using natural resources more sparingly and more wisely .
If our use of natural resources is to be brought down to a sustainable level and at the same time we make it possible for developing countries to rise out of poverty , the rich countries , such as ourselves , should over a period of 50 years make the ratio between the prosperity achieved and consumption of natural resources ten times greater .
This sounds like science fantasy but by degrees it only means an improvement of 5 % a year .
We have been able to do something similar in improving work productivity so why not in improving the productivity of natural resources ?
This century must be the century in which we improve the productivity of natural resources , the ratio between prosperity achieved and the use of natural resources .
As everyone has already said , the strategy put forward by the Commission is far too flimsy , mainly because it lacks any concrete targets and timetables , even though they are required under the Sixth Environment Action Programme .
The knowledge base for producing them exists .
We need clear targets and timetables by next year , including sector-wide action programmes .
The cheapest way of improving productivity in the use of natural resources is to end aid that is environmentally harmful .
That should be done right away .
Kartika Liotard 's conclusion that we need more quality and less volume could also be a motto for us in our use of natural resources .
( SK ) I would like to begin by thanking the rapporteur for her excellent work and for the stance she has taken on this question .
I can fully endorse all the points in her report on a thematic strategy for the sustainable use of natural resources .
The fact that the Commission worked on this document for five years indicates the seriousness of the problem .
The Commission 's document does not contain specific schedules , nor does it describe the methods to be adopted .
We have to recognise that we have a worldwide water crisis , especially as regards drinking water , as well as global warming , and a threat to biodiversity , where Europe 's ecological footprint is twice as big as its biological capacity , and every year people are dying of diseases caused by a polluted environment .
This calls for a more proactive and radical approach .
I agree with the proposal for a complete reform of the subsidy system .
Subsidising activities which have a negative impact on the environment must be reduced or stopped , especially in agriculture .
If the Commission claims that it does not have enough indicators to set specific timescales , the rapporteur mentions several in her report , for example , gross domestic product , domestic use of materials , etc .
If we wish to reduce our dependence on natural resources , I agree that by 2012 , 12 % of the energy in the EU must come from renewable sources , and by 2008 , a specific policy and line of action must be implemented for the 20 most important materials that have the greatest impact .
( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner Dimas 's example was a good one , as when the production of bioenergy is increased , it must happen on a sustainable basis and , in particular , at a global level , although the problem , with this strategy , for example , is that agriculture and forestry are not included in it .
This is one of the last thematic strategies that form part of the Sixth Environment Action Programme .
It has already been stated here that quantitative and qualitative objectives have been set under the Sixth Environment Action Programme for the European Union 's environmental policy and that they have not been mentioned in the Commission 's proposals .
Furthermore , it has not been possible in this strategy on natural resources to meet the objective of ensuring that the use of natural resources and their impact do not exceed the carrying capacity of the environment .
The Sixth Environment Action Programme was supposed to have been reviewed a year ago , and it is vital that we undertake a review of a programme as analytical as this one is , now that we have already come a long way in debating thematic strategies .
I would therefore like to ask Commissioner Dimas when the Commission is going to review the Sixth Environment Action Programme .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , allow me to thank my colleague Mrs Liotard for her comprehensive and cohesive report .
The climate changes and energy crisis faced by the European Union call for community action and the creation of a well-structured strategy for the sustainable use of natural resources which are at least in accordance with demands set by the sixth action plan for the environment .
I would like to emphasise that we need a strategy which targets the efficient use of natural resources , improvements in both their management and in waste management with a view to adopting sustainable production methods and consumer standards , whilst on the one hand , disengaging the use of resources and waste production from the economic growth rate and , on the other , ensuring that their use will not put too much of a strain on the environment than it can withstand .
I believe you have made a good point , Commissioner . The foundation has already been laid .
Before giving the floor to Commissioner Dimas I wanted to let Mrs Liotard know that I have consulted the Rules of Procedure and it is not necessary for her to enclose the two shoes which she used in her example for the purpose of drafting the Minutes , and therefore she may keep them .

These were actually shoeprints , not footprints !
Mr President , honourable Members , first of all , let me thank you for the constructive remarks made in the report and during the debate tonight .
We all agree that today 's use of natural resources is not sustainable .
Indeed , the sustainable use of natural resources is a common challenge for all of us as policymakers , as companies and as citizens , both in Europe but also globally .
Parliament has an essential role in leading this project and mobilising the necessary public support .
Today , more than one year after adoption of the communication , we have already made some progress .
Member States have endorsed the strategy and it is becoming a global benchmark promoted , for example , by the OECD .
We are developing and moving forward with the implementation in an open , transparent and engaged way .
Your report and today 's discussion will now be taken into account in future actions .
The use of natural resources policy is intimately linked to the way we produce our products and consume them .
The forthcoming action plan on sustainable consumption and production will focus on the eco-design of products , on making procurement greener and on measures that help consumers make better choices .
Actions will start from food , housing and transport , the sectors with the highest environmental impacts .
Your other priorities will be tackled as well .
We will promote best-practice approaches , innovative and eco-efficient solutions and the use of economic instruments .
Just one month ago the Commission published a Green Paper on the use of market-based instruments in energy and environment policy , and I am committed to looking beyond GDP when we assess the economic , social and environmental progress of our societies .
Finally , I fully understand those of you who want to see more action and sooner , and I thank Parliament for its proactive role in this .
I also have a lot of sympathy for calls for more specific targets .
As I highlighted earlier , a number of ambitious targets related to resource use are already in place , for example the strategy 's over-arching goal to decouple negative environmental impacts from growth on a European and global scale .
This is arguably a very ambitious target and is formally endorsed by the Commission and the Council .
We will assess the need to set an overall target for resource efficiency in the context of the review of the resource strategy planned for 2010 .
The resource strategy is a big step forward , tackling environmental impacts in a lifecycle approach .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 11.30 a.m.
Written statement ( Rule 142 )
, in writing . - ( HU ) In spite of increasing evidence pointing to the fact that natural energy sources have been used irrationally and excessively , and that daily life has become part of the worry about the sustainability of the natural environment , today humanity , and especially political leaders , lack a clear conception of how to address the problem .
The political concept of sustainable development is too general to lead to tangible results , and what is more , it tries to deal at the same time with protecting the natural environment and resolving the complex problem of justice among generations and nations .
Methods for measuring the environment ( for instance , life cycle analysis [ LCA ] ) , and indicators ( for example , the ecological footprint ) are burdened with methodological problems and are often contradictory .
Without calling into question the usefulness of designing a unified , complex and clear knowledge base on natural energy sources and a set of indicators measuring the use of energy sources , it is important to emphasise that even in their absence , many measures could be put into practice .
It is unfortunate that both the Commission 's proposal and the accompanying report from the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety are silent on the important role that the market and market-oriented regulations could play in the effective use of natural energy sources .
It would be a mistake to forget that the regulation of carbon dioxide emissions - in spite of the inevitable over-allocation by the government during the first distribution period - worked satisfactorily .
It would be a mistake not to recognise that numerous solutions that protect natural energy sources ( for instance the broader distribution of renewable energy sources ) is hampered precisely by the lack of a unified , unrestricted competitive market in Europe .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of sitting
( The sitting was closed at 11.45 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9 a.m. )
Transatlantic relations ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on transatlantic relations .

Mr President , Commissioner , honourable Members , as the European Security Strategy affirms , ' the European Union and the United States of American can , through their common action , be a powerful force for the good of the world ' .
Strengthening common trans-Atlantic action and building on our relationship with the USA are core elements in our presidency , in the political and economic spheres as much as in energy security and in addressing climate change , and it is intended that this message should go out from the EU / USA summit to be held in Washington on 30 April .

It is good that we have the chance to discuss things here today , just a few days before the Summit , so that this important signal may go out from the European Parliament .

Your House is playing an active role in trans-Atlantic relations , not least - to mention just one example - through the Transatlantic Legislators Dialogue , which is a significant part of the network of bilateral links establishing connections across the Atlantic at many different levels , and I should like expressly to thank you , Mr President , and the whole European Parliament for this commitment .
The USA is still the partner with which the EU 's relations are closest and most diverse .
The trans-Atlantic relationship rests on a solid foundation derived from common historical experiences , very similar interests and , above all , shared values - freedom , democracy , the rule of law and tolerance .
Those experiences have shown that this foundation , which is sometimes severely tested , can withstand a great deal , and so it is all the more important that trans-Atlantic relations be continually renewed and made fit for the future .
I regard practical common action as the most sustainable way of underpinning the significance of transatlantic cooperation , both for now and for the future .
The transatlantic partnership is not restricted to bilateral issues , but has a strong global dimension .
In scarcely any crisis - from Afghanistan to Iran to Kosovo - do the transatlantic partners not come together to try to find possible solutions .
Whilst we are largely agreed in our analysis of the key dangers and challenges and on our fundamental policy objectives , the EU and US have had , and still have , differing stances on the priorities , as well as on instruments and methods .
That will continue to be the case , and it would be unrealistic to expect us always to be of one mind .
Rather than ignoring difficult issues , we pursue an intensive dialogue with the US on the subject of them , and , in so doing , we will not deviate from our position that measures taken to combat terrorism must comply fully with our international obligations , including human rights law , refugee law and international humanitarian law , and be taken on the basis of our shared values .
Your House has repeatedly taken a very clear position on this , and we will continue to address these questions in talks with our American partners .
What is crucial is that we do not allow ourselves to be divided by these issues , for a close partnership between the EU and the US is indispensable for both sides , and this message , too , is to go out from the forthcoming EU / USA summit on 30 April in Washington .
On that occasion the focus will be not only on political and security-related issues , but also on the strengthening of transatlantic commerce and on closer cooperation on climate protection and energy policy .
In the margins of the summit , we will be signing the EU-US air transport agreement , a further important step on the way towards more liberalised transatlantic markets , to the benefit of the public and business alike .
It strikes me that the mobility of our citizens is an important factor in this as well , because , as you are aware , the citizens of 12 EU states still require visas even for brief visits to the United States .
The presidency is urging the US to allow all EU citizens to enjoy what is known as the US Visa Waiver Programme , and this , too , will be discussed at the summit .
That is something I would like to re-emphasise at this point , since there has , over recent days , been a degree of irritation in certain Member States in the belief that the presidency did not perhaps want that , and , together with our successors in the Presidency , I should like to stress that we do indeed want all Member States included in the US Visa Waiver Programme .
The United States and the EU are already the most closely intermeshed economic areas in the world .
We believe - and I know a large number of you think likewise - that our potential for economic cooperation is far from exhausted .
Different approaches to regulation in the EU and in the USA give rise to unnecessary transaction costs , and so a further dismantling of non-tariff barriers to trade is urgently called for .
It is for that reason that we want to use the EU-US Summit as a springboard for launching strengthened transatlantic commerce .
At the heart of this initiative is a mutual political commitment to deepen cooperation with a view to achieving regulatory convergence and even closer economic links , and we want to try to use this initiative to re-energise cooperation on a whole array of fronts , for example , on conditions for investment , in the regulation of financial markets , in new industrial technologies and intellectual property .
We expect to be able to put together an ambitious package that will give renewed impetus .
One thing I would like to stress is that this initiative is not being undertaken in opposition to multilateral efforts towards trade facilitations ; on the contrary , it is intended to complement them and to support the successful conclusion of the Doha round .
Another focus of the Summit will be the topics of energy security and climate change , which the presidency sees as key transatlantic issues for the future .
At the EU Spring Summit on 8 / 9 March we agreed on far-reaching climate protection goals and an energy action plan .
In the light of these decisions , we want to use the EU / USA Summit to develop closer cooperation with the USA in these areas .
I do not need to make a particular effort to remind your House that there have , over recent years and decades , been recurrent differences of opinion between the EU and the USA on climate change issues , some of which have been about the fundamental issues involved , but I do believe we can rely on the impression that a lot of things are changing in the States , particularly as regards cooperation in research and technology , where the Americans , too , are very interested in stepping up cooperation with the EU .
Not least because this is a major market for the future , we must aim at pooling our energies and radically shortening the innovation cycles for new processes and technologies , and it is in our own most intrinsic interest that our transatlantic partners must take a lead here .
That I say not least with my eye on the research community in Europe and the influence your House has on it .
I am persuaded that energy security and climate change will be among the transatlantic projects of the twenty-first century .
Security and prosperity in Europe and America depend to a fundamental degree on peaceful and stable development throughout the world , and so one thing for which we want to use the EU / USA summit is to send out a signal of the broadest possible agreement on foreign and security policy issues .
In the Middle East conflict , by way of the revival of the Quartet , we have - and I will be very cautious in what I say on this point - re-opened the door to a solution , at least to some small extent .
In our dealings with Iran and its nuclear partners , we have managed to preserve the united front presented by the international community , which is , I do believe , a precondition for the reaching of an agreed solution with Iran .
We are working closely together with NATO and the United States in the civil and military stabilisation of Afghanistan , and we want to further step up this cooperation , especially as regards the training of the police ; the same goes for the planned ESDP mission in Kosovo .
These are but a very few of the international issues on which close cooperation across the Atlantic is necessary .
Perhaps I might conclude by referring once more to the European Security Strategy , which states that , ' no single country is able to tackle today 's complex problems on its own ' - a statement that is true of the EU , and also of the United States .
It is only if we are able to harness the influence , experience and potential of Europe and America , and to mobilise their best forces and ideas , that we will be able to find viable responses for our common future and the future of subsequent generations .
I should like to begin by apologising for the absence of my fellow-Commissioner Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , who has had to go to the funeral of the former President of the Russian Federation , Boris Yeltsin .

Mr President , honourable Members , the EU / USA summit on 30 April is a new opportunity to strengthen our political and economic ties with the United States of America , and so let me say something , briefly , about this Summit 's objectives .
Firstly , we will be working towards economic convergence across the Atlantic , for , accounting as they do for 40 % of the world 's trade volume , economic relations between the United States and the European Union are among the most important in the world , yet , even so , they need an injection of new political vigour , and the dismantling of obstacles to trade and investment would be a major gain for our consumers and entrepreneurs .


It is for that reason that the Commission welcomes the initiative taken by Chancellor Merkel , who has spoken out in favour of a new and ambitious economic partnership between the European Union and the United States , one in which lawmaking institutions and regulatory bodies are to have their parts to play , with the participants in the summit exercising important supervisory and leadership roles .
The summit will see us mapping out specific policy areas in which we can achieve sustainable progress , including , inter alia , regulatory cooperation on industrial goods , energy , innovation , financial markets and investments .
Secondly , in foreign policy , we will explore a number of key areas in which we have common ground with the United States , with which we will continue to cooperate closely in working towards stability , prosperity and the rule of law in Kosovo and in Afghanistan .
As members of the Middle East quartet , the European Union and the United States are working together in a constructive manner for the revival of a political process involving both the Israeli and Palestinian Heads of Government , and our willingness to negotiate with the government of national unity in order to support it will depend not only on that government 's policy , but also on whether or not it acts in accordance with the quartet 's principles .
The Commission has a particular part to play in the development of an international aid machinery for the Palestinian people , with the objects of supporting them and improving the way in which they are governed .
Another high-profile event at the Summit is to be the signing of the recently-concluded , and historic , open aviation agreement between the European Union and the United States , which will - on both sides of the Atlantic - yield economic benefits estimated to amount to EUR 12 billion and create something like 80 000 new jobs .
At the same time , we shall be reiterating our commitment to the second stage of negotiations on a comprehensive agreement on air transport services , which will add to the economic benefits of the liberalisation of this important sector .
Preparation for the summit have not yet been completed , and core issues in it are to include climate change and energy .
Our aim is to get the United States to commit itself to a policy founded upon market mechanism and clean technologies as goals and on a global approach , and European endeavours to that end are founded upon the consensus achieved at the 9 March 2007 European Council , according to which global action is needed on our part in order to reduce greenhouse gas emissions .
The intention is that the forthcoming summit meeting should see European cooperation with America in this area advanced , and it is my hope that the declaration emerging from it will prepare the way for unambiguous positions to be taken by the G8 and by the UN conference on climate in Bali in December this year .
We will also be discussing issues relating to energy security and energy efficiency and discovering common goals for the development of clean technologies and their short and medium-term applications .

On visa policy , we will , at the EU / USA summit , be calling on President Bush to push for all EU citizens to be allowed to enter the United States without a visa , in the same way as US citizens no longer require a visa in order to enter the European Union ; we would very much welcome it if the USA were to extend the waiver of visas to all the EU 's Member States and thus put an end to the de facto discrimination against EU citizens .
We will also be urging the United States to agree to a solution for the forwarding of air passenger data to the United States that would satisfy the most stringent data protection requirements in a new framework that would replace the present transitional arrangements .
Not least on our agenda , of course , is to stress the need for closer cooperation in the fight against terrorism , and in doing this we will refer to our commitment to ensuring that such efforts will not conflict with our commitments to international law , for that is crucial if the measures we take together in this area are to have any credibility .
( Applause )
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , born as I was 60 years ago in the region of Alsace , I am part of a generation that , having lived through these times , can testify to the great debt that Europeans owe to Americans .
The very strong transatlantic links that unite our two continents are based on millions of personal stories just like mine .
They have helped to shape our history and our common values .
During the recent celebration of the 50th anniversary of the Treaties of Rome , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats paid tribute to the key role played by the United States in laying the foundations for what was to become the European Union , as , without the support of the Marshall Plan and without the decisive role played by the United States and Canada within the framework of NATO , the reconstruction of Europe would no doubt not have been possible .
Even in times of difficulty , we have always believed in the crucial importance of the transatlantic partnership , a partnership founded on dialogue and respect .
Within the European Parliament , our group is the most determined supporter of close transatlantic relations .
That is why I wanted the first visit outside the Union to be a visit to Washington .
The European Parliament must develop stronger links with the US Congress and the US Administration so that it can cooperate further upstream on subjects of common interest .
I should like to propose , in this House , that the President of Parliament invite the new Speaker of the House of Representatives to speak in plenary .
I was pleased to learn that , like us , the US Congress has set up a temporary committee on climate change .
I hope that these two committees can cooperate closely together .
Ladies and gentlemen , the creation of a transatlantic common market by 2015 is one of our priorities .
We must reduce the burden of regulations , stimulate competition and harmonise the technical standards on both sides of the Atlantic .
Let us provide ourselves with a compulsory road map , accompanied by a precise timetable with 2015 as the cut-off date for the launch of an unrestricted transatlantic market .
The European Parliament must be deeply involved in this process but , as friends , we also have the right to speak quite frankly to each other , and even to express criticism .
As President Kennedy observed in 1963 , let us not be blind to our differences , but let us also direct attention to the means by which those differences can be resolved .
I should also like to stress my concern regarding the risks of stricter US customs controls turning into hidden trade barriers .
We must continue being vigilant without undermining fair trade .
In the same way , US legislation on personal data protection still allows some doubt to remain about whether the protection of private life and of civil liberties is being complied with fully .
Europe is determined to fight against terrorism and organised crime , but this fight must be founded on appropriate legal bases .
Respect for fundamental rights will only strengthen our work and our influence in the world .
We also share the commitment to create the conditions of stability , peace and prosperity in the neighbourhood of the European Union .
We have already cooperated positively in Belarus , Ukraine and Kosovo .
However , we must also act in Africa .
It is our moral and historic duty to restore hope to the world 's poorest people .
The genocide in Darfur and the tyranny in Zimbabwe show that we are not a match for what is at stake .
We must also persuade other nations such as China , India , Brazil and South Africa to support our efforts within developing countries .
Furthermore , the Doha Development Agreement must be brought to a successful conclusion because it is a development round for the poorest countries .
Europe and the United States must reach a global agreement as quickly as possible .
To conclude , our group believes in the possibility of a safer world .
Nuclear proliferation has made the world more dangerous .
We support a negotiated solution in connection with the Iranian nuclear programme .
Europeans and Americans share common roots that have largely shaped our world .
We must maintain our position in what has become a multi-polar world . As Jean Monnet said , Americans and Europeans together defend a common civilisation .
( Applause )
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , I think it is clear to us that a different wind is blowing in Washington - one that is opening up opportunities , not least for cooperation with the European Union .
First of all , of course , there is the victory of the Democratic majority in both Houses of Congress , on which we would like congratulate them once again , but there are also perceptible changes in the Bush administration .
The tone has changed , and we can tell that the State Department 's authority and Condoleezza Rice has grown enormously .
More cooperation is being sought , and this is something to which we must respond .
Last week , I was with the delegation in Washington where a tangible change is underway .
First of all , there is increased support for something that has always been very important to us , namely effective multilateralism .
There is growing support for this , and also for the quest for cooperation with the European Union in this area .
They realise that the approach taken in Iraq has failed , and that other ways of cooperating must be found in order to address security issues .
Afghanistan is mentioned by many as an example ; as we see it , there is no reason why , in the context of NATO , the European Union and EU countries could not join forces with Americans in projects that involve both security and reconstruction .
In fact , a debate is currently being held at that very level on missile defence .
Whilst we are struck by the fact that more dialogue is being sought with the Europeans and Russians , we remain critical of the outcome of this process .
Another important point we raised is that on the Middle East conflict .
We would like to emphasise once again - and we hope that the Presidency will take note - that we must ensure that the new government of national unity in Palestine is not left out in the cold , and that we look for ways of supporting this new development .
Another thing that struck us is that the Democrats , in particular , are looking for a new social agenda for the United States where the focus is on the problem of healthcare , but also on Doha .
What can we do together to ensure that the environment and working conditions take centre stage in the trade talks ?
There are , of course , also areas of criticism which we mentioned in the context of renditions and secret prison camps , but also where agreements on data protection are concerned .
These are areas that need to remain at the forefront of our minds .
In the final analysis , after everything has been said and done , there is an important agenda for cooperation , based on the common values that have already been mentioned .
I should like to finish off with a minor point , which is that it is to be hoped that the presidency can also put the Wolfowitz case on the summit agenda , should this prove necessary , because in our view , given the important role the World Bank has to play in the fight against corruption , his position as Director of the World Bank has become untenable .
( Applause from the Left )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , after 9 / 11 Le Monde announced : ' Nous sommes tous Américains ' .
Times have changed .
On economic , environmental and ethical grounds the United States Government has been shredding the values for which America enjoyed our respect .
The challenge for the EU Member States is to resist US moves towards unilateralism , whether on trade policy , over Kyoto or in respect for international law .
This will require the frank , forthright , and sometimes fraught , transatlantic dialogue on issues like the visa waiver scheme , extradition and ' open skies ' , which our Member States have thus far resisted .
Indeed , President Bush succeeds in ' divide and rule ' of Europe at least as well as President Putin .
This summit is a time for some home truths .
Removing regulatory barriers and harmonising standards between the world 's largest trading partners must be our top priority .
However , it should not come at the expense of securing a successful Doha round before Mr Bush 's mandate expires on 1 July .
We must also use the summit to force recognition of the greatest security threat of the modern age - climate change - and to make the Americans agree to stabilise and reduce greenhouse gas emissions .
The UN Security Council debated the issue for the first time last week , underlining the seriousness of the situation .
But we must insist , too , that the administration clarify its position over allegations of torture , secret prisons and extraordinary rendition in the conduct of the war on terror .
Not only is it the right thing to do but it is the only thing to do to restore America 's reputation .
In the long term , only wider democratic scrutiny involving this House and the US Congress and Senate , perhaps under a transatlantic Schengen-style system , can strengthen our strategic relationship and prevent the kind of legal limbo that we are experiencing with passenger name recognition data or with SWIFT payment transactions .
Success in the war on terror rests on balancing freedom and security , not sacrificing our civil liberties .
The turmoil in Iraq is proof of what happens when we get the balance wrong .
The US and the European Union should be helping to repair the damage and showing solidarity with Iraq 's two million refugees .
The Americans have taken exactly 466 Iraqi refugees since 2003 .
We know that they do not want to acknowledge a flight of refugees that is a symptom of their failure , but we need a clear and comprehensive aid budget and an agreement on sharing the burden of asylum claims .
Finally , our negotiators must not be afraid to take the initiative .
Paul Wolfowitz has undermined the World Bank 's moral authority .
Our message to them must be that it is time for him to go .
In conclusion , I owe to an American poet , Ralph Waldo Emerson , the thought that there is no such thing as history , only biography .
Europe 's leaders should bear in mind that they will be judged as individuals for the courage they summon up in Washington .

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , tomorrow we will - together and as one - be adopting a resolution condemning the brutal treatment meted out to the demonstrators by the Russian armed forces , and our expectation is that there should be similar plain speaking during the EU / USA summit .
Yes , of course , we want new economic relations , with a stronger trans-Atlantic relationship on a new footing , but it must be founded upon unequivocal values , the democratic values that the European Union has itself undertaken to defend .
After Guantanamo , after the torture and abduction of innocent people , we need a bridge , and what other bridge can there be than that we press the US administration to adopt , in future , a policy guided by democratic principles ?
When we talk about a moratorium on the death penalty - which we have done in recent weeks , and will do again in future - we do so not only in order to save potential victims in Iran from such a death , but also in the expectation that the Americans will agree to one .
When we talk about the war on terror , we likewise expect that fundamental values will be redefined on all sides and that parliamentary control will be extended , not only in the national parliaments , but also in this one , for what we have seen happening is something we cannot accept as really fighting terror , in that we are thereby cutting back fundamental freedoms for Europe , for people , and for societies .

As regards Afghanistan and Kosovo , I urge both sides that strategy change in Afghanistan needs to be paid more than mere lip service , but also needs to be put into practice ; Operation ' Enduring Freedom ' has no legal standing any more , and must be changed , but we Europeans , too , must come up with more money in order to make peaceful development in Afghanistan possible at all , specifically in the fight against drugs , in educating and supporting democratic citizens there , and women in particular .
The same applies in Kosovo ; we cannot wait for the Americans to loosen this knot for us .
I appeal once more to the European Union and to the foreign ministers to now give Kosovo its independence , in order that it may escape another war .
As for Iran , the time has come to abandon the idea of regime change to which Bush is still attached ; that , together with negotiations , is the only way to prevent the next war , and I hope that the EU will unambiguously commit itself to that .

on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , what exactly does the transatlantic economic partnership have in store for us ?
According to Mrs Merkel , it will not mean free trade or a common market , but the regulation of markets , the protection of patents , the harmonisation of rules and cooperation aimed at improving the world 's economic governance .
Her Secretary of State , Mr Würmeling , was more direct in stating that the aim was to move in the direction of an unrestricted transatlantic market .
The Chancellor herself did , incidentally , imply that the experiment of the European single market could serve as a model for this new area .
Do I need to remind you of the definition of this single market provided by the Commissioner in charge of monitoring it , Mr McCreevy ?
As he pointed out , the single market ' is by far the greatest deregulation exercise in Europe 's recent history ' .
Is it indeed this experiment , then , that we should replicate across the Atlantic ?
The question deserves all the more to be asked because this project already has a turbulent history .
It was in March 1998 that the then figurehead of liberal Europe , Commissioner Leon Brittan , launched the New Transatlantic Market project , modelled on the North American Free Trade Agreement , NAFTA .
At the same time , top secret negotiations were taking place at the OECD on the Multilateral Agreement on Investment , the MAI , which was already designed to track down any legislation perceived by investors as an obstacle to their ever-expanding financial operations .
These two projects caused such an outcry among Europeans that they had to be abandoned .
Since then , however , lobbies such as the Transatlantic Business Dialogue have continually brought this strategic project up for discussion , albeit in a new form .
The adoption , last year , of the US accounting standards and , more recently , the buyout of the European Euronext exchange by the New York Stock Exchange are part of this disturbing trend .
Far from the image of constructive cooperation being sold to us , we are indeed talking here about a major front in the battle over the way in which Europe 's future is to be conceived .
What are at stake are both Europe 's model of society and its democratic identity .
I would point out that the report adopted on this subject last June by our Parliament regretted that ' the EU-US relationship is overshadowed to a considerable extent by political conflict and is quite often characterised by rhetoric ' .
For the sake of the common values of the Transatlantic Business Dialogue , are we going to have to keep quiet about the war in Iraq or about Guantanamo ?
About the death penalty or the International Criminal Court ?
About Kyoto or GMOs ?
About personal data , the SWIFT affair , or CIA flights ?
At a time when the process designed to lead to a new European treaty is under way , the nature of the relations between the European Union and the United States is a crucial issue that will need to be handled with great clarity .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , I would like in the very short time allocated to me to make one or two observations , offering perhaps some words of caution .
In the last couple of years I have seen that there is something of an addiction to gesture politics here , which is something we must be extremely careful to avoid in our relationships with the United States of America .
The impact of legislation , for example , is completely global .
Everything we do has a global dimension .
The serious GDP growth is in the Pacific rim , India and China , notwithstanding other parts of the Pacific and Japan , so we must be extremely careful not to burn any bridges when dealing with the United States , which also has a very serious protectionist element in its society .
As the British know , the United States is the UK 's biggest trading and investment partner and has been for some years .
It is a shame that the British have been forced , against their will , to abandon the imperial measure , which of course we share with the United States of America , and which gave us a particular advantage there .
However , that is something that must wait for another day .

on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , I share the hope of many in this House that the Summit of 30 April and the new transatlantic partnership will be a success , although we should add , of course , that this new partnership must be based on reciprocity and on respect for mutual key interests .
Accordingly , the Americans and their diplomats will , for example , need to learn that Turkey is not a European country and cannot become an EU Member State , irrespective of what the American interests are in this matter .
Our trade relations with the United States will be the subject of talks in Washington in April , when energy and climate change will be discussed , but I also see it as an opportunity to think more about the common fight we must wage against international terrorism and looming Islamic fundamentalism , in particular .
Let us not forget that this fight is about the Western values that we share , and that it is these Western values that Islamic fundamentalism and terrorism have in their sights . This is something that is often overlooked , not least by this House .
US foreign policy is very often deserving of criticism , but the one-sidedness with which this criticism is often levelled in this House is hardly constructive .
The one-sided activities of the CIA activities temporary committee in Europe and the one-sided conclusions it arrived at , as well the issue of personal data , spring to mind as examples .
Let us , whatever we do , not mistake our enemy .
Despite the many misunderstandings and different opinions we may have , it is good to remind ourselves of the fact that the USA is not an enemy , but an ally .
thar ceann an Ghrúpa UEN . - A Uachtaráin , tá an gaol eacnamaíochta idir an tAontas Eorpach agus Meiriceá ar an ngaol eacnamaíochta is tábhachtaí ar domhan .
Is dhá chóras pholaitiúla sinn , le haidhm láidir a chinntíonn caomhnú agus cur chun cinn an daonlathais ar fud an domhain .
Bíonn ár naimhde ag iarraidh aird a tharraingt ar an difríocht pholaitiúil atá idir an dá réimeas .
Ní mór dóibh cuimhneamh , áfach , go bhfuil i bhfad níos mó nithe comónta eadrainn ná mar atá difríochtaí .
In particular when we consider the links that there are between Europe and the US with regard to the action that we can take on the global stage , it is even more important now to move forward , despite the difficulties and differences we have had in the past .
Just take a look around the world .
In Afghanistan , we have to work with the US not only to ensure a stabilisation of the situation there , not just for the sake of the country itself , but also because 90 % of the heroin being used in Europe at the moment comes from Afghanistan .
Likewise , in South America we must take joint action to ensure that alternative crops can be found for its farmers , because huge amounts of cocaine come from there .
If we look at Darfur in particular , we see the failure of the international community to act and react to the genocide that is taking place there .
It is incumbent on us in Europe to bring the US along in order to take further and stronger action .
Likewise , as today we celebrate World Malaria Day , the actions that we can take collectively are far greater than those we can take individually .
Most importantly of all are the actions of world trade , however , in order to ensure a fair and more equitable society for all .
I call on the Commission and others here to no longer rescind our agreements with other countries in order to protect and assist the poorest in the world .
Together we can achieve more than that which divides us , and in that way we can overcome our political differences on small issues .
Mr President , here in this House we love to boast about our green credentials and to criticise the USA and President Bush for their environmental vandalism .
After all , we signed the Kyoto Protocol and they did not .
Let us pause for a reality check .
In fact , the US did sign the Kyoto Protocol but they did not ratify it .
Here in Europe we ratified , but we are not delivering .
Despite the Commission spending the last 10 years trying to fudge the Kyoto baseline figures , it still seems that perhaps only two Member States will actually hit their Kyoto targets .
We say that the US is the world 's biggest polluter , but only because it is the world 's biggest economy .
Since Kyoto has been in place , the US trend on CO2 emissions has been better than ours !
I repeat , for Mr Graham Watson 's benefit , that in recent years the US trend on emissions has been better than the EU 's trend .
The energy intensity of the US economy is similar to our own and , based on current trends , the US economy will be greener than that of Europe by 2010 .
The USA has a vast biofuels programme .
They are investing in green technology and their AP6 Partnership engages China and India , without whom no global programme can succeed .
Commissioner Špidla calls for the US to adopt a global approach , but it has already done so .
It is time that we in this House stopped our moral posturing and started to treat our American ally with a little more courtesy and respect .
( ES ) Mr President , I believe that it is important that we remove the ideological baggage from this debate on transatlantic relations .
I do not know whether , as the joint resolution negotiated states , the President of the World Bank should resign or not , but what I do believe to be important is that the European Union begin to develop its strategic positions and become a mature player on the international stage .
I know that Commissioner Ferrero dedicates all of her efforts - which are not inconsiderable - to this field .
I believe that this must not lead us to forget that the transatlantic link is not written into the European Union 's genetic code and also that the United States - perhaps as a result of our incapacities - have been the guarantors of security in Europe and that , when it comes to security , there is currently no alternative to the transatlantic link .
Mr President , I believe that , if we want the European Union to become a European power , that cannot be done in opposition to the United States , but rather with the United States , as two partners which have mutual respect , which share a set of values and which share a vision of the world .
This does not of course mean that we must give the United States a blank cheque , and the European Union must affirm its principles in relation to the issue of the death penalty , the issue of the International Criminal Court , the issue of the Kyoto Protocol and the issue of extraterritorial laws .
This also means that the United States must learn to respect the European Union , which is currently a force for stability in the world , and which plays a fundamental role by exerting its influence in many regions .
On a previous occasion in this House , Commissioner Patten said that , in order for the European Union to achieve its objectives - one of the more important of which is for human rights and fundamental freedoms to be respected in all regions of the world - the cooperation of the United States was essential , and likewise the United States ' objectives could only be achieved with the cooperation of the European Union .
If the European Union and the United States work together , Mr President , the situation in terms of prosperity , stability and security in the world will be better , and I believe that those are the objectives to which this Transatlantic Summit must contribute and on which it must cooperate .

Mr President , I should like to thank the Commissioner and Mr Gloser for their statements on US-European relations .
I feel that the United States ' mood and strategy is gradually and tentatively changing from unilateralism to multilateralism .
Just six days ago I , my good colleague Mr Wiersma , the vice-chairman of our group , and other colleagues visited the United States Congress and Senate and it is quite clear that the mood is changing .
This provides a new opportunity for the European Union .
I have three reflections to share with you .
Firstly , I think that a precondition for progress on the WTO negotiations is that we somehow incorporate the ' Decent Work Agenda ' .
Let us face it : it is not possible to obtain new and substantial progress without it .
Secondly , it is time to realise that the financial markets and the recent developments in hedge funds and very large and powerful private equity funds are not fully compatible with the Lisbon goals and our long-term investment and financing needs .
This observation is not just a European one but is also being increasingly made by the Democratic Party , which holds the majority in the US Congress and Senate .
We therefore hope that this signal will be clear and that the issue will be discussed at the forthcoming G8 meeting in Heiligendamm .
Thirdly , on the Middle East , we should not be naive and expect major changes in American policy in the next two weeks .
However , it would be worthwhile to step up our dialogue with our American friends and colleagues and to insist on backing the Palestinian unity government .
If that government fails , the winners will be Hamas and nobody wants that .
( Applause from the left )
Mr President , on a parliamentary visit to Washington last week , we learned more about the high-level contact group on security than we did in Brussels .
Thank goodness for the freedom of information culture in the United States !
We also learned about renewed transatlantic discussions among officials on the legal basis for rendition .
Congressmen and MEPs must not only be informed but also included in that debate .
The tactics of the Global War on Terrorism have failed , according to Scotland Yard 's counter-terrorism chief .
He said yesterday that al-Qa 'ida had not only survived the six-year onslaught , but possessed momentum .
We must certainly seek to build a common transatlantic justice and travel area in which there is maximum information-sharing .
However , we must also insist on maximum safeguards and respect for fundamental rights .
If the information shared is based on dubious profiling or data-mining exercises , or if it is tainted by torture , what value does it have ?
As one of the officials in Washington said in that refreshingly direct American manner , ' garbage in , garbage out ' .
The potential damage to individual rights is enormous .
We must have more cooperation between the US Congress and the European Parliament in order to bring about democratic accountability and the desired goal of a transatlantic Schengen-type zone .
( PL ) Mr President , of all Europe 's most important political and economic problems , not a single one could be resolved without dialogue and cooperation with the United States .
Only a European-Atlantic common market can put us in a position to compete with China and India .
Only American-European cooperation will help bring success in stemming the threat to our security posed by Iran , which today is the greatest threat to world peace , a nuclear power and sworn enemy of Western civilisation .
Only together will we be able to stop Korea from uncontrolled aggression .
And , keeping things in proportion , only together will we be able to restrain Russia from abusing its military and energy clout in Europe and neighbouring countries .
Today we have the opportunity to act in a more pragmatic way .
It is not just a question of a change of government in Washington , but also in Paris and Berlin .
I live in the hope that we will succeed , and that European identity will never again be reduced to a cheap , trumped-up and harmful confrontation with the United States in the face of such serious threats to our security and to our values .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , partnership is based on mutual respect , which itself begins with respect for one another 's laws and for the values that both parties have in common .
Not a few of the invocations of trans-Atlantic harmony in this debate today would , no doubt , cause Austrians to be greatly astonished and seriously disconcerted .
Public opinion in Austria is occupied and perturbed by two things .
A major bank was bought by an American fund and was , overnight , compelled to get rid of its Cuban clients - without notice and for no cause other than their nationality , which is contrary to international law , European law , and Austrian criminal law .
Now a major minerals company is to be forced to stop doing business with Iran - and that is against Austrian law , European law , and international law too .
I am quite astonished that this crucial matter has gone unmentioned in this debate .
If our partners recognise our legal order and values , then a partnership is what we have ; if they do not , then the relationship is one of master and servant .
The Commission 's response to these two events in Austria , which have received a great deal of publicity and been the occasion of great disquiet , does nothing to build public confidence in its ability and willingness to defend and enforce European law , yet it is on that that partnership is founded .
( Applause )
( PT ) Mr President , in an area of Baghdad , the US army is currently building a wall that , in the name of security , will separate Iraqis from Iraqis .
It is doing so despite protests from inhabitants of the area and criticisms from the Prime Minister of Iraq .
The Bush Administration loves walls ; it builds them in Iraq , in Palestine and on its border with Mexico .
The European point of view must be different .
The wall that fell in Berlin ought to have been the last .
Euro-Atlantic relations should therefore be higher up the political agenda .
For the Europe of economic liberalism , politics means business , even though the depreciation of the dollar , the environmental dumping practised by a country that has not ratified the Kyoto Protocol and the imbalance in social rights demonstrate the danger of blindly scrapping capital trade barriers in a world of walls .
( NL ) Mr President , today , the European Union and the United States are at level pegging where the immense issues in world policy are concerned .
First of all , there is the danger of Islamic terrorism that is lurking in every corner .
What could be more obvious than facing up to shared threats in unison ?
It is not that easy , though , and has not been for years within transatlantic relations , and it would be too easy to point an accusing European finger at America .
Time and again , stereotypical anti American reflexes make themselves felt within the European Union , and are at risk of paralysing transatlantic cooperation .
Let us bear in mind that the issue concerned is nothing less than crucial survival strategy .
This is why I should like to wish the Council and Commission every success in creating a favourable transatlantic working climate .
This effort on our part challenges the American idea of us being unmanageable exotic Europeans .
The joining of transatlantic forces will in any event produce a constructive working relationship , and that , surely , is something that is , after all , at stake in any transatlantic summit .

( DE ) Mr President , before Iraq was invaded , Europe had had the chance to let go of the USA 's dubious coat-tails and carve out for itself an independent role as a mediator motivated by reason , and , even as late as the business with the CIA 's rendition flights and secret torture prisons , we should have put clear blue water between ourselves and the activities of the George Bush Gang , which were inhumane and contrary to international law , and ought to have denounced them instead of trying to get Europe 's taxpayers to cough up for the Americans ' belligerent policies .
Were we , as is planned , to impose more stringent sanctions on Iran , we would once more be blindly obeying Washington 's orders , and it could not fail to cause us to be perceived , by the Islamic world , even more as its enemies than we already are ; that much is made clear by previous terrorist acts and by the latest threats against Germany and Austria .
No doubt in the hope of making the USA / EU summit go well , the position of mediator , which we have worked so hard to keep in our sights , is being abandoned without further thought ; so much , then , for our independent and assertive foreign policy .

Time and time again , the Americans have shown that they have but little interest in the EU as a partner , and would rather see it weakened by over-extension , internal problems and crisis hotspots on its borders , which is precisely what would result from Turkish accession .
The idea is that disputes should make the EU impotent , and that is precisely where the planned anti-missile systems fit in .
Political powers have no friends , but only interests .
The Americans are trying to secure their interests , ruthlessly , and even at the cost of the Europeans who are supposed to be their friends .
( CS ) Mr President , I fully support the agreement on economic partnership between the Union and the United States .
Common standards and rules for industry and finance not only simplify trade but also save billions of dollars and euros .
I feel that the removal of visas for EU citizens is an obvious part of such an agreement .
Transatlantic relations , however , cannot be narrowed down to just visas and trade .
We must put forward different approaches to solving the Iraq situation and work together to develop energy sources that will not pollute the planet and that will deliver lasting , sustainable development .
Ladies and gentlemen , I firmly believe that the era of serious rivalry between the EU and the USA is over .
Putting on boxing gloves in a ring built on the foundations of our shared values of freedom , democracy , human rights and the rule of law brings no added value to EU citizens .
In my view , a far more pressing priority is a joint response to the challenge posed by India and China , which are beginning to outstrip us in terms of economic and political development .
These powers are based on different environmental and social values from ours .
The EU and the USA have social systems built on past experience .
We face the difficult task of ensuring that the competitiveness of our shared cultural model and the living standards of our citizens are sustained over the long term and are not lowered .
I therefore feel that the biggest challenge facing transatlantic relations is to defend the position of the leading culture on the planet .
Thank you .
Mr President , the next EU-US Summit will prove a historic one , and I fully support the German Presidency 's initiative for an extensive economic partnership between the EU and the United States , which now represents some 40 % of world trade , and in particular Chancellor Merkel 's ambitious aim for a transatlantic market without barriers by 2015 through mutual recognition of the same norms for various industries and services , particularly in the financial sector .
Some in this House would regrettably call this a transatlantic ' rivalry ' rather than a ' partnership ' , because they view the EU as being in competition with the United States .
If that is indeed the case , then America is clearly winning .
The healthy long-term prospects of its free-enterprise economy are in sharp contrast to the EU 's gradual decline in a sea of over-regulation , which we must remedy before it is too late .
EU-US relations , like EU-India ones - and I especially welcome the visit to our Parliament later on today of President Kalam of India - are a partnership built on our common values of democracy , human rights , freedom and security .
On the world stage we should be grateful to the US that it is willing to bear a disproportionately large burden in fighting global terrorism , with its uncompromising stance on Iran 's acquisition of a nuclear bomb , which now demands a similar response from EU governments .
The US has led the way in calling for sanctions on Sudan with regard to the genocide in Darfur and has opposed arms exports to China .
America is also helping make Europe more secure through its deployment of missiles and missile shields , and it is now working with the EU to defend the Quartet principles for a lasting Arab-Israeli peace .
Its engagement with countries like Georgia , Moldova , Belarus and Ukraine in an effort to resolve frozen conflicts is also most welcome .
Finally , we must together urge Russia to behave as a reliable energy supplier and uphold its commitments to democracy and human rights .

( DE ) Mr President , I would just like to address a few aspects of relevance to the idea of the trans-Atlantic market .


One gets the recurrent impression , when listening to Members of this House , that relations between Europe and the United States are remarkably tense , with the expectations of it evoking permanent frustration on one side and constant enthusiasm on the other , and that is no sound basis for a relationship ; what we need is healthy realism , and so I should like to congratulate the German Presidency of the Council on having taken up the idea of the trans-Atlantic market , which this House had set out in numerous resolutions and , over many years , done a great deal of work on with the Americans , and also , of course , with many Council Presidencies and the Commission , and I would like to thank all those who were involved in this work .

It is this healthy realism that we will need in future , together with a model , a regulatory environment , in which economic cooperation between both sides can be enhanced , in which they can work together more and look together to the future , but the object of this is not coherence ; rather , it is that the two economic areas and societies continue to develop along autarkic lines .
The future will bring disputes between us , but that is part and parcel of our not being a single economic area , but having differences in many areas .
What we need , though , is this healthy pragmatism , and I hope that the future Presidencies of the Council and the Commission will all roll their sleeves up and put some effort into cultivating it in many areas .
It is also clear that this is not just about the economy ; this model has received repeated endorsement in many dialogues on subjects ranging from consumer protection to trade unions , and it is broadly supported across society .
I would also argue that it is only reasonable that Members of this House be involved in the work of cooperation , and , indeed , that this is indispensable if a model fit for the future is to be developed .
I do not believe that there is any basis for the concern voiced by some Members that the developing countries could be harmed by this ; that is nonsensical , because , on the contrary , we will , through cooperation , be helping them rather than dividing them .


( NL ) Mr President , the EU is right to be critical of the method applied by the Bush administration in the fight against terrorism , but this is not a sign of anti-Americanism as some hollow and cheap swipes made in this Chamber suggest , because the criticism of the Bush administration , and of the way in which it is riding roughshod over human rights , is far greater in the United States itself than here in Europe .
However , it is not enough to complain of the United States imposing its policy on Europe or to express our disapproval in this respect .
Rather than whining and whinging , the European Union should finally speak with one voice , because only in that way can we see our own principles through .
We must be a strong and credible partner in dialogue with the United States , because protesting with 27 squeaky voices will make no impression whatsoever .
I would like to draw your attention to the fact that it is the United States itself , rather than the Europeans , that has denounced the CIA rendition scandals , the SWIFT scandal , illegal wiretapping , or the FBI 's misuse of National Security Letters .
Finally , I am in favour of joining forces with the Americans , as long as this is not done in small , cloak-and-dagger , undemocratic groups , of which the High Level Contact Group is an example , but simply by following democratic procedures .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the German Presidency has ushered in an improved climate in transatlantic relations and a very strong commitment to fight terrorism .
All that is in contrast , for example , to one Member State 's policy , that is to say the foreign policy of the Prodi-D 'Alema Government , which is a dubious , extremely dangerous and perhaps even suicidal policy .
This is a government that is friends with Hezbollah and talks to Hamas , not to mention the support it gives to Hugo Chávez and Evo Morales , or the dubious negotiations it conducted with the Taliban to secure the release of a journalist .
All that is in conflict with the improvement in transatlantic relations and also makes European policy appear ambiguous .
I believe that the Europe of the peoples that we try to represent certainly does not want to be subservient to the United States in every field , such as with regard to GMOs , trade policy and the affair with Turkey , which we call on the United States to reconsider .
Instead , I think that Europe 's relations with the United States should form part of a policy of complete solidarity , mutual trust and loyalty , in line with Edmund Burke 's vision , because what he has left us are the deeply felt values that we share with that deeply rooted , authentic America , which is anchored in its traditions and in its historical , religious and cultural values .
( EL ) Mr President , it was not that long ago since Bush , referring directly to Europe , said : ' Those who are not with me are against me ' .
Not even Hitler had said that .
Now we forget the words of this blackmailer and run after him begging for cooperation ?
Has the Congress voted a similar resolution for us ?
Can it be that we have forgotten the conduct of this person and this nation with its secret flights over Europe ?
What kind of cooperation are we seeking for the European industry and economy when America is ruthless ?
Our industries abide by the Kyoto regulations , while the American ones fail to do so .
How will there be any cooperation ?
How will there be any cooperation when we have an ' expensive ' currency and cannot export anything , while Americans can ?
If we want to achieve cooperation , in a transatlantic trade environment , we have to adjust the two currencies .
We cannot afford this luxury .
Only US products are sold around the world .
If we really want to see the dreams of Europe come true , that is freedom , democracy and international relations , we should be calling for the resignation of Wolfowitz and Bush .
Mr President , as chairman of the Transatlantic Legislators ' Dialogue , on Tuesday last week I had the honour of leading Parliament 's delegation in briefing Congress in Washington on the findings of the Temporary Committee on the alleged use of European countries by the CIA for the transportation and illegal detention of prisoners .
We received a robust response from the chairman of the International Organizations Subcommittee , Congressman Delahunt of Massachusetts , who not only gave us his support but also thanked Parliament for its work on this issue .
This was the first time such a meeting had been held , in this case of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , under the umbrella of the TLD and on the floor of Congress .
As our rapporteur , Mr Fava , told our American colleagues , it reflected great credit on Congress that they were the first parliamentary body to ask Parliament 's committee to share and discuss its findings .
Our criticisms have also been directed at European governments and national parliaments , which have to date failed to follow the Congressional lead .
As I told Congress , we are allies who share common values of freedom , democracy and the rule of law , but in promoting these values elsewhere in the world we must ensure that they are maintained in our own countries .
I hope that this Congressional initiative , under the umbrella of the TLD , will be taken up by other committees of this House in the weeks and months to come .
This weekend I will be leading a small delegation from Parliament , which will be in Washington for high-level discussions on the margins of Monday 's EU-US Summit .
I know that the Council and Commission give high priority to significantly improving the depth and regularity of dialogue between transatlantic legislators .
In preparation for this summit a number of ideas have been floated .
We will have to wait until Monday to see how many are successful .
But it is crucial that the summit declaration clearly spells out the need for closer dialogue .

I conclude by saying that it is worth remarking that the three presidents , that is Mr Barroso , Mr Bush and Mrs Merkel , will be holding a formal briefing session with the TransAtlantic Business Dialogue and global corporate CEOs but have not yet scheduled any such meeting with either US or EU legislators .
I hope that they will put this omission right at future summits .
Good luck with your delegation , Mr Evans .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I still remember well one of Mr Barroso 's first speeches , in which he said that we had to deal with the United States as with our equals , and I think that is absolutely right ; an economic partnership is what is needed .

I am all in favour of creating a common market that acknowledges the generally-accepted international rules , such as the WTOs .

What is not acceptable , though - and reference has been made to this already - is that America , or the Bush administration at any rate , should attempt , from time to time and recently more frequently , to bypass United Nations resolutions and other rules in bringing pressure to bear on European businesses and telling them how to go about things .



Reference has already been made to one specific instance of this in Austria , where the new owners of BAWAG , a major Austrian bank , are being compelled to break off all business dealings with Cubans , and that is scandalous ; it is not for the American Government to decide how European banks are to conduct their business , any more than it is for us to impose similar decisions on their American counterparts , and I expect the Commission or the Council to speak out clearly on this .
I have in fact had a perfectly clear answer about another , related matter from the Commission , but the response from the Council Secretariat was somewhat vague .
What is needed here is a clear and unambiguous stance so as not to fan the flames of anti-Americanism , but instead to maintain a good and proper relationship between Europe and America .


I might add that I believe that Mr Wolfowitz should stand down ; those who fight corruption must have no dirty laundry hidden away , and that is something else to be sorted out by the European Union and America together .
( Applause from the left )
( FI ) Mr President , it is a good thing that it is recognised on both sides of the Atlantic that bridges of cooperation need to be rebuilt .
A common set of values and a shared history have up till now remained the basis for Transatlantic relations .
We need to recognise , however , that we cannot survive on past commendations and achievements .
During World War II and after it we were united by a common view of human rights .
Today , I think we have to ask what has happened to that common view .
If the fight against terrorism is to be a success we should not sacrifice the rights and fundamental freedoms of citizens , and I hope that this too will be discussed at the summit .
The congressional elections held last autumn heralded a new mood , and the idea proposed here that Nancy Pelosi should be invited to speak here in Parliament is , I think , well worth supporting .
It would strengthen the bridges of cooperation between the European Parliament and Congress .
( CS ) Thank you , Mr President .
The current situation in Iraq demonstrates how right the US thinker Santayana was when he said that those who do not learn from history are doomed to repeat it .
When it came to attacking Iraq , some countries such as France , Germany and Belgium refused to have any part in the venture .
Defence Minister Rumsfeld at the time divided Europe into new and old , and took a dim view of countries like France and Germany .
In reality , the countries that supported the attack on Iraq were the countries of the old Europe .
They were the countries that in fact adhered to the traditions of colonial wars and the arrogance of the powerful .
I feel that the new Europe is based on ideas of tolerance , dialogue and mutual understanding between civilisations , without losing sight of the great achievements of our continent .
I feel that if today the EU is the voice of reason and human dignity in the world , we can hope that the USA too will ally itself to the voice of reason and human dignity following the next presidential elections in that country .
( FR ) Mr President , what we have been hearing since this morning about so-called transatlantic relations - a specious expression since our capitals ' relations with the United States differ greatly - does not reassure us .
In reality , this expression does a bad job of disguising a relationship of subordination - subordination that I feel is increasing .
In every area , we are giving way .
Whether it is the transmission of personal data for various motives ; whether it is these surprising - and shameful for the whole of Europe - relinquishments of sovereignty that are the secret CIA prisons and other , all too quickly forgotten , affairs of this kind ; whether it is our willingness to accept the very term ' international community ' , which means little other than the imperial power and its accomplices ; or whether it is the general position - about which , I might add , too little is known - occupied by the US Embassy in the central bodies of the Union , these relations do a poor job of disguising different interests , different principles and different views of the world .
In relation to Washington , I call on the Member States to do as France is attempting to do - admittedly , with mixed results - and show a little more dignity and independent spirit for the good of Europe as a whole .



( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I speak today on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs in particular , and on the subject of the financial markets , in which we Europeans have already , and for a very long time , been caught up in an international , and trans-Atlantic , network of relationships , and so I will also be speaking , as one who has practical experience of these matters , on a project of economic cooperation involving Europe and America , one that we welcome and support .




Particularly where lawmaking is concerned , we do have some reservations and some experience , which I might sum up by mentioning Basel II and AFAS , and I would like to address my remarks to the Council in particular , for I can tell Mr Gloser that we must take care , in dealing with this , that this House 's prerogatives and Europe 's rights are treated as equal with those of the Americans when it comes to laying down the rules , for what happened with Basel II was that the Americans ended up deciding not to implement the package .
We also have to consider the issue of regulation , of which regulation is applied , and where ; need I mention ' Sarbanes-Oxley ' ?

We have , on repeated occasions , raised with the Commission the consequences of the incursion of the ' newest stock exchange ' into Euronext .
Will the regulations be American ?
To date , the Commission has said that the capital market will decide the matter .
BAWAG gives us a contemporary example of how American regulation intervenes directly in the European market in order to detach it from European rules , and the Commission must make its opposition to this unambiguously clear and ask them what they think they are doing .


The same , my dear Mr Gloser , does of course apply to the Council , and I would remind you of SWIFT ; there , too , European regulation has been forced to make way for its American counterpart .
I urge the Commission to at last do something about hedge funds , where an American invasion is in progress , and discussion is going on at the national level .

It is a global issue ; it is being moved forward ; the Commission maintains deep silence on the subject , and the Commissioner responsible regularly says , ' that 's how the market is ' .
When international cooperative efforts merge together , it is particularly important that parliamentary control is not eaten away , and I am thinking of the Council in particular when I say that .
I am thinking of the comitology debates and the anti-democratic behaviour of the foreign ministries in Europe when I say that I would like to insist on this House being consulted in due time on future projects of this kind , rather than being presented with a fait accompli .
( FR ) Mr President , last week the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs sent a delegation - which proved to be most useful - to address visa waiver and data protection issues , not least regarding the negotiation of a PNR agreement and , of course , regarding the problems posed by SWIFT .
It is regrettable that we had to go to Washington in order to obtain answers to questions that we had asked our institutions , to no avail .
For the European Parliament , it is vital to distinguish the negotiations on the visa waiver scheme from those on the PNR .
States that have been excluded from the visa waiver scheme are being blackmailed .
No bilateral negotiations are acceptable on either of these issues .
Only agreements at EU level can be considered .
US citizens are protected by European data protection legislation , but US legislation excludes Europeans and does not permit them any means of redress .
Therefore , Europe must , in my view , propose the negotiation of a comprehensive agreement with the United States on the exchange and protection of personal data .
It is our duty to protect our citizens ' data .
( PL ) Mr President , today the EU Member States are wavering between two extremes : stand-offishness and distance towards the USA , or wholehearted support which overrides European interests .
Neither of these are the right way .
The answer to the eternal question - more competition or more collaboration with the USA - is clear .
In today 's world , informed and wise cooperation is the only option both for the USA and for the EU .
Let us begin with wholehearted and clear-cut cooperation in business and technology .
There is no need to repeat research that has already been done on the opposite side of the Atlantic - we are more advanced in renewable energies , for example , and the USA in clean coal technologies .
Let us completely open our markets to each other and to technology exchange .
Let us collaborate more broadly in the seventh European Framework Programme and the American National Science Foundation .
Let us not compete so stubbornly for oil and gas markets .
Let us agree to act together .
Diversification is important for both sides of the Atlantic .
( PL ) Mr President , relations between two important world powers such as the USA and the EU have always aroused a great deal of emotion not just because of their effect on the international order , but also because of their complexity and the range of issues they affect .
All the issues raised in the resolution should be considered important and should be debated widely at the coming summit .
The involvement of both partners in joint cooperation to strengthen the transatlantic market is a very positive aspect .
I also agree that these relations need a fresh impetus , and one way in which this can be done would be to update the new agenda .
We live in a time of a huge increase in international competition from countries such as China , India and Russia .
For this reason improving our trade and business cooperation by establishing a common methodology and by avoiding legal discrepancies is in the interests of the economic development both of the EU and of the USA .
I would also like to draw attention to what is currently a major sticking point in EU-USA relations , which is the missile defence shield .
We need to settle publicly whether the issue of the missile defence shield should not be subject to a joint political decision between NATO and the EU within the framework of a common foreign and security policy .
Whilst I agree that we must support the US in their fight against terrorism and in protecting world security , that does not mean we should allow new lines of division to appear in Europe .
And such divisions continue to operate within the European Union , for example in the visa regime .
Citizens of the new Member States and Greece are still discriminated against when it comes to travel to the USA .
I call for the principles of loyal cooperation and non-discrimination to be respected .
( PL ) Mr President , for several years now we have been demanding that the United States remove visa restrictions on the citizens of some Member States .
However , the lack of progress has aroused understandable frustration in the countries affected , of which Poland is one .
US visa policy should not create first and second-class citizens in Europe by allowing one group to travel to the USA without visas , while others are forced to patiently wait in line for visas .
Since last December , however , the USA has shown a willingness to make changes in the Visa Waiver Program .
We have heard this both from Capitol Hill and from the Departments of State and Homeland Security .
We must seize this opportunity and urge the USA at the coming summit to take real action and waive visa requirements for all EU citizens .
I appeal to the presidency and the Commission to do this .
At the same time we have to make sure that the exchange of personal data of people travelling to the USA does not violate the rules of data protection .
( DE ) Mr President , I want to pick up on the announcement by the President-in-Office of the Council that a demand will be made at the summit for the visa waiver programme to be extended to all citizens of the European Union .
That is a very important announcement , for if that happens , all the EU 's citizens will be able to experience the practical effects of European policy , and the division that exists among them in that regard , to which you referred , can be done away with .
Moving on to security policy , we Europeans can very definitely take pride in the way that the political approach that we raised as an option - with its combination of diplomacy , pressure and offers to Iran - has now become the policy agreed on by the European Union and the United States and it was this approach that brought the world community together , while others had driven them apart from one another .
If , though , there is a policy on which all agree , one question arises naturally in connection with the anti-missile programme to which many have already referred , for , if we are persuaded that this joint approach promises success , then the issue to be settled before any debate on the stationing of the missiles and on who is to be involved in it is why , if it is possible to get Iran , by peaceful means and negotiation , to renounce nuclear armaments , it is so necessary that a decision on the positioning of these rockets be taken right now , and , since I have not , so far , heard anything from the participants in this debate on security policy that settles the matter , I would be very happy if this question were to be put on the agenda .


Mr President , as Mrs Merkel has said , we need a new ambitious economic partnership between the US and the EU , but it must go hand in hand with a new ambitious environmental partnership .
There was transatlantic accord at the recent G8 Environment Ministers ' meeting , when they agreed with the peer-reviewed scientific report of 2 500 world scientists that human-induced climate change is accelerating and that climate change has consequences not only for the natural environment but also for economic growth and development , global poverty levels , international security and energy supplies .
It was unanimously agreed that climate change requires ' prompt action ' and ' swift and determined policy responses ' .
There was , however , less accord , regrettably but not surprisingly , on what those policy responses should be .
Paragraph 16 of our motion for a resolution notes the disappointment that the United States has refused to move on issues such as emissions targets and the creation of global carbon-trading schemes .
However , with the Stern report , recent elections in the US , the IPCC report and the increased demands from citizens on both sides , I feel that transatlantic dialogue and cooperation on climate change is increasing , and will and must lead to an agreement for the post-Kyoto 2012 period that includes the United States .
Mr President , I come from that part of Europe where America was , and still is , seen as a European power .
There is no global problem , from the Middle East and the Balkans to energy and climate change , which could not be solved if the European Union and the United States acted together .
This should be the main principle on which the transatlantic partnership is built .
The democratic concepts and rhetoric of the United States and the European Union often differ , but they are simply two dialects of the same language , and this language is rooted in the same basic values .
We must build on that , and during the summit must insist that our American friends return to the principle of ' together when possible , alone when necessary ' , and abandon the burgeoning principle of ' alone when possible , together when necessary ' .
One of the problems of the transatlantic dialogue is that we do not speak with one voice .
A parallel problem is that we do not recognise often enough the existence of differing schools of thought in America .
We have to encourage those who want to return to realism and discourage the continuation of neoconservative unilateralism .
If we are to succeed in this attempt , we must act to eliminate asymmetries and disparities in terms of research , technological improvement and security spending .
Finally , we must commend the German Presidency 's ambitious ideas on a transatlantic partnership .
It is time to work for a transatlantic free trade area that can open the way towards institutionalised transatlantic cooperation .
We need more partnership and less rivalry .
( EL ) Mr President , it is widely known that the European Union and the USA are key players in the global trade policy .
As a member of the Committee on International Trade , I would like to say that the understanding between the two partners , as well as a harmonious and functional relationship does not only lead to bilateral positive results .
It is conveyed to the general multilateral trading system , affecting the trade balance on a worldwide scale , not in terms of political power , but in terms of economic interdependence .
The more we strengthen the trade-political convergence , the more visible the effects of international economic and political cooperation will become .
Voices against the multilateral trading system under the WTO , only leave room for the fragmentation of the world trading system and leave no other option but a return to bilateralism .
Ladies and gentlemen , would the disciplines of the WTO tolerate a liberated major Euro Atlantic market , which currently takes up 40 % of world trade ?
What would the consequences be for other countries , especially the developing ones ?
( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , throughout their history , Czech firemen have come into conflict with two concepts in US foreign policy , namely the concept of the lighthouse and the crusader concept .
The Monroe Doctrine of 1823 and the actions of Roosevelt in 1904 , in other words the right to intervene and the actual interventions in the Caribbean - Haiti , Panama , the Dominican Republic , Cuba and Guatemala - are meaningful illustrations of a century-old doctrine that has now been resurrected .
Since the momentous NATO summit in Washington at the time of the bombing of Serbia , it has been clear that the USA can carry on without the Security Council and NATO .
The globalisation of military intervention has emerged , alongside economic globalisation .
The Bush Administration has thus gone back a hundred years .
This cannot continue .
The USA must instead be reminded that ' international law does not belong in the dustbin , torture is an instrument that does not yield credible results ; and democracy cannot and must not be exported through the use of bayonets . '
I say yes to transatlantic relations , but on a level playing field , without the kind of servile behaviour typically shown by some of the new Member States .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in Italy today we are celebrating National Liberation Day , the end of dictatorship and of the war .
We could not remember 25 April 1945 , however , if thousands and thousands of young Americans had not also laid down their lives .
After Nazism , Europe would not have been able to defeat communism either , without the commitment of the United States .
When we talk about transatlantic relations , we must not forget the country that fought for our freedom because it shares the fundamental values of our western society .
That is why our relations with the most important democracy in the world should be a key element in Europe 's policies , from security and the fight against terrorism to the fight against drug trafficking , and from the search for energy security to the issue of climate change .
In this context , Europe should support the Merkel proposal to create a transatlantic free trade area .
I am also convinced that the future creation of a European army must not come into conflict with NATO , which is a useful tool for the United Nations and for the security of us all .
Just as Europe needs the United States , however , the United States cannot do without a strong Europe that is capable of being a loyal , credible and reliable interlocutor as well as an essential protagonist in upholding the shared values on which our democracies and that of the United States are based .
Mr President , Commissioner , honourable Members , although I would like , in view of the lateness of the hour , to keep my remarks very brief , I would like to express my gratitude to you for this lively and frank debate .
One essential point that has emerged from it is that it is better to talk with one another than about one another .
It is evident from the way in which contact is maintained between Members of this House and Members of the US Congress that talking with one another is the only way to learn from one another and to better understand one another .
Relations across the Atlantic were important in the past and will be important in the future , particularly in view of the challenges that we in the European Union find ourselves facing together , in the shape of issues relating to energy and climate change , but also , for example , the fight against international terrorism .
Our relations with other major economic actors show that we can do all these things only together and not in opposition to one another .
Earlier on , Mrs Mann said that neither open enthusiasm nor frustration are of any use in this , and the pragmatism to which you have referred is the right way to go about things , because pragmatism is vital in any ongoing dialogue with the United States .
A number of points of criticism have been made , not only of security issues of interest to the United States , but also matters of interest to the European Union , for example data protection standards , passenger data and the issue of SWIFT ; these issues are being addressed openly rather than being evaded , and the Commission and the Presidency have already made it clear that all of them will be raised with the Americans .

I would like to highlight once more the waiver of visas .
Within the European Union , there must be no differences of treatment when it comes to deciding who will be able to travel to America without a visa ; that opportunity must be open to the citizens of all the Member States of the European Union , for it is with the European Union that America has to deal .
Perhaps I might be permitted to discuss some other critical comments .
I believe that the European Union has , in certain international conflicts , managed to abandon unilateralism and move towards a form of multilateralism , and it is in this way that the European Union has succeeded in involving America in its initiatives with respect to Iran , something that also involved consultation and partnership with China and Russia .
Important steps have been taken in the same way .
I know that Members of your House can never be satisfied with what has been achieved to date as regards the Middle East , but , in the aftermath of the conflict between Lebanon and Israel , there was much enthusiastic advocacy of the re-mobilisation of the Middle East Quartet , and addressing these issues in tandem with America makes an important contribution .
I hope that this joint summit involving both the European Union and United States will lead to the establishment of a sustainable basis for the future discussion of critical issues .
An alliance or a relationship is not to be regarded as impaired merely because there are disputes within it .
Mr President , honourable Members , this debate did of course go into some depth , and I will take the liberty of speaking a little longer than usual .
A very large number of interesting lines of argument have emerged , and I think it would be good to answer them properly .
I welcome your House 's view that we should work together with the United States in order to find multilateral solutions to the challenges we have to face together , and I endorse it unreservedly .
I would like to assure you that we are working very hard to ensure that the statement emerging from the EU / United States summit expresses in abundantly clear terms our shared determination to strengthen the hand of the United Nations and to equip it with the tools it needs to perform its tasks .
At the EU / USA summit , we will continue to urge the USA to have recourse , as a matter of preferential choice , to the United Nations in resolving crises such as those in Iran , in the Sudan and in Afghanistan and , of course , to follow the Quartet 's approach in the peace process in the Middle East .
Yet another example is climate change , in contending with which the multilateral approach is the only way of acting effectively .
At the summit , we will be endeavouring to secure American support for the inception of negotiations on a global framework in the course of the talks called for by the United Nations in Bali ( Indonesia ) in December .
The Commission has repeatedly supported the efforts of the individual Council Presidencies to make it clear to the United States our obligation to unconditionally endorse the application of international law to humanitarian matters and to human rights issues .
I would remind your House that it was the EU , at the 2006 Summit , that prompted President Bush 's statement to the effect that he wanted to see Guantanamo closed down and that the inmates remaining there would have to be either brought before a court or set at liberty .
The concerns to which you have given voice were among the main reasons for the initiation of the EU troika 's dialogue with the US State Department 's legal advisor .
I also welcome the idea of enhanced dialogue between Members of your House and Members of the United States Congress .
Dialogue between parliamentarians on both sides is an important pillar in the relationship between the EU and the United States .
The Commission has been unstinting in its endeavours towards securing the closer involvement of the legislative institutions in trans-Atlantic relations , and it was the Commission , in particular , that set in motion the trans-Atlantic dialogue between them .
Members of these institutions would be able to put themselves in an even stronger position if they were to hold the annual Top Level Domains meeting immediately before the EU / USA summit , as is the practice with the trans-Atlantic economic dialogue .
As it always does , the Commission has , this year , endeavoured to move our American hosts to involve the legislative bodies in the events on the margins of the summit ; as far as I am aware , the Americans ' current plan is to invite the TLD representatives to a briefing of senior officials from the European Union and the United States on the afternoon following the summit .
Our aim is that , under the new policy agreement on the promotion of bilateral economic relations , a political figure from each side should be appointed to move the EU / USA summit process forward , and we have suggested to the United States that these persons , or contacts as they are termed , should be advised by a small informal group composed of people chosen from legislative bodies , business associations and consumers ' groups .
Our shared objectives in terms of the development and use of environmentally-friendly energies cover , in the medium term , and will be restricted solely to the promotion of , largely emission-free coal use , the development and use of renewable energy sources - biofuels in particular - and the promotion of energy efficiency , in every one of which areas we will endeavour to set qualifiable targets for both the European Union and the United States .
The EU will be working on the basis of the sound policy platform agreed at the meeting of the European Council on 9 May .



Turning to the visa issue , I have to emphasise that the US administration 's undertaking to reform the system is something to be welcomed , although , as it would be premature , at the present time , to adopt a position on the reform of the USA 's visa programme , we must wait to see what is in the final document , which the US Congress might well adopt even before the summer , and only when it has done so will the Commission be in a position to judge whether the new programme represents an advance in terms of greater reciprocity between the EU and the United States .
Our position , which has been clear from the very outset , is that all EU citizens should be able to enter the United States without a visa , in the same way as US citizens are allowed to enter the EU without one .
We have repeatedly raised these issues at all levels with the United States and have demanded that the visa waiver scheme be extended to all EU Member States , thus ensuring equal treatment for all the EU 's citizens .
Negotiations on airline passenger data began in Washington on 26 February , and we expect to be able to conclude them by the end of July , that is to say by the time the current agreement on PNR data is due to expire .
We had further constructive talks with the United States last week , about which Vice-President Frattini may be able to give you more detailed information .
We also aim to secure similar security measures for SWIFT in order to ensure that European citizens ' data is suitably protected in the United States , and are continuing to work with the USA on agreeing for the long term a series of general data protection principles .
Dialogue between experts on both sides has so far been fruitful , but we have not yet got far enough to be able to negotiate a formal agreement .
Reference has also been made to the missile shield issue .
I endorse what Mr Solana told your House on 29 March on this subject , namely that the EU is not a defence alliance and that , in accordance with the treaties , sovereignty in this area remains with the Member States , although it has to be said that that does not mean that the EU is wholly unaffected by this matter ; in view of the fact that the EU possesses a common foreign and security policy and a security and defence policy and that matters of common interest , among them the relations between the EU and Russia , might be affected , it strikes me as important that the opportunity be found for a debate on this subject at EU level .
The BAWAG case is an interesting one , but the Commission does not as yet have any information to the effect that BAWAG has actually taken such action ; had it taken a decision to do so , the Commission would have had to have been informed of it , since this sort of extraterritoriality is not acceptable under our laws .
The facts of the case are as yet unclear , but European Union regulations do not , generally speaking , permit such measures or an extraterritoriality of that kind .
' Economic contacts ' must not be taken to mean mere deregulation , but rather the arrangement of matters of common concern in such a way that real use can be made of economic potential on both sides of the Atlantic .
I am quite certain - and this has also been reflected in this debate - that relations between the United States and the European Union , and the matters of common interest that they share , are of great importance and that there are no other relations of greater significance to Europe ; there is practically no major issue in which Europe and the United States do not have a common interest and involvement , and so - as was also clearly articulated - we should address the Americans as equals and engage them in a truly rational dialogue , but must not , in so doing , lose sight of our common European values .

Commissioner , thank you for your efforts to shorten what was evidently a much longer speech .
I have received seven motions for resolution tabled in accordance with Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place later today .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( PT ) One of the notable events of the start of the German Presidency of the EU was Mrs Merkel 's trip to the USA , the purpose of which was to renew Germany 's proposal for a strategic partnership between the EU , Germany and the USA aimed at ' shared world leadership ' , this at a time when the Bush Administration is in considerable trouble and looking increasingly isolated .
In the context of the rivalry / conciliation between the major European capitalist powers - with Germany at the helm - and the USA , the current state of affairs can be characterised as an attempt to relaunch what are termed transatlantic relations .
The EU-USA summit set to take place on 30 April is the result of attempts to overcome differences , to put disagreements to one side and to realign the political , economic and military agendas of the two sides of the North Atlantic .
One of the priorities on the agenda for debate singled out by Mrs Merkel is the strengthening of what is referred to as the ' New Transatlantic Economic Partnership ' with the aim of setting up a ' barrier-free transatlantic market ' in the years ahead .
These endeavours - led by Mrs Merkel and her right-wing / social democrat coalition - come at a time when the USA is strengthening its military roots in Europe with the creation of new military bases and with its plans to install anti-missile systems , which represent fresh threats to peace .
Imperialist machinations ...
Progress report on Croatia ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Swoboda , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on Croatia 's 2006 progress report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by thanking my fellow-Members , especially those on the Committee for Foreign Affairs , for their really very good and fruitful cooperation .
I would also like to thank all the Croatian representatives , who have given a very great deal of help in preparing their country 's way as it draws nearer to the European Union - its ambassador to the EU , the principal negotiator , its foreign minister , and , above all , the country 's Prime Minister , Mr Sanader , who did a great deal in the last few years of his term of office to move the negotiations forward , but I also want to thank the former Prime Minister Mr Račan , who is a personal friend of mine , and , regrettably , very seriously ill .
It was he who started to do what had to be done to prepare the way for Croatia to move closer to the European Union .
All these people are not merely Croatian figures , but European ones , for they are helping to make it possible for the whole region of South-Eastern Europe to enter the European Union once the relevant criteria have been met .
There are those who have asked me whether I am not perhaps too friendly to Croatia .
I do indeed have very strong emotional ties to the country , but I can also see the things about it that are worthy of criticism and still have to be sorted out , and so I am against the idea that some of the points of criticism made in this report should simply be deleted .
Let us be honest with Croatia .
Covering things up will not help them , but drawing attention to the outstanding issues will .
Although a great deal has already been got underway , some reforms have still not yet been implemented , and I am thinking here not only of those needed in the administration of justice , but also of economic reforms .
I hope that these reforms will make progress despite the elections that are being held today , and I rejoice in the fact that Croatia is cooperating with the International Criminal Tribunal in The Hague .
Achieving that was a major step forward , and , while I wish its neighbour Serbia would do likewise , this work must nonetheless be proceeded with in the immediate future .
Another matter that remains to be completed is the return of refugees .
When you learn that some villages are still without water or electricity , you understand why returning home is not exactly an attractive prospect for refugees , and so there is plenty left to do on this front .
There are still problems with borders .
It is not surprising that borders were not laid down with 100 % certainty following the collapse of Yugoslavia , and the best way of solving these problems lies in a bilateral approach , which , in other words , means that Croatia would arrive at different solutions with each of its neighbours , but , if things cannot be sorted out in that way with one country or another , third parties should be brought in who are capable of mediating , adjudicating , and resolving issues in a European manner - not as if there were principles at stake , but treating the issues in practical , economic and political terms .
In my report , I made the quite deliberate point that Croatia should pull out all the stops in order to be able to conclude negotiations by 2008 , so that this House can give its agreement in principle before the European Parliamentary elections in June 2009 , and I do not doubt that the question as to whether we will be able to do that out of real conviction is one that it is primarily for Croatia to answer .
Croatian politicians on both the government and opposition sides know that it is , nowadays , becoming more and more difficult to get agreement to enlargement , to new Member States , since a certain amount of ' enlargement fatigue ' has of course set in , but we have to be honest and upright about this , for we said , in the course of the Thessaloniki process , that , if countries have complied with the Copenhagen criteria and are cooperating with the International Criminal Tribunal , they , too , are entitled to membership .
Croatia 's membership could send the right signal to the other countries ; not a message to the effect that they could become members automatically or that it would be easier for them to do so , but they would be able to see that it is possible for a country to join the European Union if it does its homework .

None of us can have an interest in creating a black hole in this region .
We are firmly committed to the idea that the European Union , too , must do its homework and set in motion the necessary institutional reforms in order to complete the constitutional process , and I can do no other than repeat what Mr Schulz told Chancellor Merkel in his last speech in Brussels , namely that the Council and the Commission must do everything in their power to get this process completed contemporaneously with , and in parallel with , the negotiations with Croatia , so that Croatia will be enabled to become a Member State of the European Union rather than finding the door slammed in its face .
We must not treat the deepening of the European Union , the reform of its institutions , as something that can be dispensed with ; the two should go together , so that we will then be able to welcome Croatia as a new Member State of a strengthened European Union .
( Applause )


Mr President , Commissioner , honourable Members , speaking on behalf of the German Presidency of the Council , I want to thank you and particularly Mr Swoboda for the balanced draft of a resolution for your House on the Commission 's latest progress report on Croatia , and to say that I do think that - as you have said in your remarks - the draft does indeed separate darkness and light just as clearly as does the Commission 's progress report itself , while also venturing to take up an explicit political position , particularly on the state of play as regards compliance with the political Copenhagen Criteria , and that is to be welcomed .


Your House is doing important work in the course of the enlargement process ; its active and critical monitoring is making a definite contribution to the transparency of the process , and also enabling it to find more solid support at the level of the European people .
We know that it voices criticism from time to time , of such things as the speed of enlargement , but it is important that the process be monitored by the European Parliament .

I am glad to note that your House 's views and those of the Council coincide to such a large degree in this area , for that remains enormously important for the continuation of the enlargement process in line with the conclusions of the European Council , and , as you mentioned , the Joint Parliamentary Committee of the European Parliament and the Croatian Sabor plays a pre-eminent role in this , as another means whereby ideas can be transported through dialogue .

Croatia is continuing to make good progress on its way into the EU , and the accession negotiations are moving ahead , but it goes without saying that progress in the talks will continue to be dependent on how quickly Croatia implements the requirements that emerge from the screening process and the negotiations .
The Commission 's 8 November 2006 progress report makes clear that , all this progress notwithstanding , Croatia still has a lot of work ahead of it , and needs to accelerate its efforts in certain areas .
Mr Swoboda has mentioned the fact that this is particularly the case in the reform of the justice system and of public administration , the fight against corruption and a massive effort at economic reform .
I hope you will not mind if I discuss individual areas in brief .
We can see that , while a certain amount of progress has been achieved in justice reform , a number of problems remain to be overcome .
This is where it needs to be stressed that the creation of an independent , non-partisan , reliable , transparent and effective justice system is of paramount importance , and it is also a precondition for the reinforcement of the rule of law and for the proper application of the acquis communautaire .
Progress in this area is important if Croatia 's readiness for eventual EU membership is to be assessed .
The same is true of corruption , which continues to be a serious problem ; here , too , we are insisting on greater effort to prevent , uncover , and effectively combat corruption .
Successful application of the acquis is largely dependent on professional , accountable , transparent and independent public administration , something that is also of the utmost importance to the public and , ultimately , to the investors that the country needs , and that much has already been learned from the experience of previous accessions .

It is for that reason that Croatia should press on with its efforts at good neighbourly relationships , and for that reason , too , that we strongly urge it to work harder at finding definitive solutions to all the as yet unresolved bilateral issues with its neighbouring countries , particularly those to do with borders , solutions that must be acceptable to both sides .

As for the economic criteria , we are glad to see that a general consensus on the essential elements of economic policy has been achieved , and that there is evidence of positive indicators such as low inflation , stable exchange rates , and more rapid growth .

Croatia will probably be able to cope in the medium term with the pressure of competition and market forces in the EU , but that will be dependent on it implementing its reform programmes in a determined manner and thereby dealing with its remaining weak points , and it is with this in mind that we have called on Croatia to speed up its structural reforms , including the restructuring of enterprises .
Finally , we note with satisfaction that Croatia has become better able to implement the acquis .
While it has made progress in most areas , further determined efforts are indispensable in the approximation of legislation and administrative capacity , and there are many areas in which even the short-term objectives of the accession partnership have not yet been achieved .
We are , then , very glad that Croatia recently adopted a national programme for its own integration into the European Union , which constitutes an updated response by it to the recommendations made under the accession partnership , and we look forward to the programme 's implementation with high expectations .

Let me reiterate , by way of conclusion , my warm gratitude for your cooperation on matters relating to enlargement , for your House 's calm attitude consistently helps to keep enlargement policy rational , and I look forward to our continued cooperation in future on the various projects that we still have to sort out together .


Member of the Commission .
( FR ) Mr President , the Commission welcomes Mr Swoboda 's report on Croatia .
It is a balanced report , which addresses the main challenges that Croatia will face on the road to membership of the European Union , not least in the political sphere .
I am certain that the adoption by the European Parliament of a resolution on this report will contribute a great deal to the process of enlargement to include Croatia .
The accession negotiations with Croatia have got off to a good start .
The screening process was successfully concluded in October 2006 .
It gave an overall insight into Croatia 's current degree of alignment with the acquis communautaire , as well as into issues requiring further efforts .
The rate at which Croatia will progress on the road to accession will largely depend on its ability to fulfil all of the necessary criteria .
This is not an easy task .
Croatia must bring its legislation into line with the countless EU regulations and ensure that the latter are implemented and complied with .
It must also continue with its efforts to fulfil the political and economic criteria .
Six out of thirty-three chapters of the negotiations have so far been opened .
For two of them , negotiations have been temporarily suspended .
The objectives have been defined for nine chapters , and they will have to be achieved before negotiations are opened in sectors such as competition policy , public procurement and free movement of capital .
The European Union and Croatia are preparing their negotiating positions in many other chapters .
We hope to be able to open negotiations on other chapters during the German Presidency .
Generally speaking , Croatia has solid foundations on which to make further progress .
There is work to be done , however , not least regarding the political and economic criteria , where difficulties remain .
We believe , in particular , that there is an urgent need for Croatia to continue with its efforts and to produce concrete results where judicial system reform , public administration and the fight against corruption are concerned .
Croatia has begun to implement its judicial reform strategy , and we are starting to see the initial results .
That is a positive point .
However , the Croatian judicial system has serious shortcomings , and many improvements should still be made to it , as Mr Swoboda rightly observes in his report .
There is a large judicial backlog .
The procedures are far too slow , and we need to ensure that court decisions are executed properly and that judges become more independent and more professional .
The government must also present its plan to rationalise the judicial system .
Improvements must also be made to the way in which trials for war crimes are held .
Corruption remains a worrying problem .
Some measures have been taken as part of the anti-corruption programme , but they are only just starting to be implemented .
The implementation of the entire programme is necessary , as is a strong political will to step up efforts .
The many weaknesses that remain in the area of public administration do not help make the fight against corruption any easier .
Croatia urgently needs to speed up the reform process in this area .
Croatia is headed in the right direction where minority rights are concerned .
However , it must still meet several specific challenges in the future , concerning the repatriation of refugees .
Some problems have still not been resolved , including the allocation of housing to refugees who had occupancy and rental rights before leaving Croatia .
The report rightly highlights Croatia 's positive influence in the region , not least in its role as chairman of the South-East European Cooperation Process .
It does , however , stress the need to continue to encourage Croatia in its efforts to achieve good relations with its neighbours , not least by stepping up the work aimed at resolving outstanding bilateral issues , particularly those relating to the delimitation of borders .
With regard to the economic criteria , satisfactory progress has been made overall .
Indeed , Croatia can be considered as having a market economy that works .
It is in its interests , however , that it continue to move in the direction of an open and competitive economy , so that it can handle , in due course , the competitive pressures of the European Union .
It must proceed further with the economic reforms and take some difficult decisions , not least in relation to industrial restructuring , particularly in the steel and shipbuilding sectors .
Whether or not progress is made in the negotiations depends on Croatia .
Only the future will tell when Croatia will be ready for accession .
The Commission position is not to set a target date for accession before the accession negotiations are at the stage of being concluded .
Croatia still has a great deal left to do , and the progress of the negotiations will depend on its ability to meet the demands of accession .
The Commission will continue to do all it can to help Croatia to achieve this objective .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , if there were any justice in history , the Croats - a European people - would have been among the founders of the European Union , but Communism and the union of the South Slavs prevented it .
If history were in any way just , Croatia would have acceded to the European Union at least three years ago , together with Hungary , Slovenia , the Czech republic and other countries with which it shared a history and a culture and with which it had always been united , but this was prevented on the grounds that a third of it had , for years , been occupied by a neighbouring state .
Today , at last , Croatia is on track to join the European Union , and we should play our part in making history just by enabling it to accede before this decade is out , for it is the only European country that can do that - and should be allowed to .
That does not mean that we are blind to the things about it that are worthy of criticism .
I want to express my thanks for the good cooperation with Mr Swoboda , and these points of criticism need to be addressed .
Commissioner , we must do everything in our power to prevent artificial barriers being put in Croatia 's path - barriers of a kind with which other candidates for accession have not had to contend .
We must be clear in our own minds that Croatia must not be made the butt for the frustration with enlargement that has arisen since the last time we tried it .
Croatia cannot be lumped in with the rest of South-Eastern Europe , or with Turkey either .
There is no doubt that it , despite certain defects , has , in many respects , achieved greater progress in its preparations for accession than have certain Member States , and that is why we have to put our own house in order and put the European Union in a position to be able to welcome Croatia without delay .
I would like to make it plain that it is not a matter of doubt that Croatia - in view of its four and a half million inhabitants and the stage of preparations for accession that it has reached - is not going to make excessive demands on the European Union 's integration capacity , but will , on the contrary , be a major force for stability in a region beset by problems and will make the European Union stronger .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , first of all , I should like to thank my dear colleague and friend Mr Swoboda for the work he has done as rapporteur , and to congratulate him on his report , which shows that the rapporteur is closely following the developments in Croatia , a candidate country that has made huge progress , and has taken important steps towards the EU , which the rapporteur is right to emphasise in this report .
At the same time , though , the rapporteur is honest and open as to what remains to be done , and about the reforms which we expect the Croatian Government to implement in the short term .
My group holds fast to the European prospect of the countries of the Western Balkans and , as I said before , backs Croatia 's candidature emphatically and unanimously .
Accordingly , there are no doubts in my group as to the European Council 's pledges and the question whether Croatia can become an EU Member .
It should be noted , though , that we take as our guiding principle the accession criteria and the renewed enlargement strategy , on which we reached broad consensus in this House last December and which is also supported by the Commission and the Council .
This does not in any way mean that the criteria that apply to Croatia are different from previous candidates .
It does mean , though , that we expect the Croatian Government to carry on working on the foundations that were largely put in place by the previous government led by Prime Minister Racan .
This leaves us one last , joint challenge : the synchronisation of the road maps for completing negotiations with Croatia on the one hand and those for the necessary institutional reforms within the EU on the other .
We cannot force either process , but since we aim to have a solution in place by mid-2009 where the constitutional future is concerned , along with my group , I do not see any obstacles that cannot be overcome to complete Croatia 's accession process without unnecessary delays .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( HU ) Croatia deserves recognition for the results achieved in the past few years .
Internal reforms have begun , the harmonisation of laws is progressing well , and there is full cooperation with the ICTY .
But Croatia still has a great deal of work to do before it can become a member .
Administrative reforms have only just begun , and while there have been important steps toward judicial reform , more are needed .
The fight against corruption has so far yielded few results , the return of the refugees needs stronger support and there is still much to do in terms of environmental protection .
So the Croatian Government has its hands full .
Contrary to previous expectations on both sides , negotiations are running behind schedule , and this is not only Croatia 's fault .
We also have to do more to keep on schedule and prepare for the eventual admission of Croatia to the EU institutions .
We attach great importance to Croatia 's ability to solve pending questions with its neighbours - including border disputes - as soon as possible .
Constructive thinking and flexibility are needed for this , not only on the part of Croatia but of course on the part of its partners as well .
If these results cannot be achieved , the intervention of a third party seems appropriate .
For the moment all political parties are in agreement regarding EU membership , but public opinion is , for the most part , undecided .
The government must do more to win over public opinion .
Elections are approaching in Croatia and there is a long electoral battle going on .
It has already started , and for that very reason we have to take care to remain neutral in sensitive internal political matters .
We must not take the side of any one camp , but instead send a message to the whole of Croatia .
In my opinion , this message has to be a positive one .
I congratulate Mr Hannes Swoboda , because his well-balanced report points to both advantages and problems , encouraging Croatia to continue its efforts .

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I am most grateful to Mr Swoboda for his report , which sets out both the areas in which Croatia falls short and the progress it has made in drawing closer to the EU .
We must be most careful in calling by name the points of criticism relating to compliance with the accession criteria and reviewing them - not only where the reform of administration and business is concerned , together with the fight against corruption and the reform of the justice system , but also in every area relating to the making and the enforcement of law .
Let me give some examples of what I am talking about .
Becoming a democracy also involves engagement with the past , and that is why we have submitted an amendment relating to the thorough and non-partisan examination of the crimes against humanity committed in the course of hostilities , many of which have gone unpunished .
It is reported that various non-governmental organisations and other activists have been monitored and intimidated .
A living civil society and active participation by NGOs in political life are indispensable to any pluralistic and democratic society and must be firmly entrenched before accession can go ahead .
Sexual minorities are still subjected to public obloquy , and investigation of crimes against them is inadequate .
I would nevertheless like to make it clear that Croatia is on the right road to accede to the EU within the near future , since it is facing up to the political , environmental and economic challenges presented by the Copenhagen criteria , and , while we are encouraging it to do what it has to do without delay , and to establish the rule of law , democracy and human rights , we should also be conscientious and determined in carrying out our own reforms , so that we may both achieve our objectives before 2009 .
( HU ) As chairman of the EU-Croatia Joint Parliamentary Committee , I wish to point out that Croatia is considered a model to be followed by all neighbouring western Balkan states that have also set their eyes on joining the EU .
Therefore it is the duty of the European Parliament to support by all available means its ally , which is committed to European values , and to send a clear , positive message encouraging implementation of the necessary reforms .
Members of the joint parliamentary delegation who were present at the last meeting in March could see for themselves how seriously the government of Croatia is committed to preparing for accession .
Their conclusion was that in all areas there were significant advances towards meeting the political , legal and economic criteria for membership .
The dynamics of the negotiations are satisfactory and the delegation supported Croatia 's ambitious aim to have their citizens take part in the next European elections in 2009 .
It is obvious that the government is taking effective measures to abolish corruption , to reform its administrative and judicial structures , and that it can show considerable results regarding the return of refugees , the protection of the rights of minorities and in the field of regional cooperation .
Croatia 's accession has already been delayed too long .
Previously , citing a lack of cooperation with The Hague tribunal , and now on grounds of the EU 's limited integration capacity - as well as of the absence of the legal and treaty foundations - Croatia is left in uncertainty .
As a consequence , the European Union 's popularity is very low among its people .
I can only approve of the new communication strategy undertaken by the Croatian Government together with the opposition , of informing people of the expected advantages of accession .
I recommend setting up a consistent long-term information action plan by the EU , with the aim of reducing the scepticism and mistrust toward the EU among the 4.5 million Croatian citizens .
Coming back to the report of Mr Swoboda , I congratulate the rapporteur and will personally support it .
I hope the amendments proposed by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats will also be approved .
Good luck with your delegation .
( SL ) First of all , I would like to extend my sincere congratulations to my fellow Member , rapporteur Swoboda .

In its documents to date the European Parliament has continuously urged Croatia to settle unresolved border issues with neighbouring countries through bilateral agreements .
Despite these efforts , nothing has changed .
Presumably , nothing has changed because Croatian politicians do not want to , or do not know how to , take responsibility for settling such unresolved border issues through bilateral agreements , despite the fact that some of Croatia 's neighbours , including Slovenia , have done everything in their power to bring about the conclusion of such agreements .
For this reason it is good and right that rapporteur Swoboda should find a consensus by mentioning potential third-party mediation and that this should concern all border issues and all the countries which share borders with Croatia and which , for the most part , have not settled their border issues with Croatia .
It is also right that we should welcome the progress Croatia has made and that we should urge the European Union to do its utmost to provide a legal basis for Croatia 's accession to the European Union .
( SL ) Croatia deserves to be congratulated on all the things referred to in this report , because it has made clear progress in a wide range of areas .
However , Zagreb must now reaffirm its determination to implement its obligations concerning the reform of the judiciary , the introduction of a non-discriminatory market economy , the protection of ethnic minorities and the return of refugees and displaced persons .
Our relations with neighbouring Croatia are very well developed , which is why I look forward to the moment when our colleagues from Zagreb will be able to join us in this Chamber as observers .
However , in the spirit of consolidating bilateral relations , I support the proposal for Amendment 23 tabled by Alfonso Andria , a fellow member of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe .
Italy and Slovenia were indeed disturbed by the decision of the Croatian Parliament last December to activate Croatia 's Ecological and Fisheries Protection Zone .
This unilateral provocation has undoubtedly been detrimental to Croatia 's credibility and has undermined what are otherwise good relations in the region .
Mr Andria 's proposed amendment is important because it underlines the significance of the Trilateral Agreement reached by Italy , Croatia and Slovenia in Brussels on 4 June 2004 .
I also welcome Mr Swoboda 's positive response to the initiative that the proposal for Amendment 24 be supplemented with an oral proposed amendment .
In doing so , he has produced a balanced report , given the fact that Croatia also has unresolved border issues with Bosnia , Montenegro and Serbia .
Let us not forget that Bosnia , Montenegro and Serbia deserve a European future , too .
( SL ) First of all , I would like to compliment rapporteur Hannes Swoboda and shadow rapporteur Bernd Posselt for the sterling work they have carried out , which has provided the foundations for widespread support for this report .
I am happy to note that the report begins by acknowledging Croatia 's good progress in many fields .
At the same time , the report also presents a realistic and detailed picture of the demanding tasks which Croatia , as a candidate country , yet has to implement on its road to accession .
Amongst these tasks the report mentions Croatia 's unresolved issues with its neighbouring countries .
I anticipate that Croatia will , in the spirit of this report , implement all its commitments arising from the agreements it has concluded to date with Slovenia and with other neighbouring countries .
I also anticipate that Croatia will strive together with these countries to settle the bilateral issues and to forge permanent good neighbourly relations , particularly amongst the inhabitants of the border regions .
Good neighbourly relations should be established through common rather than unilateral action .
I welcome the ambition that , subject to these commitments being implemented , the negotiation process should be concluded in time for the European Parliament to give its assent before the next EU parliamentary election .
The project of European integration must continue .
It is right that we should be aware of how important every step taken by Croatia and the countries of South-Eastern Europe is towards implementing European values , principles and the common rules of the game and how much Europe should welcome this .
I welcome the emphasis placed in the report on the importance of Croatia 's advancement to all other countries whose prospects of full accession to the European Union were unlocked by the decisions made in Thessaloniki .
It is also right that we should be aware of the fact that we are adopting a report on the progress made by one of the countries that was plagued by war in the 1990s .
Certain traces of war can only be expunged through a genuine commitment to the spirit of Europe , which also includes efforts towards reconciliation .
Thus , in this regard , Croatia 's achievements are also important for progress in the wider region .
We know that history is not always our ally .
Nonetheless , with regard to some of the supplements proposed , I have to say that I am convinced that this report cannot impose on Croatia , as a democratic country and a country that has condemned all types of totalitarianism , a task which Western democracies have not previously imposed on any other countries .
( Applause )
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I agree with Mr Swoboda 's report in its entirety .

The about-turn on collaboration with the court in The Hague was certainly significant , but the government and all the political parties in Croatia need to work harder on public opinion there in order to help close the chapter of nationalist claims once and for all .
We are in favour of Croatia 's future accession , because we want this country to consolidate its membership of Europe and to share its values and policies in order to contribute to the stabilisation of the western Balkans .
This is something that Italy considers fundamentally important .
In that respect , there is no point in reopening painful wounds .
Instead , as the report points out , we want to encourage an all-embracing process of truth and reconciliation involving all the interested parties , both in Croatia and in the rest of the Balkans .
Legitimate claims concerning minorities in Croatia , including the Italian minority , need to be addressed fully in compliance with international law and all our Community legislation , as indeed the current negotiations require .
Their complete integration at all levels of the country 's life is still a fundamental objective .
We shall follow the negotiations not least because of that .

( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I shall be extremely brief and say this : in the negotiations between the Commission and Croatia , Croatia must not be held hostage either by the incidents that took place during the negotiations with Turkey or by any inability on the part of the European Union sufficiently to reform its institutions before the accession of that country .
My group supports Croatia and hopes that it can join the Union as soon as the negotiations have been concluded .
My group hopes - I repeat - that these negotiations are conducted swiftly , which does not mean , incidentally , that they should lack firmness .
It is in Croatia 's interest to prepare itself as best it can to join the Union as soon as possible .

The House is grateful to Mr Gloser for the Council and to Mr Špidla for the Commission for renouncing their speaking time at the end of the debate .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - I would like to congratulate my colleague , Hannes Swoboda , for his report on Croatia 's progress on the way to EU membership .
As usual , I have three points :
Firstly , enlargement is the most effective foreign policy of the EU .
The incentive of EU-membership has helped EU neighbours develop their societies on the principles of respect of human rights , market economy , rule of law and effective administration .
Many of the former neighbours are now EU members .
Secondly , the report reminds us that Nice does not provide an adequate basis for enlargement .
We have to put our house in order .
The responsibility lies with the Union and not with the candidates .
The Constitutional Treaty , whatever name it will be given , provides the necessary remedy .
Thirdly , remembering recent history I wholeheartedly hope that Croatia 's successes are the first steps for membership for the whole region of the Western Balkans .
This process is in the heart of EU , which itself started as a project of reconciliation .
Mr Swoboda 's report clearly states that Croatia has made considerable progress in terms of political and economic criteria .
Therefore , let us congratulate Croatia .
Mandate of a Member
Before the vote , I have a request from Mr Watson to take the floor to table a procedural motion .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I rise because a member of my group , Mr Geremek , is to have his mandate as a Member of the European Parliament revoked by his own government with effect from 19 April .
The powers under which the Polish Government is revoking Mr Geremek 's mandate are a ' lustration ' or monitoring law adopted just a couple of months ago which is currently under legal challenge in Poland 's constitutional court .
This law requires all journalists , academics and elected MPs to sign a declaration stating that they never collaborated with the Communist-era security services .
Mr Geremek has signed such declarations in the past .
His refusal to sign in this case is on moral rather than political grounds .
He rightly objects to the witch-hunt which the Polish Government seeks .
( Loud and sustained applause )
I would ask three things , Mr President .

I would ask first of all whether Mr Kaczyński , who met Mr Pöttering last week , raised this issue with him ; secondly , whether it is right and indeed possible for a Member of this House to be stripped of their democratically-elected mandate in this way ; and thirdly , whether you would give this House the assurance that Parliament will act to protect Mr Geremek 's right to exercise his democratically-elected mandate with all possible haste .
( Loud and sustained applause )
Mr Watson has , in my opinion , already broadly expressed a feeling that is shared by us all .


Chairman of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , further to what Mr Watson has just said , I want to say , on behalf of my group , and addressing Mr Geremek personally , that we - as you , Mr Geremek , will be aware - share but few of your political views , but there is one point on which you can count on the Socialist Group in this House , on its unconditional solidarity and - I do believe - on that of the House as a whole , and that is when it comes to fighting off a government that , while being within the European Union , seeks to persecute a man who fought as few others have done for Poland 's liberation and for its development as a democracy .
It is a disgrace that so great a country should be ruled by such a government .
( Sustained applause )
Mr Watson has said what needed to be said , and I expect the President of this House , tomorrow , to tell the Kaczyński Government that we expect the Polish Government to afford Mr Geremek the protection due to him as a Member of this House .
We will , in future , judge everything that has to do with Poland by its treatment of him , and I expect Mr Poettering , tomorrow , to make that as plain as I have .

( Applause )


Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , not only do we agree with Mr Geremek , but for years we have fought against Stalinism with Mr Geremek , and it is unthinkable that , today , ...
( Commotion )
... and that is why this Parliament has to be uncompromising .
( As the commotion did not stop , the Member addressed the President )
Can you tell these madmen to keep quiet ?
Ladies and gentlemen , Mr Cohn-Bendit has the floor , and your behaviour in this matter does little for Parliament 's reputation .
There is only one position that this Parliament can adopt : if a government is employing Stalinist or fascist methods , we must unhesitatingly protect our fellow Member from all the madmen in this House .
We stand united .
( Applause )
chairman of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have been at odds politically with Mr Geremek in the past and will be again in the future .
Despite that , I am only too happy to express to him my deep respect for the political courage that he has demonstrated and , on behalf of my group , I give him my full support .
( Applause )
The chairman of the Committee on Legal Affairs , Mr Gargani , has the floor .
( Protests )
Chairman of the Committee on Legal Affairs . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as Chairman of the Committee on Legal Affairs , I should like to reassure Parliament and all my fellow Members that as soon as this issue is examined - which I hope will be soon - ...
( interruption )
... as soon as the Bureau sends the committee the documentation on this issue , we shall duly examine all the documents , with the considerable sensitivity for Parliament 's autonomy that distinguishes the Legal Committee , and we shall once again ensure that this Parliament remains autonomous and that its Members , who represent Europe , can be protected in their autonomy and freedom .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like simply to say that every Member here present , irrespective of the party to which he or she belongs , enjoys parliamentary immunity .
We are a parliament and we abide by the rules !
For the time being , there has been no request , no legal analysis , as Mr Gargani has said .
Mr Geremek has our full support , and I can also confirm to him that he has the support of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats .
We abide by the rules of law in this House , rules that apply to all MEPs , including Mr Geremek !

( Applause )
The speeches that have been made may well clarify both the form and content of this matter .
Ladies and gentlemen , we have not received notification today of this decision of the Polish Government , which , I might add , is highly questionable .
Parliament 's role is to safeguard and protect the parliamentary duties exercised by one of its Members .
What I imagine will happen is that the Conference of Presidents will have to debate this issue and that the Committee on Legal Affairs , precisely in the terms stated by Mr Gargani , will be very keen to ensure that Parliament 's independence is respected , and I therefore consider this debate now closed .
( Protests )
The debate is closed .
The next item is the vote .
( Despite the President 's urgings , the protests continued )
1 .
Transmission of national accounts data ( vote )
- García-Margallo y Marfil report
( Some Members continued to protest and to request the floor )
2 .
Multilateral Agreement on the Establishment of a European Common Aviation Area ( vote )
- Lichtenberger report
( After the vote , the commotion grew louder )
Voting time
The next item is Voting time .
( For results and other details of the vote : see Minutes )
Mandate of a Member ( continuation )
Very well , since you do not wish to be quiet , I am going to give the floor to the group chairmen who have not yet spoken on this matter .

co-president of the UEN Group . - Mr President , on a point of order , I will not delay the proceedings for too long , but I wish to say that it was unfair of you not to call on the vice-chairman of the UEN Group , Mr Kamiński , who indicated that he wished to speak on the issue .
Whether you would have agreed or disagreed with the point he wished to make is irrelevant .
Other people were given the opportunity to speak and he should also have been given an opportunity to speak .
Some people in this House have a different opinion with regard to the interpretation put forward by the speakers before me and they should have been given an opportunity to have their views heard when other views were heard .
( Applause )
Mr Crowley , we could give the floor to any one of the 765 Members of this House to speak on this subject .
I have given the floor to the group chairmen , and you have spoken on behalf of your group .
Mr President , I believe that , as group chairman , I have just as many rights as the others .
Our fellow Member , Mr Cohn-Bendit , said that fascist and Stalinist intrigues should be condemned .
Well , I believe that the main difficulty in this matter is precisely that of knowing whether Mr Geremek has been a party to the Stalinist intrigues , to this most appalling form of totalitarianism , and , if so , to what extent .
I note that the protection of Members ' rights , which is no less important to us than it is to you , is , from your point of view , often flexible .
When Mr Le Pen fell from grace at the end of an iniquitous procedure - after an absurd campaign incident - you cited national sovereignty as a defence .
When one of our colleagues , Mr Ruiz Mateos , was prevented from taking an oath in Spain because legal action was being taken against him , you cited national sovereignty as a defence .
When action was taken against me for my freedom of political expression , you refused to defend my immunity and you cited national sovereignty as a defence .
Hodie mihi , cras tibi , it is my turn today , and it will be yours tomorrow !
( Applause from the ITS Group )
This matter will be referred to the Conference of Presidents .
It will be discussed tomorrow morning , and I believe that the great majority of the European Parliament has come out in favour of supporting Mr Geremek .
Just the once will not hurt , since I am President , but I too would like to offer my full support .
( Applause from the left )
1 .
Adaption of Title IV of the EC Treaty - Court of Justice ( vote )
- Szájer report
- Before the vote
rapporteur . - ( HU ) The European Parliament is duty bound to provide for European citizens ' legal protection .
Here in the EP , there is widespread support for the Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe , which would be a great step forward from the point of view of the Court 's jurisdiction .
Nevertheless , we are in the fortunate position of not having to wait in this matter for the birth of the Constitutional Treaty , as the Treaty of Amsterdam provides for a transition , a ' passerelle ' .
The report I have tabled clearly advocates implementing the transition , or ' passerelle ' , extending thereby the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice to matters concerning the European visa , as well as to refugee and immigration policies .
This guarantees total legal protection for European citizens .
My proposal would thus make it possible to strengthen European legal safeguards with regard to fundamental rights .
In this way I wish to facilitate the uniform interpretation and application of Community rules and laws , and the creation of a unified system of legal safeguards .
This is not the first time Parliament calls upon the Council to speed up the adoption of this transitional clause , the ' passerelle ' , in order to remove the limitations on the Court 's competence with regard to Article 4 of the Treaty .
I ask Parliament to support my proposal .
2 .
Framework Agreement on a Multilateral Nuclear Environmental Programme in the Russian Federation ( vote )
- Remek report
3 .
Common rules in the field of civil aviation security ( vote )
- Costa recommendation
- Before the vote

( FR ) Mr President , yesterday , during the debate , Mr Barrot announced that he was in possession of a written version of the Commission position on the amendments tabled by Members , and I note that this document has not been distributed .
I call on you to ensure that the Commission positions are made available to Members , since many Members are waiting to learn what these positions are .
Very well , Mr Goebbels , we shall ensure that that happens .
Voting time ( continued )
Welcome
Ladies and gentlemen , it is my pleasure to inform you that , within the context of interparliamentary relations , the Knesset delegation , chaired by Mrs Amira Dotan , chairman of the delegation for relations with the European Parliament , will be visiting our Parliament over the next few days .
I should like to extend a very warm welcome to Mrs Dotan and to the members of her delegation .
I should like to stress the importance that we attach to this visit .
( Applause )
They are seated on the left , and I extend a cordial welcome to them .
Voting time ( continued )
Formal sitting - India
Mr President , honourable Members , it gives me great joy to be able to welcome , today , to this House , to the European Parliament , the President of the Republic of India , Mr Abdul Kalam .
A very warm welcome to you , Mr President .
Before your election as President , you were well known as the architect of the Indian space and atomic energy programme , and you enjoy international renown as one of India 's most important scientists .
Most of your previous life has been devoted to science and technology , and you have always given voice to the view that developing countries should take second place to others when it comes to harvesting the fruits of the most highly-developed technology , because technology - when used rightly - creates growth and can help to improve the day-to-day life of the poor .
I do not doubt that this House agrees with your views and is therefore glad that India is participating in the research programmes funded by the EU , collaborating , for example , with us on Galileo .
Alongside the key role you played in promoting science and technology , we were also impressed by your election as President of the Republic of India in 2002 , in which you achieved an overwhelming majority with votes from across all party divisions , and that , for you , as a Tamil and a Muslim in a country with a Hindu majority , was no mean achievement ; it is evidence of your great ability to bring together people of every background , culture and religion .
India is a country of many peoples and religions , and , as the largest democracy in the world , it can encourage new and young democracies .
The relationship between the European Union and India has been in existence since the early 1960s , when India was one of the first countries to establish diplomatic relations with what was then the European Economic Community .
Our contacts and cooperation at the parliamentary level are among the positive results of a long-term process , for the first meeting between the European Parliament and the Lok Sabha took place in 1981 .
For a number of years , parliamentary contacts between the European Parliament and India have taken the institutional form of a delegation of the European Parliament for relations with the countries of South-East Asia and the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation , the SAARC .
Both the European Union and India have undergone fundamental changes over recent years .
I rejoice to be able to tell you that , over the past month , the European Parliament has set up - quite separately from the delegation to SAARC - a parliamentary delegation for relations with India , an action that takes account of the ever-increasing importance of your country to the European Union .
We would very much welcome it , Mr President , if the Lok Sabha were to be able to respond by setting up a delegation for relations with the European Parliament in order to derive the maximum benefit from this deepening relationship and to make contacts between the two parliaments easier .
Mr President , you were invited by my esteemed predecessor in office Mr Borell Fontelles , who is present here today , and it gave me great pleasure to reiterate that invitation to you .
The relations between India and the European Union are not only of the greatest economic importance , but also of the greatest political importance .
The dialogue of cultures is also of the greatest importance .
It is therefore a great pleasure to invite you , Mr President , to take the floor to address the Members of the European Parliament .
( Applause )
Friends , my greetings to all of you .
I would particularly like to greet Mr Hans-Gert Pöttering , Mr Harald Rømer , Mr Klaus Welle and Mr Ciril Stokelj .


Good afternoon , Ladies and Gentlemen .
I am delighted to be with the honourable Members of the European Parliament on the occasion of the Golden Jubilee year of the European Union .
I was wondering what thoughts I could share with you .
As you are aware , as a democratic nation India has experience in providing leadership to over one billion people with multi-language , multicultural and multi-religious systems .
I wish to share this experience with you , friends .
European civilisation has a unique place in human history .
Its people were valiantly engaged in the adventure of exploring the Planet Earth , resulting in the discovery of many ideas and systems .
Europe has seen the birth of pioneers in science , leading to the development of technologies .
Europe was the theatre of conflicts among the nations lasting hundreds of years , including the two World Wars .
Now , with this backdrop and these dynamics , you have established the European Union with a vision of peace and prosperity for the entire region .
The European Union has become an example for connectivity among nations , probably with no possibility of war , leading to lasting regional peace .
Before I started out on my journey to Europe , I was thinking : why are Europe and India unique and natural partners ?
Do we share a common history and heritage and , possibly in the future , a common destiny ?
This was the question .
I was astonished by what I found : the depth and vitality of our inter-connectedness , through language , culture , ancient beliefs , ideologies and the movement of people , have stood the test of time .
This has matured into a very strong bond through sustained trade and intellectually satisfying collaboration in many areas of science and technology .
For example , on 23 April 2007 , the Italian scientific satellite Agile was launched by the Indian Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle rocket system into a very precise orbit .
Scientists from India and Europe are very excited .
Let us congratulate them .
India is a country that has learnt over the years to evolve and maintain a unique unity amid diversity .
Similarly , the European Union 's greatest contribution has been to demonstrate to the world that it is possible to build a strong union of nations without compromising national identities .
It has become an inspirational model and an example to emulate for every region in the world .
The European Union and India support a social form of economic development and we encourage a model of growth with equity .
Both are conscious of the need for growth to respect the environment and to make it sustainable for future generations .
With India 's and the European Union 's centuries of valuable experience , we can develop a doctrine of global cooperation based on the foundation of regional collaboration and core competencies of our nations .
The European Union and India radiate a message to the world that regional cooperation and interregional collaboration will lead to a win-win situation for all , so that we can have a politically and socio-economically emergent civilisation .
Our contribution will be successful if , before the 21st century is over , we are able to make all regions transform into happy unions leading to the emergence of a world of unions .
In this context , I am reminded of the dream of an Indian poet who said 3000 years ago in the Tamil classic : , which means , ' I am a world citizen .
Every citizen is my own kith and kin ' .
He said that 3000 years ago .
Against this backdrop , I have brought from India a message to launch three important Indo-European tasks that could contribute to global peace and prosperity .
I propose these missions on the basis of India 's experience and the European Union 's dynamics .
The first task is the evolution of an enlightened society , in which citizens have a system of values , leading to a prosperous and peaceful world .
The second idea is creating energy independence .
Normally people talk about energy security .
I am talking about energy independence : a three-dimensional approach to energy choice that aims to achieve a clean world .
The third aim is a World Knowledge Platform to bring together the core skills of the European Union and India in certain areas in order to provide solutions to critical issues like water , healthcare and capacity-building .
When nations join together to build a cohesive society , it is necessary to ensure that the benefits of development encompass all sections of society .
Worldwide poverty , illiteracy , unemployment and deprivation are driving forward the forces of anger and violence .
These forces are linked to some earlier real or perceived historical enmities , tyrannies , injustice , inequalities , ethnic issues and religious fundamentalism that are flowing into an outburst of extremism worldwide .
Both India and the European Union have witnessed and are witnessing the unsavoury acts of certain misguided sections of society .
Together we must address the root causes of such phenomena in order to find lasting ways to promote peace .
How do we do that ?
We need a carrier of eternal goodness and wholesomeness in human conduct , which is called ' righteousness ' .
As we say in India :
' Where there is righteousness in the heart
There is beauty in the character .
When there is beauty in the character ,
There is harmony in the home .
When there is harmony in the home ,
There is order in the nation .
When there is order in the nation ,
There is peace in the world . '
( Applause )
Honourable Members , this is true for the whole world .
When we need peace in the world , we need order in the nation .
We need harmony in the home .
Whether in Europe , India or in any part of the world the origin is righteousness in the heart .
How do we instil righteousness in the heart of every citizen of the world ?
This is my area of specialisation and I would like to talk to you about it .
First , I wish to discuss the evolution of an enlightened society .
With this spirit of righteousness in the heart , I would like to present to this important gathering a methodology for developing a happy , prosperous and peaceful society in our world , which I call ' Evolution of Enlightened society ' .
I have shared these thoughts with many intellectuals in national and international circles .
We need to create an enlightened society with three components : 1 ) education with a value system ; 2 ) religion transforming into spirituality ; and 3 ) economic development for societal transformation .
Beginning with the first component , we have seen that the seeds of peace in the world have their origin in the righteousness in the heart of every individual .
Such righteous citizens lead to the emergence of an enlightened society .
Education with a value system has to be designed so that the righteousness in the heart is developed in young minds .
That should be the mission of education .
The prime learning environment is five to seventeen years of age .
That reminds me of what an ancient Greek teacher said a few thousand years ago : ' Give me a child for seven years ; afterwards , let God or the devil take the child .
They cannot change my child ' .
This shows the power of great teachers and what they can inculcate in young minds .
Parents and teachers must instil moral leadership in children .
It requires the ability to have insight into the uniqueness and universality of human consciousness .
True education is the acquisition of enlightened feelings and enlightened powers to understand daily events and to understand the permanent truth linking man to his environment , human and planetary .
I remember the lectures given when I was a student a long time ago - nearly 57 years ago - at the Jesuit institution of St Joseph 's College in Tiruchirappalli in southern India by the college 's highest authority , the Reverend Father Rector Kalathil .
Every Monday , the Reverend Father would take an hour-long class .
He used to talk about good human beings present and past and about what makes a good human being .
In this class , he used to give lectures on people such as Buddha , Confucius , St Augustine , Caliph Omar , Mahatma Gandhi , Einstein , and Abraham Lincoln and to tell moral stories related to our civilisational heritage .
In the moral science class , Father Kalathil used to highlight the best aspect of how these great people had evolved as good human beings through parental care , teaching and the companionship of great books .
Even though these lessons were given to me in 1950 during my college days , they inspire me even today .
It is essential that in schools and colleges in every nation , important teachers at the institution give hour-long weekly lectures on civilisational heritage and the derived value system .
This may be called a Moral Science class and will teach young minds to love their country and other human beings and to elevate them to higher planes .
I have suggested this methodology to education experts in my country .
The European Union may like to consider developing a system that would enable a student to learn these fundamental lessons for the benefit of all .
Let me turn to the issue of transforming religion into spiritual force .
Many in the world believe it is a difficult task , but I disagree .
I would like to share an experience that convinced me that it is possible for religion to be transformed into a spiritual force .
How do we do that ?
As you all know , religion has two components : theology and spirituality .
Even though theology is unique to every religion , the spiritual component spreads the value to be absorbed by human beings in order to promote a good life and the welfare of society in the pursuit of material life .
I witnessed the coming together of religion and science in a major task .
In the early 1960s , the founder of the Indian Space Research Programme , Professor Vikram Sarabhai , and his team had located the most technically suitable place for space research after considering many alternatives .
The town of Thumba in Kerala in southern India was selected for space research as it was near the magnetic equator .
This made it ideally suited to ionospheric and electrojet research in the upper atmosphere .
I was fortunate to work with Professor Vikram Sarabhai for about eight years .
The major challenge for Vikram Sarabhai was to locate the site in a specific area .
As was usual , Professor Sarabhai approached the Kerala Government administrators first .
After seeing the land and the sea coast , he was told that thousands of fishermen lived there and that the place had an ancient church , the St Mary Magdalene Church , a Bishop 's House and a school .
It would be very difficult , therefore , to allocate this land and the administration was willing to provide land in an alternative area .
Similarly , the political authorities also believed that it would be a difficult situation owing to the existence of important institutions and concern for people who were to be relocated .
However , the Professor was very determined .
It was suggested that he should approach the only person who could advise and help .
That was the Bishop , Father Peter Bernard Pereira .
Professor Sarabhai , approached the Bishop one Saturday evening .
I still remember their meeting , which proved to be historic .
Many of us witnessed the event .
Father Pereira exclaimed , ' Oh Vikram , you are asking for my children 's home , the fishermen 's home , my home , the Bishop 's House , and God 's home , the church .
How is it possible ? ' .
Both had a special quality : they could smile even in difficult situations .
Father Pereira asked Professor Sarabhai to come to church on Sunday morning at 9 a.m. and he turned up on Sunday with his team .
Prayers were taking place with a reading from the Bible by Father Pereira .
After the prayer was over , the Bishop invited Professor Sarabhai to come to the dais .
The Reverend Father introduced him to the congregation .
' Dear children ' , said the Bishop , ' here is a scientist , Professor Vikram Sarabhai .
What does science do ?
All of us , including this church , experience the light from electricity .
I am able to talk to you through the microphone because of technology .
Doctors treat patience thanks to medical science .
Science through technology enhances the comfort and quality of human life .
What do I do as a preacher ?
I pray for you people , for your wellbeing and for your peace .
In short , Vikram and I are doing the same : both science and spirituality seek the Almighty 's blessings for human prosperity in body and mind .
Professor Sarabhai says that he will build within a year alternative facilities near the coast .
Now , dear children , can we give our homes , my home and God 's home for a great scientific mission ? '
He asked the question .
There total silence , as there is now .
Then the entire congregation got up and said ' Amen ' , which made the whole church reverberate .
That was the church where we had our design centre and where we started rocket assembly , and the Bishop 's house was where the scientists worked .
Later , the Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching Station led to the establishment of the Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre and the space activities led to the emergence of multiple space centres throughout the country .
This church has become an important centre of learning , where thousands of people learn about the dynamic history of India 's space programme and the great minds of a scientist and a spiritual leader .
Of course , the people of Thumba received well-equipped facilities , a place of worship and an educational centre elsewhere as promised .
When I think of this event , I can see how enlightened spiritual and scientific leaders can come together to give reverence to human life .
Of course , the birth of TERLS and the VSSC gave the country the ability to launch vehicles , spacecraft and space applications that have accelerated social and economic development in India to unprecedented levels .
Professor Vikram Sarabhai and Father Peter Bernard Pereira are no longer with us , but those who are responsible for creation and making flowers blossom will themselves be a different kind of flower , as described in the Bhagwat Gita .
It says , ' See the flower , how generously it distributes perfume , honey .
It gives to all , gives freely of its love .
When its work is done , it falls away quietly .
Try to be like the flower , unassuming despite all its qualities ' .
What a beautiful message to humanity on the purpose of life , reflecting the spiritual component .
Can we bridge the spiritual component of the religions to bring peace to nations and to the world ?
I was asked to talk about cultural dialogue and would like to recall an incident that commonly occurs in many parts of my country .
I witnessed this event as a young boy of 10 .
In our house , periodically , I used to see three unique people meet : Pakshi Lakshmana Shastrigal , who was the head priest of the famous Rameshwaram temple , a Vedic scholar , Reverend Father Bodal , who built the first church on Rameshwaram Island , and my father who was an imam in the mosque .
All three used to sit and discuss the island 's problems and find solutions .
In addition , they built several religious connectivities with compassion .
These connectivities quietly spread to others on the island like the fragrance from the flowers .
This sight always comes to my mind whenever I discuss with people the dialogue of religions .
India has had this advantage of integration of minds for thousands of years .
Throughout the world , the need to have a frank dialogue among cultures , religions and civilisations has been felt now more than ever .
These two instances give me confidence that religions can be bridged through spiritual components .
Whenever I meet the young and experienced in my country , I narrate these two experiences .
Many in my country and the world over may have such experiences .
We have to spread such ' glad tidings ' to every part of the world .
Now let us discuss the third important component of enlightened society , which is to achieve economic development for societal transformation .
Let me take India as an example ; it may be true to many parts of the world , including the European Union .
The Indian Economy is in an ascent phase .
There is considerable growth in the manufacturing and service sectors .
We have a mission of spreading this economic growth throughout the country , including the rural sector .
Nearly 220 million people out of a billion people must have their quality of life raised in both rural and urban areas .
Even though GDP growth indicates our economic growth , people 's participation is essential to achieving the required targets .
It is essential to ensure that citizens are empowered with good quality of life encompassing nutritious food , good habitat , clean environment , affordable healthcare , quality education and productive employment , integrated with our value system drawn from civilisational heritage leading to the comprehensive development of the nation that will bring smiles to one billion people .
These are indicators for the growth of the National Prosperity Index .
To achieve that growth rate , we have identified five areas where India has a core competence for integrated action : 1 ) agriculture and food processing ; 2 ) education and healthcare ; 3 ) information and communication technology ; 4 ) infrastructure development , including PURA ( Providing Urban Amenities in Rural Areas ) ; and 5 ) self-reliance in critical technologies .
We propose to realise the vision of transforming India into a developed nation before 2020 by energising and igniting the minds of the 540 million youth of the nation below 25 years of age .
So far we have discussed the three-dimensional approach of providing value-based education , religion transforming India 's spiritual force and economic development for societal transformation leading to the evolution of an enlightened society .
This integrated three-dimensional methodology for the evolution of enlightened society will pave the way for peaceful , prosperous , happy nations and , thereby , for a world free from extremisms and further seeds of extremism .
On my website www.presidentofindia.nic.in , I have stated how an empowered world body is essential to evolve the nations of enlightened citizens .
I will be very happy to exchange thoughts , ideas and action related to this mission with the honourable Members after they have seen my website .
Let me now discuss the second mission , ' Leading to Energy Independence ' .
When we analyse the critical problems facing the planet today , two important issues come to our minds .
Firstly , the continuous depletion of fossil-material-derived oil , gas and coal reserves , as predicted by the World Energy Forum , of which you are all aware .
The second is the continuous degradation of the environment , primarily due to extensive use of fossil materials to generate energy .
The solution to these problems can be found through energy independence , which I have presented to my country .
It may be applicable to many nations .
What form of energy independence do I propose in India ?
India has 17 % of the world 's population , but only about 0.8 % of the world 's known oil and natural gas resources .
Based on the progress visualised for the nation during the next two decades , its power-generating capacity has to increase to 400 000 MW by the year 2030 from the present capacity of 130 000 MW .
This takes into consideration the energy economies planned and the design and production of energy-efficient equipment and systems .
I have proposed various systems .
Solar cell efficiency , common to the European Union and India , has to increase from the present level of 20 % to 55 % through intensified research on carbon-nanotube-based solar cells .
Regarding thorium reactors , thorium is a non-fissile material .
It has to be converted into a fissile material using fast breeder technology .
In the biofuels area , the challenge is biofuel plantation for higher yield , esterification technologies for higher output and changes to automobile power plants .
These three research areas need intensive cooperation between the European Union and India .
I would suggest setting up an India-EU renewable energy development programme for advanced R [ amp ] D in all forms of renewable energy , leading to the availability of commercial-class large-scale power plants within the next decade .
( Applause )
I should like to conclude with the ' World Knowledge Platform ' .
With India 's experience of two successful international cooperative ventures from concept to realisation and marketing , I would suggest developing the ' World Knowledge Platform ' to bring together the core competences of the nations of the EU and India in science and technology , leading to the development of unique systems for global applications .
The ' World Knowledge Platform ' will enable joint design , development , cost-effective production and marketing of the knowledge products , systems and services in various domains based on the core competence of partner nations in the international market .
The ' World Knowledge Platform ' is a meeting place for science , technology , industry , management and marketing .
You may ask about the missions of the ' World Knowledge Platform ' .
The convergence of biotechnology , nanotechnology and IT is expected to touch every area of concern to humanity .
The ' World Knowledge Platform ' will take up missions in some of the areas discussed further , which are of the utmost importance to all of us and to making our world a safe , sustainable , peaceful and prosperous place to live .
The first is water : desalination of sea water using solar energy , channelisation , networking of rivers and cost-effective safe drinking water .
The second is healthcare : diagnosis , drug delivery system , development and production of vaccines for HIV , TB , malaria and cardiac diseases .
The third is agriculture and food processing : increased production of food grain in an environment of reduced land , reduced water and reduced manpower ; preservation of food ; food processing ; cost effective storage and distribution .
The fourth is knowledge products : hardware , software and networking and storage products , including handheld micro and nano electronic devices .
The fifth is transportation systems : fossil-fuel-free transportation systems using renewable energies , safety systems , hardware and embedded software integration .
The sixth is habitat : an energy-efficient , water-efficient , pollution-free habitat .
The seventh is disaster prediction and management : earthquake forecasting , assessing in advance the quantum of rain for particular cloud conditions .
Finally , capacity-building : quality human resource development for all the above areas , including the development of personnel with world-class skills .
The European Union represents a wealth of scientific potential with a rich culture for research .
India has emerged as a leading country , with its demonstrated scientific and technological potential in many societal missions , and is now on the ascent .
The combined strength of the nations can be utilised for the advantage of both India and the EU by joining together as partners in creating the ' World Knowledge Platform ' .
In conclusion , as we have seen , there is a visible common thread to our dreams and problems .
When I am with you , I have a feeling that there are beautiful solutions from beautiful minds .
Beautiful minds generate creativity .
This is the common heritage of both India and the European Union .
I have presented three missions : ' the evolution of an enlightened society ' , ' leading to energy independence ' and ' creating the ' World Knowledge Platform ' .
These Indo-EU missions will reinforce further our strategic partnership and become the foundation for making changes to the life of 1.5 billion people , ultimately leading to the confluence of civilisations .
To meet the challenges of these missions , we can draw inspiration from the saying of Maharishi Patanjali from about 2 500 years ago .
He said : ' When you are inspired by some great purpose , some extraordinary project , all your thoughts break their bounds .
Your mind transcends limitations , your consciousness expands in every direction , and you find yourself in a new , great and wonderful world .
Dormant forces , faculties and talents come alive , and you discover yourself to be a greater person by far than you ever dreamt yourself to be . '
I have great admiration for the European Union .
In this context I have composed a poem which I should like to share with you .
( Applause )
The title of the poem is ' The message from Mother India to the European Union ' .
' Beautiful environment leads to beautiful minds .
Beautiful environment leads to beautiful minds .
Beautiful minds generate freshness and creativity ,
Created the explorers of land and sea ,
Created the European Union ,
Created the explorers of land and sea ,
Create minds that innovate ,
Create great scientific minds everywhere .
Why ?
Go back to the many discoveries .
Discover the continent .
Do you realise you have discovered a continent ?
Discover the continent and unknown lands .
Venture into unexplored parts .
Create new highways .
In the minds of the best ,
In the minds of the best was to us also born ,
Generated seeds of the battle and hatred ,
Hundreds of years of war and blood .
Millions of my wonderful children lost in the land and sea .
Tears flooded many nations ,
Many engulfed in an ocean of sadness .
Then came the vision of the European Union .
Took the vote never to turn human knowledge against ourselves or others .
United in their thinking , action emanated to make Europe prosperous ,
And peace bound the European Union .
Those glad tidings captivated the people of the planet of my galaxy .
Those glad tidings captivated the people of the planet of my galaxy .
Oh , European Union let your mission spread everywhere like the air we breathe .
That is my poem .
( Applause )
Finally , friends , let me convey the greetings of the one billion people of my country to all the honourable Members of the European Parliament and , through you , to all the citizens of European Union countries .
May God bless you all .
( The House rose and accorded the speaker a standing ovation )
President Kalam , on behalf of the European Parliament , I thank you for that important and inspiring speech .
That was one of the most extraordinary speeches we have ever heard .
( Applause )
Delivered by a statesman , scientist and poet , it was unique .
Thank you .
I believe what is most important is that we listen to each other , in order to understand each other better and to respect and cooperate with one another .
That was your message .
I wish you and your great nation all the best , and convey my best wishes too in respect of our cooperation between the great nation of India and the European Union .
( Sustained applause )
1 .
Advanced therapy medicinal products ( vote )
- Mikolášik report
- Before the vote
rapporteur . - Mr President , as rapporteur I would like to take this opportunity to make a clarification in introducing this report .
I wish to condemn and strongly oppose the behaviour of some of my shadow rapporteur colleagues who , by bypassing the rapporteur and presenting block one as a so-called compromise with the Council , are undermining the role of Parliament .
There are eight political groups in this House , but only three groups - the PSE , ALDE and GUE / NGL - have agreed on these over 70 amendments .
We have not been informed by the Council that COREPER has accepted this package .
I therefore urge you to vote to reject block one and support block two , which is the result of the work done by the parliamentary committees .
However , at the same time I should like to state clearly that I will listen to the voice of this House , and that as the main rapporteur I will give my definitive support to this proposal .
Mr President , I simply want to stress that I myself , and members of some of the other political groups , used their democratic right to table amendments in due time .
I wish to underline that all of the amendments in block one reflect the votes in committee and are in line with an agreement reached in a technical trialogue with the rapporteur , who then decided not to continue with that trialogue .
We did not exceed our powers in relation to any of those items and I would propose that we proceed to the vote .
I always respect the democratic procedures applicable here .
( Applause )
Before the vote on Amendment 66
( DE ) Mr President , I do not believe that Amendment 66 is covered by the compromise amendment , and would be grateful if we could have an additional vote on that .
According to the analysis that has been done , Amendment 66 is covered by Amendment 127 , which deals with derogations for hospitals .
Therefore , we believe that matters have been voted on .
( ES ) Mr President , in order to ensure that the vote runs properly , I would ask you please , when you announce that a roll-call vote is starting , to leave a little more time before closing it , because some Members find it difficult to keep up with your fast pace .
( Applause )
So please allow for a few more seconds between opening and closing the vote .
Thank you very much !
Before the vote on the amended Commission proposal
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , according to my voting list , we should have also voted on Amendments 24 , 35 , 44 , 45 , 61 , 62 in two parts and on Amendment 66 , which we have not done .
I would therefore ask you to put them to the vote , please .
These amendments , Mr Mikolášik , have been covered by the first package .
2 .
Enforcement of intellectual property rights ( criminal measures ) ( vote )
- Zingaretti report
- Before the vote on Amendment 46
Mr President , I would like to clarify that the scope of this directive should be restricted to piracy and counterfeit practices .
As it is to apply in different Member States with different legal systems , where this amendment mentions ' intellectual property ' , we propose ' copyright and related rights ' .
' Intellectual property ' means not just copyright , but copyright and related rights .
This is an oral amendment .
( The oral amendment was not accepted )
3 .
Community vessel traffic monitoring ( vote )
- Sterckx report
- Before the vote on Amendment 46
( ES ) I shall briefly explain the reason for the oral amendment .
The Committee on Transport and Tourism originally approved Amendment 46 , presented by myself , and Amendment 50 , presented by Mr Sterckx .
Subsequently , the services have noted that there is some incompatibility between them , with regard to certain dates .
We have come to an agreement and taken the view that the best solution is an oral amendment to Amendment 46 that I propose to the House and which consists of a simple addition , as follows : ' and in any case not later than 1 July 2008 ' .
This would not change the meaning of either of the amendments and would provide a legal solution to this conflict .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
4 .
Investigation of accidents ( vote )
- Kohlíček report
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , I should like to change the order of the votes .
With regard to recital 11 , it would be better to vote in the first instance on Amendment 26 , because it is more extensive than Amendment 1 .
The voting list is established in accordance with the Rules of Procedure , but if the House has no objections , we will do as the rapporteur wishes .
5 .
Liability of carriers of passengers by boat in the event of accidents ( vote )
- Costa report
- Before the vote
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am just taking the floor to say , for the sake of clarity , that as rapporteur I call on everyone , in all roll-call votes , to vote against anything not tabled by the committee .
I do so to prevent the European Union from having to intervene the next time there is an accident on any major European river , because that might happen if we do not extend consumer protection to this sector as well .
( DE ) Mr President , that was a very brief description of the problem .
Both my own group and the other take the view that specific rules would offer better protection for passengers on inland vessels , since the present regulations , on which we are to vote , apply to sea-going traffic , and so I would just like to point out that we are doing no less for the passengers ' safety if we table our amendments , and then - it is to be hoped - get a majority to vote for them .
6 .
Port State control ( vote )
- Vlasto report
7 .
Ship inspection and survey organisations ( vote )
- de Grandes Pascual report
8 .
International Financial Reporting Standards ( IFRS ) ( vote )
- Motion for a resolution
- Before the vote

( FR ) Mr President , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs should like , on the basis of Rule 170 ( 4 ) of our Rules of Procedure , to have the vote on this resolution postponed until the second part-session in September .
The aim of this postponement is to adapt our timetable to the new timetable set at our request by the Commission services for approval of the IFRS 8 accounting standard as a replacement for the IAS 14 standard .
The Commission proposal to adopt IFRS 8 would mean incorporating the equivalent US accounting standard into European law without an impact study on the effect of applying such a standard to European listed companies having been carried out .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs would like to point out that the convergence of IFRS financial reporting standards and US GAAP - which Commissioner McCreevy is so keen to see happen - must result in standards that make it possible to produce better quality financial information .
Real convergence means much more , for the one party , than simply copying the financial reporting standards of the other party .
In this context , the Commission services have agreed to review their timetable , and have thus consented to an impact study being carried out .
This information was communicated to us by letter last night .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs would also like to point out that the Commission proposals on implementing measures - at the very least in the financial sphere - including financial reporting standards , must be examined within a three-month period .
We should like it if the Commission could resubmit this implementing measure , accompanied by the results of this impact study thus requested , before our Committee on 10 September , so that our Parliament might definitively validate or otherwise the application of this standard in European law .
( Parliament decided to postpone the vote )
10 .
Damages actions for breach of competition rules ( vote )
- Sánchez Presedo report
12 .
Thematic Strategy on the sustainable use of natural resources ( vote )
- Liotard report
13 .
Transatlantic relations ( vote )
- Motion for a resolution
- Before the vote on paragraph 13
Mr President , I would like to propose the following changes to paragraph 13 .
Firstly , that the word ' welcomes ' be replaced by the word ' notes ' .
Secondly , that we add at the end : ' regrets , however , the lack of democratic oversight due to the exclusion of the European Parliament and national parliaments from this dialogue ' .
Finally , we also propose deletion of the word ' political ' before ' framework ' .
( ES ) Mr President , I simply wish to say that my group would agree with two of the references : that of changing the word ' Welcomes ' to ' Notes ' and the removal of the word ' political ' .
In order to be able to agree to this proposal , however , we would like to add a positive note and say : ' so as to give greater democratic legitimacy to this dialogue , calls for the European Parliament to be involved ' .
Mr President , I think that is acceptable .
( The oral amendments were accepted )
14 .
Progress report on Croatia ( vote )
- Swoboda report
- Before the vote on Amendment 18
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , it had been agreed with the shadow rapporteurs that this would read simply ' the Croatian authorities ' rather than ' the government and local authorities ' .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
- Before the vote on Amendment 24

rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , something else I have to clarify , with the agreement of the shadow rapporteurs , is that this provision is intended to apply to all problems with borders , and so I ask that ' with neighbouring countries ' be inserted .
This rule that recourse be had to the services of a third party should , then , apply in principle to all border problems that are as yet unresolved .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
That concludes the vote .

( DE ) Mr President , might I ask why it is that , since we always have relatively few votes on a Tuesday and always a very large number of them on Wednesdays , why it is that formal sittings are always on Wednesdays ?
Could we not move them to a Tuesday ?
That would work every bit as well , and we would be able to organise our timetable far better .
I shall pass your comment on to the right person and try to get you an answer .
Voting time ( continued )
Corrections to votes from previous sittings : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 2 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Ukraine ( debate )
We shall proceed to the next item on the agenda . This is the Council and Commission statements on Ukraine .
Mr President , Commissioner , honourable Members , we very much welcome your decision to put discussion of the current situation in Ukraine and also the European Union 's relations with that country on the agenda .
Ukraine 's importance in terms of European stability is not to be underestimated , and so I am glad of the opportunity to express the Council Presidency 's position with regard to it .
The Orange Revolution was an impressive demonstration of the power of civil society movements in Eastern Europe , and the democratic parliamentary elections in March 2006 , being largely free and fair , were an example for other states in the region to follow .
This is not , however , the first time that Ukraine has found itself at a very difficult point in the course of its difficult process of transition and transformation .
It has experienced the Orange Revolution , which was in itself the critical culmination of a political dispute , followed by the political wrangling and difficulties relating to the formation of a coalition and a government following the March 2006 parliamentary elections , which were a debate on the country 's internal and external orientation , and now President Yushchenko 's decree of 2 April 2007 dissolving the parliament , together with the refusal by the government and parliament to obey it .
The attitude of both sides is causing considerable constitutional misgivings in Ukraine itself , with the Ukrainian parliament appealing to the constitutional court to rule on the constitutionality of the President 's decree dissolving it .
While the Council is of course following events in Kiev with close attention , they are also a cause of great concern to it .
The European Union has been in close contact with both parties in the conflict since the crisis broke ; Mr Solana has spoken with them on several occasion and has made them aware of the European Union 's position , and our Presidency , on the day after the decree of dissolution was published , urged moderation and readiness for dialogue on the basis of democratic rules and the Ukrainian constitution .
Our Presidency has also been in close contact with the groups involved in the crisis and with protagonists on both sides , and the European Union will build on those contacts .
The Ukrainian constitutional court has been presented with a difficult task , and will be able to perform it only if it is enabled to come to a decision on the constitutionality of the dissolution of parliament without being made subject to external pressure .
If the political crisis is to have a long-term solution , however , political compromises will be necessary , and so we are glad to see that both President Yushchenko and Prime Minister Yanukovych are no less willing to engage in dialogue than they were , and welcome the assurances given by both sides to the effect that violence is not even being considered as a means of settling the conflict .
Our expectation is that both sides will abide by their public statements and the assurances given by them to the European Union in order to prevent any further escalation of the crisis .
Whatever changes may come about in the political environment in Kiev , democracy , free and fair elections , the free expression of opinion and the freedom of the press remain the basis underpinning political and social life , and that is one reason why we are confident that Ukraine will find a way out of this political crisis that is consistent with our shared conceptions of democracy and of the rule of law , one that will enable Ukraine to continue to be able to count on the support of the European Union .

Mr President , honourable Members , I thank you for the invitation to make a statement on relations between the European Union and Ukraine .
This debate is of the utmost importance and is of greater contemporary relevance than ever for various reasons , one of which is the fact that we , on 5 March , commenced negotiations on a new and extended agreement that is intended to put our relations with Ukraine on a new footing .
Another is the way in which the domestic political situation in Ukraine is developing .
It is of the utmost importance in terms of the further entrenchment of democratic conditions in that country and of the continuity of its reform process that a solution be found to the present crisis .
The Commission has kept an attentive eye on the latest developments in Ukrainian domestic politics , observing with concern the way in which President Yushchenko 's dissolution of parliament has resulted in deeper division between him and Mr Yanukovych , the Prime Minister .
It matters a great deal to us that Ukraine should pursue its course of reform , moving closer to complete democratisation , stability and prosperity .
Ukraine , and its future in Europe , depend absolutely on stability , which is vital to the European Union too , for it , along with prosperity , is what we need in the countries around us .
What is happening at the moment is that the maturity of Ukrainian democracy is being tested .
Mr Barroso , the President of the Commission said , when he met President Yushchenko last week , that there was , in a democracy , no political problem for which a political solution in harmony with the law could not be found , and the frank political debate and the - so far - largely peaceful demonstrations on the streets of Kiev are evidence of the fact that the Ukrainian people understand that internal political disputes have to be settled in a responsible and democratic manner .

What is crucial is that all the relevant political forces should work together in a constructive manner and work honestly towards a political solution , adhering completely , as they do so , to the principles of democracy and of the rule of law , and all of them must obey the democratic ground rules , take action to deal with corruption , respect the independence of the Constitutional Court and obey its rulings .
Ukraine is also in need of a long-term process - one in which everyone can take part and which will lead to a constitutional reform founded on a new-style political compromise - that will equip the political system with clear mechanisms of control and regulation .
While it cannot be part of the European Union 's role to intervene in this crisis by mediating directly between factions , we can and should appeal to the cautious and rational instincts of all those involved in Ukrainian politics in urging them to hammer out a compromise together .
That is the message we should be sending out in the confidence that the young Ukrainian democracy will pass this test and that its politicians will continue to work for the good of the country and for its future relations with the European Union .
Since what was known as the ' orange revolution ' and the adoption of the EU / Ukraine action plan , the EU and Ukraine have come much closer together , and relations between them have improved .
Ukraine is an example of just how successful the European neighbourhood policy can be ; our political dialogue has deepened to an appreciable degree , and there has been a constant increase in the sectors in which we cooperate .
We have decided to increase the support grant under the new European neighbourhood and partnership instrument to EUR 120 million per annum , have initialled the agreement on visa facilitation and returns , and , on the trade front , are preparing extensive measures that , taken together with the new and wider-ranging agreement , will move us closer to a free trade zone .

We have just started to do something about putting our relations on an even closer footing , for it was on 5 March that the Commission commenced negotiations with Ukraine on the new and extended agreement , which , it is intended , should , when concluded , reflect the significance of relations between us and open up new perspectives , among them the prospect of a deeper partnership in the energy sector .
A second round of negotiations followed in Kiev on 2 and 3 April .
The talks progressed to our complete satisfaction , in that it proved possible to achieve substantial progress , and the Ukrainian side demonstrated considerable commitment to them .
It is the Commission 's intention that the negotiations on the new and extended agreement should be continued as planned , for Ukraine is a key partner for the European Union , and we continue in our firm determination to further develop and put on an even firmer footing our relations with this important neighbour .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , President-in-Office , Commissioner , the political crisis in Kiev is a matter of concern to those who welcome the political progress made since the Orange Revolution .
Let me remind those here of the leading and pioneering role played by Parliament in 2004 .
It is vital that today 's situation be resolved in line with the rule of law and democratic principles consistent with European values and , above all , in accordance with the democratically expressed wishes of the Ukrainian people .
In my view , we could have done more to prevent this crisis from developing , notably by providing more substantial moral and financial support to help Ukraine overcome the very difficult political legacy of its Soviet past .
We must devote every effort to the task of nurturing and encouraging Ukraine 's democratic gains .
It is now time for Europe to engage in a more committed and consistent manner .
A new enhanced agreement should establish relations between the EU and Ukraine on a new , reinforced basis commensurate with the challenges posed by reality .
The European Union must understand and acknowledge the context in which this crisis has arisen .
There is little use calling for Ukraine 's leaders to reach a sensible internal settlement when not all the sides in the conflict are willing to share power , and the normal constitutional mechanisms have fallen into disrepair .
Some may use the crisis in Ukraine as a pretext for not doing anything , claiming that the situation there creates an obstacle to more serious engagement on our part .
That is exactly the opposite of what we should do .
The difficult internal situation is a challenge to the Union to set out a practical course of engagement for resolving the crisis , which might as such have wider implications for Europe .
It is high time to do more for Ukraine .
Tangible progress has been made since the Orange Revolution , but may be wasted if it is not further pursued .
Let us support Ukraine in its European choice .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , we too are worried about the ongoing political instability in Ukraine .
The situation that has arisen out of a conflict between the President and parliament is not doing the country any favours , and will undoubtedly affect cooperation between it and the European Union .
As long as the country is in a constitutional impasse , it will be difficult to hold further discussions on closer cooperation , let alone to make concrete progress .
I do not think , though , that we should be persuaded to think that this crisis could cancel out the results of the drastic events of the winter of 2005 and 2006 , when the Orange Revolution brought about fundamental democratisation of Ukraine , so that it is today a considerably different country from what it was before that , and the European Union has played a major , helpful role in this .
At the same time , though , it has to be said that this Orange Revolution has not managed to bridge the huge divisions in Ukraine , and there is as yet no consensus on the course that the country should take .
The current conflict is an expression of discord within it .
It also reflects the apparent failure , at any time , to strike a balance between the role of the different political players , the power of the different institutions and the varying views of the country 's future .
It is not in the first instance up to us to choose sides now .
At this moment in time , the case is already before the Constitutional Court in Kiev , and at this moment in time , I cannot see any really good reason to doubt its ability to pronounce a correct verdict about the right institutional balance , for it has proven before that it can act independently .
The lion 's share of the responsibility , however , lies with the political players and the political class .
Without a compromise on their part , a constitutional solution will not work either , so they will have to do everything in their power to invest in a compromise that brings the groups closer together rather than driving them further apart .
This is where the European players can , and indeed must , play a mediating role , and I welcome the comment Mr Gloser made in this connection .
It is in our interest too , because muddling along as they currently are not only produces losers in Ukraine , it also turns the EU into a loser , because we can only play our role there with some difficulty .
The challenge is now to overcome internal inconsistencies , so that they can carry on with the reforms needed to forge closer ties with the EU , and to flesh out Ukraine 's own ambition of becoming a Member State of the European Union .
This is the only credible basis on which the ambition that all political parties have in common can be achieved .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( HU ) The Ukraine is a strategically important partner of the European Union .
We have a fundamental interest in the Ukraine being a stable and democratic country with a functioning market economy .
This is why we supported and followed with great hope the events of the Orange Revolution .
Unfortunately , the period since then has proven that the country 's democratic , social and economic transformation is much more complex and contradictory than we had hoped .
The current crisis is another sign that this is the case .
The crisis in the Ukraine is fundamentally a matter of internal politics , and therefore the solution will have to be found within the Ukrainian internal political sphere , by Ukrainian politicians , through peaceful negotiations .
We can help in this by our active neutrality .
We are neutral with regard to the parties to the debate , but not with regard to the outcome of the debate .
For it is in our interest that ultimately the Ukraine be a stable , democratic state governed by the rule of law and nurturing close relations with Europe .
We cannot expect much from the Ukrainian Constitutional Court by way of providing a solution to the conflict , since it is itself a part of the problem .
The greatest responsibility therefore rests on the internal political forces within the Ukraine and on the country 's politicians .
At the moment there are discussions between the European Union and the Ukraine with a view to closer collaboration .
These discussions are moving along smoothly .
Our interests are that these discussions meet with success as soon as possible , but the leaders of the Ukraine have to understand that ties between their country and the European Union will only be strong if the Ukraine finds its way back to the path from which the recent crisis has diverted it .
Therefore we emphasise that a solution to the internal crisis has to be found as quickly as possible by means of peaceful negotiations , and that we are happy to be of assistance in seeking such a solution .
We will assist any process that leads to the consolidation of a democratic Ukraine .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( LV ) Thank you , Mr President .
The development of events in Ukraine is of particular interest to the European Parliament , and not only because Ukraine is a state neighbouring Europe .
Although Ukraine , at least in the near future , is not regarded as an applicant country to the European Union , nonetheless the successful development of democratic processes and the growing economic potential of the country in the medium term does not rule out such a possibility .
The development of democratic processes in Ukraine , its integration into the world economy and the multi-faceted development of relations with the European Union created strong foundations for steering the country 's internal political contradictions towards constructive solutions and for uniting Ukrainian society .
The current political crisis is a touchstone for the degree of development of democracy in Ukraine and its resolution will determine the direction of the country 's future development .
The European Union must encourage the movement of Ukraine 's warring political factions in the direction of compromise .
Political rivals need to be able to reach an agreement on eliminating shortcomings in constitutional reform , in order for these reforms to be directed towards preserving the balance between institutions of the national government and in order to ensure the stability of the state 's political system .
Solutions to the political crisis should be based on democratic methods , including early elections , which would give the Ukrainian people the final word in the resolution of the political crisis .
Thank you .

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , if you want to judge how far Ukraine has progressed in becoming a democracy , all you have to do these days is to look at Moscow and Kiev both at the same time ; a comparison between them shows that light years separate the two in terms of respect for democracy , and that , confusion and disorder notwithstanding , it is in a much more stable state in Kiev than one could have hoped three or four years ago .
It is because Europe - as everyone who has spoken so far has said - has such a great interest in Ukraine 's development as a stable democracy that I do not want to take a neutral view of President Yushchenko 's decision ; I think he is right in his political reasoning behind the calling of new elections .
If a political force such as the Party of Regions announces its desire to unite under its banner three hundred votes in the Ukrainian Parliament , then the President is perfectly entitled to declare that they , if they want that sort of majority , will have to seek it through the ballot box .
I believe that these elections are necessary , that President Yushchenko was right to bring political matters to a head , and that this is in Europe 's interests too , but , when these new elections are actually held , all the parties must accept their outcome and do much more to make the constitutional reforms , which have been promised for so long and put on the back burner , actually happen .

Something I would like to add for the benefit of the Members from Poland , since Warsaw is Ukraine 's principal advocate in the EU , is that Warsaw , where Ukraine is concerned , really is being very continental , very European , in its approach , and I wish that our Polish Members - with whom I share many points of agreement - would show evidence of this European approach , this continental thinking in other matters of dispute , for that would make it possible for us , once more , to pursue a good Eastern policy , not only in Ukraine , but also in other countries to the East of us .

on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , if the president of a state is to dissolve its parliament , it goes without saying that he has to do that in accordance with the rules laid down in that state 's constitution , and , just as President Yushchenko is perfectly entitled to do that under Article 90 of the Ukrainian constitution , which lays down in clear and precise terms the conditions under which a parliament can be dissolved , in the same way , the parliament itself has the right to appeal to the Constitutional Court and say that it takes a different view , that this article is not being applied consistently with the text of the constitution .
That is why democratic societies have the separation of the powers , which guarantees that , at the end of the day , it is the judicial power that determines how the text is to be interpreted .
That is , then , in the first instance , a legal opinion rather than a political one .
By the same token , any member of parliament is perfectly entitled to pass moral judgment on whether or not it is a good thing when members change sides , and I would like to remind you that groups in this House , too , have been formed and reformed , that members of it have left one group and joined another ; such a thing is perfectly normal in many countries within the European Union .

Members of the Ukrainian parliament do not take instructions directly from those who elect them , and , for as long as that is the case , they can be required to take moral responsibility , but cannot be pursued in the courts .
Mrs Harms is right ; there is a very considerable difference between Moscow and Kiev , and I would ask her to call to mind how the late Boris Yeltsin , when he was the Russian President , had troops fire on the Russian Parliament for not doing what he wanted it to do .
That sort of thing is not happening in Ukraine , where there are democratic forces to prevent it , and a good job too !

What I find intermittently disturbing in this debate is that we are in too much of a hurry to pigeon-hole the rival parties , making the assumption that President Yushchenko is the one the European Union can do business with , that the Prime Minister , Mr Yanukovych , is Russia 's protégé and represents Russian interests , that it is obvious that the two are of different nationalities , the one being Ukrainian and the other Russian .

The fact is , though , that they are both Ukrainian citizens and both of them represent that country 's interests ; that they differ in their ideas as to how they should go about that is perfectly normal and is regarded as such in every Member State of the European Union .

I think , then , that there are four things we have to do .
Firstly , we have to ask that the decision from the Constitutional Court be forthcoming in the immediate future .
Secondly , we should be thinking and talking about the possibility of sending a delegation to Ukraine .
Thirdly , it might also be possible to invite all the groups in the Verkhovna Rada to come here and have a debate .
Fourthly , we could also invite the sparring protagonists to come here on the same day in order to debate the matter together ; we do not want to have Mr Yanukovych coming here on one day , with Mrs Timoshenko arriving on the next , and Mr Yushchenko turning up the day after that , when what we want instead is a joint debate .
( The President cut off the speaker . )
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , as I see it , the future of the European Union and that of Ukraine are politically intertwined .
The EU of the 27 will need to nail its colours to the constitutional mast about its geographical scope and its external borders , which should , in principle , extend to include a European country such as Ukraine .
This clarity would also open up Ukraine 's European future prospects , which is undoubtedly a huge incentive for the Ukrainian reform forces , and in fact , an honest choice for all Ukrainian citizens .
Given the general political crisis situation in which Ukraine is currently embroiled , all this still seems far removed from reality .
Kiev 's discord , however , requires at this stage a powerful and creative contribution from Brussels within the framework of European neighbourhood policy .
For the sake of sustainable stability along our own eastern border , the Council and Commission cannot afford to wash their hands of the Ukrainian crisis .
How would you reconcile these strategic interests of the Union with a beckoning prospect for Ukraine ?
Mr President , I was privileged to observe the 2006 Ukrainian Parliamentary election , which was held in exemplary fashion .
Regrettably , the outcome then produced neither a stable government nor a climate of financial probity amongst many of the Verkhovna Rada MPs , who had little interest in politics and really only a vested interest to protect their business interests or avoid prosecution by acquiring parliamentary immunity .
I was therefore not surprised to hear the allegations that MPs were being bribed large sums to cross the floor in an attempt by the governing coalition to achieve the magical 300 seats , or constitutional majority , required to finally strip President Yushchenko of his remaining powers .
I personally have always championed Ukraine 's intrinsic right under Article 49 of the Treaty to apply for EU membership .
That is still some way off , given enlargement fatigue and the fear by some Member States of offending Russia .
Nevertheless , I believe the Council missed a trick in not granting Ukraine , in the heady days of the Orange Revolution , the same status as western Balkan countries like Albania of being called a potential candidate for eventual EU accession .
This would have been a great carrot to Westernising democratic reformist forces .
It is very regretful that this did not happen .
I believe Ukraine will come through this most recent constitutional crisis without violence and fully respect European norms of democracy , human rights and the rule of law .
I strongly condemn the alleged attempts to intimidate the Constitutional Court judges in their legal deliberations over the legitimacy of President Yushchenko 's dissolution of the Verkhovna Rada .
In the meantime , I welcome EU plans for a free-trade and visa-facilitated travel area after Ukraine joins the WTO .
Ideally , in 2008 the expiring PCA should be replaced by an association agreement .
Either way , Ukrainians must be brought closer to the European Union , where they rightfully belong .
It is clear to me that the enduring legacy of the Orange Revolution , namely a free press and democratic elections , remains intact .
Mr President , the essence of the crisis in Ukraine lies in the difference between the views of the political players regarding the check and balance mechanisms and separation of powers .
The crisis is fuelled by weaknesses in the interinstitutional equilibrium and how state institutions function .
The European Union should play its part and assume responsibility , since it did not do much to prevent the democratic deficit or the fragility of democracy which led to this crisis .
The good news is that parties now seem to be negotiating and there is a prospect of compromise .
We should not take sides .
It is wrong to view the Ukrainian people as being pro-Western or otherwise .
I think that we ought to assess them not by their rhetoric but by their deeds , in accordance with our values .
At the same time , we should at all costs avoid personal initiatives which could be misleading or be misused .
Likewise , we must avoid approaching the situation in Ukraine with national agendas in mind , and avoid competition within the European Union or Parliament which would be counterproductive .
On the other hand , we should not be indifferent to certain values .
As I mentioned , we have particular values which we are entitled to put forward when approaching this crisis .
We have to encourage all players to show a spirit of compromise , respect for the rule of law and democracy .
We should also ask them to accept the Constitutional Court 's decisions , even if it is not yet fully functional .
We have to encourage them to negotiate a package of constitutional modifications and improvements , preferably to be agreed before the Constitutional Court issues its decision .
Parliament 's delegation for relations between the European Union and Ukraine is in permanent contact with those concerned and is prepared to help .
We made it clear that the outcome will be a test of Ukraine 's ability to cooperate with the European Union and integrate with our structures .
We have also stated that one should not sacrifice the rule of law for the sake of a better institutional equilibrium or vice versa .
On the other hand , we should look at ourselves .
Do we have a clear vision of the future status of relations between the European Union and Ukraine ?
Do we really know what kind of state Ukraine should be ?
Did we express our expectations clearly enough ?
Do we have a strategy on how we ought to promote cooperation between Ukraine and the European Union ?
Do we have a plan on how we could draw Ukraine and its Euro-sceptics towards us ?
Are we interactive , not just reactive ?
I am afraid the answer to many of these questions could be ' no ' .
If we do not change the approach , I am afraid that the prospects are dubious , to say the least .
- ( PL ) Mr President , the European Parliament committed itself closely to Ukraine during the Orange Revolution .
We were greatly moved by the call from Kiev 's Independence Square for respect for human dignity , for a democratic country based on rule of law , for a country free of financial and political corruption .
It was the Ukraine we had all been waiting for .
From the platform of this House I now appeal to both sides of the conflict in Ukraine - president Yushchenko and Yulia Timoshenko , both symbols of the Orange Revolution , and to premier Yanukovich , representative of the ruling coalition - to resolve this crisis through negotiation .
Compromise is something that is greatly prized in the EU , it is a value which has repeatedly proved its worth in avoiding conflict .
It is good that today both sides have sat down at the negotiating table .
We hope that the negotiations will end soon , and with success .
Here in the European Parliament , we would like to continue to have the grounds and the conviction for declaring that we are open to the European aspirations of the Ukrainians .
( PL ) Mr President , three years ago we rightly supported democratic change in Ukraine .
Today Ukraine has media freedom and more efficient democratic institutions .
It is now up to the Ukrainians themselves to decide where their country will go next , and how to resolve democratic stresses and crises .
But that does not mean that we should just sit idly by .
By supporting the changes in Ukraine , we took on certain moral obligations , and it is our job to maintain good relations with the country .
So firstly , we must begin serious negotiations with Ukraine on closer energy cooperation .
This will help us secure supplies of oil and gas to the EU via Ukraine and independently of Russia .
Secondly , some active investment is needed in Ukraine , above all in oil and gas pipelines which have been short of funding or which are incomplete .
Thirdly , we need an EU diplomatic offensive among the Caspian states which are potential suppliers of oil and gas to the EU via Ukraine .
Fourthly and most importantly , we must conduct an open-door policy to Ukraine and treat it as our closest strategic partner and a future EU member .
This will be a way of providing true support for an independent , stable and democratic Ukraine with a free market .
It is up to us , and it is our duty to make it work .

Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we agree on many points where the assessment of the situation in Ukraine is concerned , and I agree with the many of you who have said , in the course of this debate , that it is now the people in positions of political power who must have their say , that it is they who have to take the decisions , that they must do so with respect for the institutions now established in that country - of which the Constitutional Court is one - and that they must not be put under pressure when they do so .
It is not appropriate , at the present time , that the European Union should play some sort of mediating role ; on the contrary , this is , in the first instance , an internal issue in which the persons responsible - the state 's President and Prime Minister - must reach some sort of accommodation with one another and find a way out of the crisis .
On the other hand , however - and Commissioner Špidla made this perfectly clear - the European Union has itself shown that the way to closer cooperation is through the commencement of negotiations and that Ukraine has the choice of many courses of action as it pursues its economic and political development .
It is that way that we should make our own over the coming weeks .
As I have mentioned , Mr Solana is in close contact with both groups , and it is important that we should not keep our distance , but should instead , so to speak , maintain a neutral attitude as regards what others have to do in Ukraine .
I do hope , though , that the people of Ukraine will find the prospect that the European Union has held out to them acceptable .
I am put in an optimistic frame of mind when I note that neither political camp has lost sight of the road that leads to Europe and that that is something on which they agree .
Madam President , honourable Members , the Commission fundamentally agrees with the assessment your House has given of the current political crisis and welcomes the prudent approach it has so far adopted to the present situation .
For our own part , we will keep an eye on the further progress of the crisis and play our part by encouraging those in positions of responsibility in Ukraine to see long-term political compromise in the interests of their country .
As has already been emphasised , the Commission continues to give firm backing to negotiations on the newly-extended agreement and sees Ukraine as one of our key partners , to which we are wholeheartedly committed .
We will follow with interest the ongoing debate in your House on Ukraine and now look forward to the final version of the Kamiński report .
The debate is closed .
Homophobia in Europe ( debate )
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on homophobia in Europe .
I have to inform you that the Union for a Europe of the Nations Group has tabled a motion to omit this debate on the grounds of inadmissibility .
Mr Szymański is to speak in defence of this motion and now has the floor .
( PL ) Madam President , I ask the motion for the debate on homophobia be declared inadmissible pursuant to Article 167 of our rules of procedure .
The grounds are that this House was misled as to the grounds for the debate , which is to discuss a bill that has never existed , does not exist and will not exist , as was quite clearly stated by the Polish premier .
The proposal is to discuss the statements of certain Polish politicians , which the Polish premier corrected by stating quite clearly that the Polish Government has not proposed any kind of discriminatory policy against homosexual circles .
In my view this should suffice to withdraw the motion for a debate on this issue , as the grounds for the debate do not exist .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , where anti-discrimination is concerned , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats ' position is perfectly clear ; it unequivocally endorses the decisions taken by this honourable House and expressed by it in various resolutions and legal acts .
Having discussed the Polish minister 's utterances in the House 's Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , we asked the House 's legal service to give us some idea of what importance should be attached to them and whether or not they were contrary to European law .
The legal service replied that it regretted its inability to give an opinion , as this was not a legal matter , and that is the very point made by our friend from the Union for Europe of the Nations Group .
The Group of the European People 's Party would like to see this issue taken seriously , and so we have moved that our agency recently formed to deal with these matters be mandated to monitor developments in this area and keep a close watch on them .
I would like to make it clear that , while the Group of the European People 's Party endorses these decisions , we do believe that there is no reason to bring these matters before Parliament again , and it is for that reason that we are in favour of deleting this item from the agenda .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Madam President , I think that the PPE-DE Group also knows that today we are not just talking about one statement by one Minister .
It is a much broader debate .
I think it is obvious to the majority in this House that this motion has only been put forward because some people do not want to discuss discrimination against homosexuals .
However , we are politicians in a democracy and if you do not like a resolution , you simply vote against it .
I cannot understand why this should be inadmissible .
Next time we will declare a debate about the internal market as inadmissible !
The topic falls within the remit of the European Union .
Equal rights are at the core of the European Union .
Since the Treaty of Amsterdam - I do not know whether everyone is aware - Article 13 stipulates that we have a role in anti-discrimination legislation .
It is not the first time that we have discussed homophobia and nor , unfortunately , will it be the last .
My point is that it is very clear : it is admissible because it falls within our remit .
The only reason it can be otherwise is because you do not wish to discuss it .
Let us debate it this afternoon and take account of it when we vote , but let us not distort a debate .
( Applause )
( The motion of inadmissibility was rejected . )
Madam President , Commissioner , honourable Members , ' Europe - succeeding together ! ' is the motto that the German Presidency of the EU has chosen as its watchword ; ' Europe - succeeding together ' - but what does that mean ?



It did mean that we , in Europe , have to keep on reminding ourselves of what is positive and good about diversity , respect , recognition and tolerance , because diversity , respect , recognition and tolerance are the core values upon which is founded the Europe in which we share .
At first sight , it would appear that those whose orientation is towards their own sex are today accepted and tolerated more widely than ever , and the work of associations plays a vital part in this , for movements of lesbians and gay men are ever better organised and encourage their members to affirm their sexual orientation openly .
Following as it does centuries of institutionalised discrimination , that is a heartening development .

I speak for Germany , and our history has given us a particular responsibility , in that , 60 years ago , homosexuals were among those who fell victim to the National Socialist machinery of extermination .
If one takes a second look , it rapidly becomes evident that homophobia is still very much alive and kicking in many parts of Europe , and current events show that in ways that make us ashamed .
Homosexuals are still exposed to prejudices , intolerance and officially sanctioned discrimination , and hate-filled tirades and acts of violence against sexual minorities are daily occurrences , often going unpunished by the criminal law .
In this regard , I can wholeheartedly endorse the words of Hans Winkler , who , speaking to your House as a representative of the Austrian Presidency of the Council not quite a year ago , stressed that : ' Wherever the safety and dignity of any man or woman living in the European Union are in jeopardy , so are the safety and dignity of all of us , and with it the credibility of our Union and its principles and institutions . '
That is still true today .
( Applause )
Discrimination against homosexuals is a problem against which we have to bring all the means at our disposal to bear .
Fighting homophobia calls for perseverance .
Continuous work is needed in order to progressively demolish the walls of prejudice and intolerance in people 's heads , while , at the same time , there is a need for the building of new structures founded on acceptance , equality and respect .
To be sure , people 's thinking cannot be changed overnight , but official positions and laws can be , and must be , changed if fundamental human rights are to be protected , and in this regard we , in Europe , have already taken a great step forwards .
The European Union is founded upon the principles of freedom , democracy , and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms .
To be specific , Article 13 of the European Communities Treaty , and also Article 21 of the EU 's Charter of Fundamental Rights explicitly forbid any form of discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation , and , over and above that , the EU 's Member States , as members of the Council of Europe , have committed themselves to adhere to the European Convention on Human Rights .
Ever since the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam in 1997 , the European Union has been empowered to address discrimination on a wide range of grounds , including discrimination by reason of sexual orientation .
Since then , the European Union has , by adopting the equality directives , put in place a wide range of regulations making it possible to take action against discrimination right across the European Union ; in the world of work , for example , an EU directive has prohibited discrimination on the grounds of religious belief , handicap , or sexual orientation .
We may well already have made considerable progress in changing the legal position on protection from discrimination and on the promotion of equal opportunities across the EU , but that is no reason for us to rest on our laurels , for even the best-drafted legislation avails nothing if the political will that it be consistently implemented is not strong enough and it is not supported by the population as a whole .
( Applause )

This is where there is work for the Commission to do , because its task is to monitor whether directives such as the ones I have mentioned are transposed properly and in good time by the Member States , and the newly-established Fundamental Rights Agency will in future be giving it additional support in this , as soon as it is fully up and running .
Even so , I have to emphasise that responsibility does not lie with the Commission alone .
We , too , as people in positions of political leadership in the EU or at national or regional level , can and must give a good example by promoting tolerance , understanding , mutual respect and peaceful coexistence , and we also need to keep a watchful eye on the Commission 's monitoring activities in the countries that are candidates for accession or have the potential to be such .
Accession negotiations no less than stabilisation and association agreements require that all conditions be fulfilled , and that includes specifically those applicable to the human rights of sexual minorities .


At the end of the day , we have to influence the way people think , in order that the walls of prejudice and intolerance in their heads may be brought down , and I am glad that the joint initiative of the Commission and the German Presidency of the Council made it possible for the first European Equality Summit to be held in Berlin on 30 and 31 January , marking the inauguration of the ' European Year of Equal Opportunities for All ' , which offers a unique opportunity to promote a more solidarity-based society and to mobilise everyone concerned in order to drive forward the European Union 's new Framework Strategy on Non-Discrimination and Equal Opportunities , both now and after 2007 .
The intention behind the programme is that the public be made more aware of the right to equal treatment and of the ways in which discrimination is combated , and to spread the news that everyone is entitled to equal treatment irrespective of their gender , race , ethnic origin , religion or outlook , of any disability they may have , of their age or of their sexual orientation .
Let us make use of this opportunity to fight intolerance and discrimination together and to promote diversity , respect , acceptance and tolerance as positive things .
Only if we work together can we ensure that the European Union can claim , with pride , to be ' united in diversity ' .
( Applause )
Madam President , honourable Members , I should first like to remind the Chamber that , in my statements on homophobia on 17 January 2006 , and on the increase in violence motivated by racism and homophobia in Europe on 14 June 2006 , the Commission strongly condemned all forms of homophobia , which represents an attack on human dignity .
The Commission wishes to emphasise its serious commitment , as a matter of principle , to upholding the basic rights on which the EU was founded .
The Commission will do everything in its power to fight homophobia .
It is necessary to combat discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation , which is clearly outlawed in Article 21 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Furthermore , Article 13 of the Treaty allows for the adoption at a European level of appropriate measures in the fight against discrimination on the grounds of gender .
In the year 2000 , the Council adopted a directive , on the basis of Article 13 , establishing a general framework for combating discrimination in employment and occupation on several grounds , including sexual orientation .
The Commission will monitor the implementation of the directive in all Member States , including Poland .
It will not hesitate to take firm action against Member States if directives are not properly implemented .
The Commission wishes to point out that in 2005 it launched studies into the current national laws prohibiting all forms of discrimination , including discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation , in areas other than employment and occupation .
These studies demonstrated that all Member States to which the studies related have in some areas gone further , often much further , than Community law .
There are , however , significant discrepancies between Member States as regards the extent of protection .
The Commission also stated in its political strategy for 2008 that it will propose fresh initiatives aimed at preventing discrimination in areas other than the labour market , including discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation .
In this context , in February the Commission launched an impact assessment in order to establish whether further EU intervention is justified in areas other than employment and occupation .
The Commission is now carrying out extensive consultation with the general public and with interested parties such as NGOs and social partners .
The results of the impact assessment are expected at the end of 2007 .
The Commission is aware that protection under the law alone is not enough to guarantee the protection of the people concerned .
It is also important to fight prejudice and stereotypes .
The European Year of Equal Opportunities for All 2007 establishes the following aims : to inform the citizens of their rights , to support diversity as a benefit , to promote equal opportunities for all in economic , social , cultural and political life .
The Commission welcomes the national strategies drawn up by the Member States in the context of the European Year .
All countries including Poland have incorporated all grounds of discrimination into their strategies .
The Commission has become aware of the statements made by a member of the Polish Parliament , who has declared his intention to table a proposal for an act that would ban the promotion of homosexuality in schools and in all other youth or leisure organisations .
According to information at the Commission 's disposal the proposal in question has yet to be drawn up and the statements made by the Polish Government are not binding .
This law , were it to materialise , could be in breach of fundamental laws contained in the European convention on human rights and the EU 's Charter of Fundamental Rights .
It also could be in breach of the principle of non-discrimination in employment and occupation , that is to say , in breach of Directive 2078 / EC .
The Commission will monitor further developments closely and will not hesitate to take action in the event of breaches of Community law .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to make clear - perhaps rather more calmly than before - that we in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats stand fully behind the European Parliament 's resolutions and behind the directives that have been adopted here and which the Commission has described .
Europe is an area of the rule of law and we have to defend that .
However , the occasion for today 's discussion , namely the statement by this Polish minister , which is unacceptable and which the Group of the European People 's Party rejects , is no reason for such a debate .
As Commissioner Špidla pointed out , when we discussed discrimination against homosexuals only a few weeks ago we saw that unfortunately some of Europe 's politicians say things that are unacceptable and we must fight them by political means .
I would like to say that it should make us stop and think when Polish Members of all groups - and I am thinking in particular of the discussion among the Liberals - have said that what happened in Poland is unacceptable , but that the debate must be conducted primarily in Poland itself and that Poland itself is dealing with the unacceptable things that were said there .
It has been said that Poland does not need a Big Brother interfering in its affairs and that they will deal with the matter themselves .
That should give us pause for thought .
We will do those who are fighting discrimination in Poland as we would wish no favours by making a big issue of it here .
Please therefore accept - and it is a procedural matter we are raising here - that we consider it inappropriate to debate this matter today , because we have enough decisions and directives about it .
No to discrimination , No to homophobia in Europe !
We therefore propose that our agency should continue to monitor the situation and keep an eye on it .
The Group of the European People 's Party will act accordingly tomorrow .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , on 16 January 2006 , I spoke in this very place to defend the resolution against homophobia .
It was not the first time , and I fear that it will not be the last .
Indeed , we were hoping to put a stop to the difference in treatment suffered by homosexuals on Union soil , and we fully realise that there is still a long way to go .
Let us remember that we are a few days away from the International Day against Homophobia .
The text being submitted to us today mentions not only known cases of homophobia in several EU countries but also , in fact , a declaration by the Polish Deputy Prime Minister .
It is not a question of stigmatising this or that government or this or that Member State , but these diatribes reveal this rise in homophobia within the European Union .
These remarks reveal , in fact , an unacceptable state of mind , and they are not the remarks of the man in the street .
They are those of a member of government .
This needs to stop .
We must once again take a stand against these sickening remarks , and I should like , here and now , vigorously to denounce the new revolting and despicable publication by Mr Giertych , a Member of our Parliament , who has just had his second pamphlet distributed , in which he implies that homosexuals are sick .
All those who rightly feel hurt by these hateful acts and words and all those young people who discover that they are different , some of whom go so far as to commit suicide , must know that that is not what Europe is about .
We cannot spend our time voting for resolutions designed to fight against the discrimination suffered by homosexuals .
In the future , we must think about tools that will enable us to act effectively .
From now on , everyone within the Union must shoulder his or her responsibilities .
( Applause from the left )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , I should like to clear up a misunderstanding : this resolution is not about Poland , but about homophobia .
Unfortunately , Poland does not have the monopoly on homophobia , which is , regrettably , to be found throughout the world .
It is a fact , though , that we discussed the problems in Poland one and a half years ago and that they are still there today .
As Mrs Roure rightly pointed out a moment ago , it not just anybody who has made statements of this kind , it is opinion leaders and members of the government who have contributed to a climate in which hatred and violence have become the norm .
Two weeks ago , a homosexual man was beaten to death on the street in my own country - a country that is extremely tolerant and liberal - because somebody thought he looked too effeminate .
Beaten to death !
Can you imagine ?
That is the kind of thing that happens in a climate that is created by people who are guilty of making homophobic statements .
You cannot say , therefore , that because there is no legislative proposal yet , we do not have a problem .
In that respect , I am also delighted that Mr Weber , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , as well as the ombudsman , have dissociated themselves so emphatically from the statements of the Polish minister in question .
I would be appreciative if the Council and Commission could respond with a statement that is just as emphatic .
As the Commission , and particularly the Council , have said , we do have laws , rules and treaties ; all of which are wonderful , but they have not managed to stop these people from making homophobic statements of this kind .
We would like to see more action .
We would , for example , like the Council to indicate the measures it intends to take in respect of this Education Minister .
Will you tolerate that this Education Minister attends meetings of European Education Ministers , or are you prepared to consider suspending him as long as he refuses to distance himself from his statements ?
This is the first time that we have made statements of this kind about Member States - plural , because there are several of them in the European Union .
We are always keen to point the finger at other countries , but I think that if we take Europe seriously , if we are a community of values , we should put our own house in order first .
I hope that this House will , today , send a very strong message to Europe and to the world that these are the values for which we stand .
Madam President , aggressive behaviour against homosexuals is a problem in many European societies , but it is certainly not the biggest problem .
We also have problems with such behaviour on the part of government agencies , such as the police , in Germany , the UK and Italy , for example .
Even so , it would never occur to me to debate the matter in the European Parliament and to give advice .
The governments of the Member States themselves know best how to deal with such matters .
It is unfortunate that some colleagues here do not think this rule applies to Poland , for example .
There can only be one reason for this .
This House is being led by the nose by a group of extremist MEPs who are riled by every word of polemics ( applause ) that stipulates or mentions homosexuality .
I would like to point out that homosexuals are not outside the scope of criticism .
That is the basis of democracy .
Submitting so easily to homosexual censorship has become a hallmark of this House .
I do not believe that this will do anything to help our authority .
( Applause )


on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , I should like to start with a word of reassurance for the last speaker - we have most definitely discussed hooliganism in this House before , but this is a different matter altogether , because in the case of hooliganism , the government does not incite the violence , whereas in this case , certainly in the case of Poland , I am beginning to get the feeling that homophobia is something that is - as it were - being staged by the state , certainly if one considers the statements that were made by members of the Polish Government to the effect that ' homosexuality is demoralising , perverse , a mental disorder and a threat to society ' .
I listened very carefully to what Commissioner Špidla had to say to the effect that ' if a law is proposed , then I will respond ' .
I appreciate this , and I gather that Commissioner Špidla can see why a law of this kind would constitute a threat to European values and an infringement of European law .
Things , however , are already going wrong , and this is something I find lacking in the speech , for governments cannot , of course , make all kinds of unconditional proposals , only then to retract them , with it then being said that there is not really a problem anyway .
After all , something is obviously being set in motion : this sort of thing is , of course , making homophobia more widespread , and the Commissioner is , after all , responsible for compliance with anti-discrimination legislation within the labour market .
Surely you do not believe that the concept of equal opportunities within a labour market can survive within a society where homophobia is rife , so what are you proposing to do about this ?
How do you propose to deal with governments that - to all intents and purposes - promote homophobia ?
What are the repercussions for the labour market ?
This is what I would like you to tell us .
Finally , for the benefit of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , I should like to say that I regret that you have given your backing to the Union for Europe of the Nations Group for what you claim to be merely procedural reasons .
It would be great if a whole delegation from Parliament , including your group , could attend a number of gay pride marches in Warsaw , in Riga and in many other countries .
I would greatly appreciate it if we could stand there , hand in hand , so that is my invitation to you , and , who knows - it might actually happen .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I think it would have been extremely hypocritical if the European Parliament had not debated this issue today , that is , if we had not debated the fact that homophobic public displays and statements have increased in Europe in recent years .
The Polish minister 's statements are embarrassing and come in the wake of his Government 's ban on the Gay Pride celebrations .
Despite public indignation , the minister has never withdrawn his very worrying assertions .
Sadly , this is not the only case in Europe .
Displays of intolerance are on the increase in our civilised Europe .
We often read about incidents of violence against men and women because of their sexual leanings , or we look on helplessly at the increasingly common cases of serious bullying at school , which can even lead young people to commit suicide , as recently happened in Italy .
For that reason , politicians must not show signs of intolerance and they must not issue statements like those the Polish minister made , because by doing so they risk legitimising homophobic attitudes .
This applies not just to politicians but also to the Church authorities , who more and more often do not miss an opportunity to show their aversion to homosexuals , branding them as sinners .
No kind of discrimination is acceptable and , more to the point , no discrimination based on sexual orientation is acceptable .
This Parliament rejected Rocco Buttiglione as a Commissioner because of what he said .
I think there needs to be a strong message from the Commission , so that it can keep the promises it made to adopt concrete measures against any form of discrimination .
Europe 's history and culture owe a great deal to the sensitivity of men and women who have been persecuted by authoritarian regimes and are still criminalised by reactionary and racist cultures in Europe .
We owe a great deal to Sappho , Pier Paulo Pasolini , Oscar Wilde , Michel Foucault and André Gide , and it seems to me a serious matter that , if it had been up to these obscurantist cultures , these great artists would never even have had a voice .
I believe , and I hope that Parliament too will agree with me , that a culture that is against homosexuals is unacceptable and should be strongly resisted .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( SV ) Madam President , the fact that homophobia is still a problem in Europe in 2007 is deeply unfortunate and alarming .
What is still more unfortunate is that there are fellow Members here in this House who , through their clearly homophobic statements , help make the situation worse for homosexuals , bisexuals and transsexuals .
They make such statements not only here in the European Parliament but also , to a large extent , on their home territories .
One of the consequences of stirring up homophobic feeling is that homosexuals , bisexuals and transsexuals are in danger of being exposed to both physical and psychological violence , as happened at quite a few Gay Pride parades around Europe last year .
What is even worse is when faith and religion are used as excuses for discriminating against EU citizens .
You can surely work out what I have in mind .
These are medieval values that do not belong in our modern society .
Europe in 2007 should be further along the road than that .
Let us combat homophobia wherever it occurs : in politics , in the media and in the circles in which we all move .

on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , we have already had a debate on homophobia in Europe - it was in January of last year - and , on that occasion , I said , among other things , that nobody in the European Parliament should accept that homosexuals , on account of their orientation , should be disadvantaged , attacked or intimidated in any manner whatever .
At the same time , I also warned against the spirit of political correctness which is gradually suffocating the free expression of opinion .
Indeed , in addition to homophobia and other phobias , a kind of ' freedom of speech-phobia ' is starting to develop , an irrational fear of letting people express their opinions freely .
What my group does not like in today 's debate and the resolutions that have been submitted , is that one specific Member State is being targeted on the basis of information the accuracy of which is in dispute .
This is not the right way to going about things .
We should exercise more care in this area so as to prevent the people in that Member State from turning away from the European Union even more .
Madam President , I rise in sadness , and not in anger .
After the Second World War , we still have not learned the lessons .
During the 1930s we stood and watched as Jews , Communists , trade unionists and homosexuals were taken off to the camps .
We stood .
We said and did nothing .
We have now moved on .
I say to those countries that have lived under domination and repression that they , of all countries , should know the value of fundamental human rights , freedom of association , freedom of speech and the right to a private life .
( Applause )
You should be teaching us about fundamental values .
That is why we will not hesitate to defend human rights and human rights defenders , wherever they are .
Let me say to anyone who feels under attack wherever they are - and , as a gay man , I could have been born in Poland , Latvia or the Czech Republic in fear of my life , in fear of my job - you are not alone , we are with you and we will win for the simple reason that goodness and justice always succeed in the end .
When we refer to politicians in office and the statements that were made , we are not talking about a one-off statement but rather a series of statements that have been calculated and made over the years .
Hate-speak creates a climate that somehow lives are inferior , that the person poses a threat to society .
A climate is created and fear is engendered , rights are under threat .
Words once spoken cannot be taken back and the harm that is done continues and the words too often empower the thug , which leads to violence .
I note that Mr Weber says ' no to homophobia ' .
However , it is sad that he also says ' no ' to doing anything about it here in this House today .
Let me finish on this : we will succeed , but that means we have to take up our responsibility to defend human rights and to end human rights abuses , wherever they are .
( Applause )
- ( PL ) Madam President , I would like to say a couple of words on behalf of the Polish delegation in the liberal democratic Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Group .
Firstly , we accept no form of discrimination , and are for complete tolerance in matters relating to this debate .
Secondly , we would like to stress that there is a big difference between non-discrimination in this area and the promotion of homosexual attitudes .
Tolerance yes , non-discrimination yes , but promotion no , because such promotion is not a measure of respect for human rights .
And finally , this is not a political issue , and should not be treated as such .
It is a moral issue which is deeply related to pluralism , which should characterise the European Union .
Madam President , those who were so willing to vote on the necessity for this debate just now were just as quick and willing to leave the hall .
That is the best illustration that their intentions were not real , but artificial and for political purposes .
It is an attempt to persecute a government in a country that does not please various options : liberals , the left , left-wingers , etc .
This I can understand , but , for heaven 's sake , while thousands of pyres were burning in your countries in the not too distant past , those who fled those pyres gathered in Poland .
Jews , persecuted throughout Europe , gathered in Poland .
Poland is a symbol of tolerance .
The attempt being made here to convince the world and Europe that Poland is a hotbed of intolerance towards homosexuals is a huge obscenity and political slander , a cynical ploy to delude public opinion in Europe .
I protest against this ploy because it is fundamentally untrue .
( Applause )
( ES ) I believe that Mr Cashman has conveyed the sentiment shared by the majority of this House very well and I therefore believe that we must insist once again that we must raise our voices in the face of certain attitudes .
It is not a problem of freedom of expression .
The problem is that certain statements that are hostile to sexual freedom come from governmental institutions , States and governments that are part of the European Union , who have signed treaties , such as the European Union Treaty , Article 6 of which clearly defines freedom of choice , including sexual choice .
Let us not confuse propaganda with the right to be free to be what one wants to be at any time , in any circumstance and in any Member States of the European Union .
I therefore believe that these statements , which , as Mr Cashman said quite rightly as well , are not isolated , are part of a tendency , of a calculated strategy to question the fundamental values of the European Union .
They cannot go unpunished .
This House had to react - I believe that it is doing so - though , regrettably , I fear that this is not the first time , but we will always insist and , although it is a bore to re-state the obvious , we must continue to do so because - as Mr Cashman also said - we are right and right will prevail .
( PL ) Madam President , everybody has the right to live and deserves respect and help .
That includes misguided and injured people who have succumbed to homosexual inclinations .
The solution , however , is neither blind acceptance nor intolerance , but understanding and kindness .
The solution is to help sufferers to get better , which is what is expected of us .
To accept homosexuality as something natural and normal is to glorify pain and suffering .
It is erroneous and dangerous political correctness .
Homosexual acts are against the laws of nature , because they preclude the gift of life .
Propagating them is an attack on the family and leads to abnormalities .
Dear Europeans , instead of levelling unfair criticism at Poland , you ought to be following Poland 's example of morality , tolerance and normality .
In this country , Coming out Straight .
Understanding and Healing Homosexuality has been published .
The author is Richard Cohen , who freed himself from homosexuality and is now a happy man and a father .
Let us benefit from his experience .
To the so-called defenders of human rights who are raising such a fuss today and magnifying the problem I ask - why are you ignoring the moral degradation of the media , discrimination against normal families , why do you shut your eyes to the mass murder of children in their mothers ' wombs ?
Do you realise that by promoting a civilisation of falsehood and death you are bringing about the destruction of Europe ?
( PL ) Madam President , the Campaign against Homophobia and the Lambda Association presented a report on the situation in society of bisexual and homosexual people in Poland in the years 2005 and 2006 .
The report paints a picture of persecution .
Every fifth homosexual has been jostled or kicked .
Half of those questioned have been insulted , harassed or blackmailed .
Harassment has increased in recent times .
Of the people who have experienced physical violence , almost 42 % had experienced it more than three times in the past five years .
It is with deep regret that I have to confirm that homosexuals today cannot rely on the institutions of the Polish state , ruled by a conservative-nationalist-populist alliance , to afford them effective protection .
In many statements representatives of the government openly express an ideology of hatred , intolerance and discrimination against homosexual circles .
That is what makes today 's resolution so important , my Polish compatriots of the right !
For these people , the European Parliament has become a champion of justice , a leading light which keeps alive their hopes that their fundamental citizen 's rights , and to a dignified life , will be upheld .
( Applause )
Someone wanted to raise a point of order .
Madam President , no , I cannot do that because there is not one .
I just wanted to say that listening to Mr Tomczak proves exactly why we need a debate on homophobia in this House .
Those were the most homophobic statements I have heard in this House for a very long time , and I am truly saddened by them .
( Applause )
President-in-Office of the Council .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to take advantage of this debate to come back to a speech which the Council President made here in this House about a Europe of values and tolerance .
It is a very important point that holds true in very many areas .
We have discussed a great deal about various other matters today , directing our gaze to problems outside the European Union .
If we do that - and we are right to do so - it is perfectly legitimate also to look at what we have still not put in order in our own House , namely intolerance towards homosexual orientation .
I therefore ask you , even if many take a different view on this matter , at least to tolerate there being a debate and to see that it is also important that the Commission should have instruments on the basis of which it can take appropriate action to combat such discrimination .
On behalf of the presidency I can only expressly repeat that it is our duty not to leave this with the Commission or the parliaments alone , but that we must also actively seek to make our society aware of this matter so that such discrimination no longer occurs .
I hope today 's debate has at least made a small contribution to that .
Member of the Commission .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , human rights are inalienable rights , and I feel that this is a fundamental value on which the entire European project is based .
Given that we have held a very profound and emotionally-charged debate , I should like to quote exactly what the Polish deputy minister said in his speech .
According to the deputy minister , the proposed law will affect all those who promote homosexuality or other deviations .
I feel that this detail is a sufficiently clear signal for us to conclude that if the law is adopted it will stigmatise a particular category of people on the grounds of their sexual orientation , and for this reason it is unacceptable from the standpoint of European law .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Commission will do everything in its power to uphold the rights of all citizens in all Member States , and I feel the message has come through strongly from this debate that homophobia is not only a phenomenon affecting some Member States , but rather a universal phenomenon .
It is of course true that today we are dealing with a speech made by a member of parliament in a particular country .
In conclusion of the debate , four motions for resolutions have been submitted pursuant to Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon .
( The sitting was suspended at 5.50 p.m. and resumed at 6 p.m. )

Council Question Time
The next item is Question Time ( B6-0017 / 2207 ) .
The following questions are addressed to the Council .
Subject : Bolstering the Frontex Agency
What action has the Council taken in order to bolster the operations of the Agency for the Management of External Borders ( Frontex ) , with a view to ensuring that there are no massive influxes of immigrants over the next few months , such as occurred last year ?
President-in-Office of the Council . ( DE ) I can answer your question as follows , Mr Ortega .
In its December 2006 Conclusions , the European Council noted the following : the capacity of the European Agency for Operational Cooperation at the External Borders - the European border protection agency Frontex - will be rapidly enhanced by ensuring adequate financial and personnel resources and their effective use , establishing procedures for emergency situations , strengthening operational means , reinforcing links with the Immigration Liaison Officer Network and completing the planned review of the Agency and its tasks in 2007 .
The Agency 's budget for 2007 has been increased appreciably and now stands at a total of EUR 22.2 million .
The number of persons employed is also increasing steadily and will total 87 in 2007 .
Regarding the establishment of procedures for emergency situations , the Council has recently concluded consultations with the European Parliament on a proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a mechanism for the creation of Rapid Border Intervention Teams and amending the Council Regulation as regards that mechanism .
The European Parliament will be voting on the regulation at the end of April .
The Justice and Home Affairs Council will then consider the regulation in June .
In addition to sending personnel , Frontex is currently compiling a centralised record , the ' tool box ' , of the Member States ' existing technical equipment for controlling and monitoring the external borders , which they are willing to put at the disposal of another Member State on a voluntary basis and on request .
On 15 February 2007 , the Council examined the progress made in establishing the ' tool box ' and called on the Member States to make an active contribution .
The situation was again reviewed at the Council meeting on 19 and 20 April .
The Council Conclusions of 14 and 15 December 2006 invited Frontex , together with the Member States of the region , to establish a permanent Coastal Patrol Network on the European Union 's southern maritime borders by mid 2007 .
The introduction of this network will be an important step for taking action jointly and in particular in coordination with the Member States against illegal immigration on the southern maritime borders .
The network will be an effective instrument for countering the growing migratory pressure in the region that is anticipated in the next few weeks and months .
The Coastal Patrol Network is planned to commence on 24 May 2007 .
Finally , in accordance with the Hague Programme which the European Council adopted on 4 November 2004 , the Commission will before the end of 2007 be submitting to the Council an assessment report on the Agency , and in connection with that assessment consideration could be given to the possibility of giving Frontex additional tasks or powers .
( ES ) Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I would like to acknowledge the work of the Council in this field , and I believe that you have explained it very clearly .
Our only concern , however , is that it appears that the operations that have been set up - specifically ERA 1 , ERA 2 and ERA 3 - are interrupted at a particular moment with regard to the protection of the Atlantic maritime border and the feeling is created amongst the public that , being of a temporary nature , protection is purely temporary and there is no permanent protection .
Does the Presidency believe that , by means of these measures , permanent control of this border - currently a sensitive border - can be guaranteed for the whole of the European Union ?
President-in-Office of the Council . ( DE ) In the first instance , the protection of external borders is of course the responsibility of the respective Member States .
In special situations , however , Frontex can be called in .
That is why it was created .
That means there may be cases where Frontex does not need to act because the Member State concerned can cope on its own .
But of course we want to get the idea across that in particular situations , such as illegal immigration , the European Union will show solidarity - that is what this European initiative was about .
Only it cannot be a permanent deployment .
Really , Frontex should only act in particular cases .
President-in-Office , thank you very much indeed for your answer on how to bolster the Frontex Agency .
You talked a lot about having more staff , or in other words having more money .
If that is your thesis , how would you recommend that the staff complement of Frontex be enlarged , and how much money should we put into the Frontex budget ?
I cannot give any definite figures at present , honourable Member .
We have set this agency up and we must now see what demands are made of it , what tasks the Member States are able to assume and what tasks can be performed by Frontex .
But in the talks on the matter that is still undecided .
At any rate , if I have understood the honourable Member correctly , we must also send out a signal that we have not merely created a pseudo institution , so that the public can see that here the European Union has recognised that it is necessary to have an agency to take effective action .
Then of course we must also be able to make the necessary resources available .
Question 2 has been withdrawn .
Subject : The investigation and prosecution of genocide , crimes against humanity and war crimes
In order to increase the effectiveness of the investigation and prosecution by law enforcement authorities of persons who have committed genocide , crimes against humanity and war crimes , the Council adopted Decision 2002 / 494 / JHA on setting up a network of contact points on genocide and Decision 2003 / 335 / JHA on the investigation and prosecution of serious international crimes .
What plans does the Council have to improve the institutional infrastructure of the network , in order to strengthen cooperation among the national authorities and contribute to the creation of a consistent approach by Member States in the fight against impunity for grave international crimes ?
What is the attitude of the Council regarding a suggestion to establish EUROJUST as the secretariat for the network ?
Will the Council consider including the network on the agenda of the Article 36 Committee ( CATS ) meetings so as to ensure a follow up of network conclusions ?
In light of Article 4 of Council Decision 2003 / 335 / JHA , how will the Council address the current lack of specialised war crimes units within Member States ?
President-in-Office of the Council . ( DE ) There is no proposal for improving the institutional infrastructure of the European network of contact points under discussion at the moment .
Up until now , the meetings of this network that have been held have been prepared in cooperation with the Council Presidency and General Secretariat .
Neither is there any proposal before the Council to set up a secretariat for the network within Eurojust .
If such an initiative is put forward , the Council will discuss it .
The Presidency can inform you , honourable Member , that the next meeting of the European network of contact points in respect of persons responsible for genocide , crimes against humanity and war crimes will be held on 7 and 8 May .
In accordance with existing practice , that meeting 's conclusions will be passed to the Article 36 Committee for further discussion .
Under the Council decision of 2003 , the establishment of specialised war crimes units is a matter for the Member States .
All the Member States have already designated contact points for the investigation of genocide , war crimes or crimes against humanity .
Yes , that is reasonably encouraging .
I hope that you will conclude that Eurojust should indeed be a secretariat or at least a contact point .
I am glad that there is going to be a meeting in May of the contact group - unfortunately there was none under the last Presidency .
Can you assure me that the European Parliament will be informed about the conclusions of that meeting ?
As the Council begins the process of developing the post-Hague JHA programme , what steps will be taken to ensure that the EU 's commitment to fight impunity from international crimes , genocides , crimes against humanity and war crimes , both within the Union and outside , is included as a vital part of the justice , freedom and security agenda so as to create a single area of justice for victims of the gravest crimes ?
President-in-Office of the Council . ( DE ) On this question I would like to say that the right of initiative in the area of public health lies exclusively with the Commission .
There is at present no legislative proposal concerning diabetes before the Council .
May I point out that under Article 152 ( 4 ) in conjunction with Article 251 of the EC Treaty such a proposal would fall under the codecision procedure ?
I would also like to draw your attention to the Council 's answer to the written question from 2006 .
Given that type 1 diabetes predominantly affects children and that poor management of diabetes in children can cause problems in the long run , such as kidney failure , blindness and amputations , what measures can the Council put in place to ensure the provision of appropriate education for the patient and his family , as well as providing education campaigns about the disease , in order to prevent the discrimination that many diabetes sufferers come across ?
President-in-Office of the Council . ( DE ) You are quite right to raise the issue of the consequences of type 1 diabetes , especially in children .
I would like to point out , however - please do not misunderstand me - that this is primarily a matter for the Member States .
It is , however , important to do research and make discoveries and then to exchange those findings at European level , even if the responsibility for health matters does lie with the Member States .
We are talking about the wellbeing and future of children and the right thing to do is to exchange findings promptly and effectively .
The President-in-Office replied that the EU has no legislative competence , which is true , but it has the Framework Programme for Research .
Does the Council believe that the EU is providing enough financial backing for research into type 1 diabetes ?
My understanding is that scientists believe that a cure for type 1 diabetes is deliverable , although a concerted effort will be required to achieve this .
It is probably the worldwide disease for which we have the best chance of finding a cure .
I should add that I must declare an interest , as my husband is the Chairman of the UK arm of the Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation , which supports research on type 1 diabetes .
In its 2007 Spring Report , the Commission noted that the availability of affordable child care is a problem in some Member States , making it difficult to reconcile work and family life .
The 2006-2007 Joint Employment Report expressly points out that some Member States have set national targets for child care .
These efforts should be recognised .
At the same time , however , we should keep an eye on further developments in the Member States to see that the Barcelona Process obligations are complied with .
Thank you , President-in-Office , but with respect that was a very general answer .
Perhaps that is all you can provide me with at this stage , but could I ask you to kindly e-mail me any details you have , or indicate how I can obtain a breakdown of details by Member State because , as you rightly say , improving the work / family life balance is a priority and it is in all our interests to ensure that priority is widely shared .
I hope that you will in turn encourage your successor Presidency to take it on board as a priority too .
President-in-Office of the Council . ( DE ) A few weeks ago we had a debate against the background of the Alliance for Families and the objectives we set ourselves in Barcelona .
In that debate I proposed , on behalf of the Presidency , that a report should be presented next year on how far those objectives had been achieved in the individual Member States .
In the meantime , we have also produced a list of criteria on the basis of which this report will be produced in 2008 .
That is an important point .
I am also pleased to say that child care has featured prominently at a number of conferences in the last few weeks , including in the debate about the Alliance for Families .
As you know , I am from Germany and I am familiar with the debate that is currently taking place in our country .
We have also found that the problem is not confined to Germany , however .
What can we do , then ?
So far as best practice is concerned , the experiences and results in achieving those objectives must be set out in the report I mentioned next year .
We will send you the information you require in due course .
( DE ) You mentioned Germany , Minister .
I would like to know about the position regarding child care in the old and new Länder .
In my opinion , the fact that the child care situation is particularly bad in the new Member States is a problem for the EU .
How do you see this problem ?
President-in-Office of the Council . ( DE ) There are of course different trends in the European Union , and there is no need to make a distinction between old and new Member States .
We have found that some Member States have developed a sensible infrastructure over many years - it was a political objective - while other countries are lagging behind .
The East German Länder had a different structure even before reunification , and facilities exist there .
We do of course have another problem to deal with in the East German Länder , namely the question of depopulation , of people moving away from particular areas because the economic situation is not as people imagined .
In general terms , Germany needs to find a way of providing all-day care and care for small children under three .
The German Bundestag is currently discussing how we can meet the targets we set ourselves in Barcelona .
( EL ) Madam President , I would like to point out that daycare cannot become a substitute for families ; it can only facilitate them .
Therefore , I would like to inquire about the quality of the service provided , namely how can it be assured and how can we be certain that the personnel hired by these institutions will be capable of determining possible learning difficulties or other disorders , in order to protect children while growing-up , but also provide them with a solid educational future for the rest of their lives ?
President-in-Office of the Council . ( DE ) First , I would like to point out that the amendment to the Television Without Frontiers Directive will be adopted under the codecision procedure .
As co-legislator , the European Parliament is just as entitled as the Council to bring influence to bear on the content of the legislation .
The Council has taken account of the particular concerns you raise in revising the directive .
In particular , the Council is considering extending the scope of the directive so that appropriate provisions for the protection of minors and a ban on incitement to hatred will also apply to new no-demand services and to services offered over new platforms such as mobile networks and the Internet .
The Council envisages that the revised directive will recognise that instruments for co- and self-regulation can make an important contribution to this .
As you know , the final scope of the revision will have to be agreed together with Parliament .
I also made clear at yesterday 's meeting of Presidents that the Presidency is very keen to work together with the European Parliament to reach a decision quickly .
( EL ) Madam President , I would like to specifically ask the representative of the Council on the free market and free competition with regard to these products and the obstacles that may arise from this directive , which prohibits certain products that are hazardous to children .
I would also like to ask if a relevant regulation would be provided for , with regards to trade relations with third countries , so that the imported products can be inspected .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( DE ) This matter is still being discussed at present . Of course cross-border transmission also plays a major part .
We are continuing to conduct an intensive dialogue with the European Parliament on the important question of how we can protect children and young people from certain products .
( DE ) Minister , is there any chance of using this directive to at least get the public sector media in the European Member States to largely stop depicting violence on radio and television ?
President-in-Office of the Council . ( DE ) First of all , we are not seeking to distinguish between private and public television channels , but to have a general directive for television at European level .
I also assume that a number of television stations have taken it upon themselves to ensure that no one is incited to hatred and the like by their programmes .
( LT ) The programmes of our local television broadcasters contain a lot of material from the United States .
It is precisely from this country that we see plenty of violence and aggressive programmes and films , which have a very bad influence on young people and children .
We see events from the life of the United States itself : massacres in schools and universities .
Could we have any influence on limiting the amount of this type of material being imported and broadcast in Europe ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( DE ) Mr Posselt , the European Council 's decision of 15 and 16 December 2005 to give the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia the status of a candidate country stands in recognition of the country 's reform effort so far .
The European Council stressed that further steps to bring Macedonia closer to the EU will be considered if the conditions and requirements laid down in the Conclusions are satisfied .
The Commission will keep you informed of these developments in its progress reports .
After examining the developments in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia as set out in the Commission 's progress reports , at its meeting on 11 and 12 December last year the Council expressed its regret at the slowing of the pace of reform in 2006 .
On 14 and 15 December last year , the European Council reiterated that the individual countries ' progress along the road to the European Union depends on the efforts each of them makes to satisfy the Copenhagen Criteria and the conditions of the stabilisation and association process .
So far as the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia is concerned , it urged the country to step up the pace of reform in the key areas and to implement the priorities laid down in the European partnership in order to make further progress in the accession process .
The country 's government faces great challenges , especially in the areas of police and judicial reform and the fight against corruption .
As I stressed here back in March in answer to a question from Ryszard Czarnecki , the questions that remain open must now be tackled quickly .
The pace of the accession process therefore depends primarily on the efforts and achievements of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia itself .
The Commission 's next progress report will shed light on this .
The European Union will continue to actively support the country in making this objective a reality .
( DE ) Three brief comments on that excellent reply .
Firstly , I would like to ask you what the position is with regard to the implementation of the Ohrid Agreement , in particular local government reform .
Are you satisfied with the developments in home affairs ?
Secondly , what do you think of the future Slovenian Council Presidency 's announcement that it will work towards a date ?
Thirdly , has there been any easing of tension over the tricky question of the name ?
President-in-Office of the Council . ( DE ) I will begin with the last point , because I know it is very controversial .
It would be best if the two countries concerned could settle the matter between themselves , but they have not yet been able to agree on anything .
Regarding the date , if I have understood you correctly , it was about the Slovenian Presidency .
What I said before shows that while the European Council has sent out a signal by giving the country candidate status , we are however still not conducting accession negotiations , hoping that further progress will be made after this debate .
I do not think it is right to set a date at this point .
If the conditions are satisfied , if the necessary pace of reform is reached , if the results are there , then the European Council is ready to set definite dates so that the next steps can be started .
So far as the Ohrid Agreement is concerned , Mr Posselt , I am unable to give you a precise assessment of the situation at present , but I will gladly send you the answer later .
( DE ) Minister , if Macedonia really does join the EU at some point , it could trigger something of a Babylonian confusion of languages , since that country alone has six official languages .
Is the Council really aware of the problem of an impending language explosion ?
President-in-Office of the Council . ( DE ) At the Thessaloniki summit the European Union unanimously said that , in view of previous events in the countries of the western Balkans , it is necessary to offer those countries the prospect of accession .
That decision was motivated by the desire to bring stability to the region .
All the things you have just raised in connection with the diversity of languages will not have been considered from the outset .
The important thing , however , is that we help to bring stability to the region , and the problem you raise is therefore a subordinate point for the time being .
In any case , the European Union has already solved quite different problems .
( DE ) Do you share the view that the preparation and approval of a new basic treaty or constitutional treaty or simply of a new treaty is a prerequisite for the accession of Macedonia , Croatia or other countries of the western Balkans ?
President-in-Office of the Council . ( DE ) The Council has reacted strongly to the Sudanese Government 's refusal to issue visas for the United Nations Human Rights Council 's assessment mission to Sudan and it deeply regrets the lack of cooperation on the Sudanese Government 's part .
The European Union had already made repeated approaches to the Sudanese Foreign Minister and appealed to Sudan to cooperate with this mission .
The Council welcomes the fact that , at its fourth session , the UN Human Rights Council noted the Mission 's report and unanimously adopted a resolution on the human rights situation in Darfur , charging a team of special rapporteurs with reviewing all existing recommendations for improving the human rights situation in Darfur and pressing ahead with their implementation .
On 15 March 2007 , the Council reaffirmed its support for urgent consideration of further measures against Sudan by the UN Security Council , pointing out that under UN Security Council Resolution 1591 anyone hindering the peace process must be called to account and appropriate measures taken .
The Council also expressed its resolve to consider further measures , especially in the context of the UN , against any party to the conflict who obstructs UN support for the African Union mission in the Darfur region of Sudan , including the carrying out of the agreed hybrid AU-UN operation .
The Darfur conflict has been discussed regularly in talks with both China and Russia , including at political dialogue meetings , for example .
We have consistently taken the view that the Sudanese Government must work towards a political settlement of the conflict and give its unequivocal agreement to the implementation of the full UN support package for the AMIS mission .
deputising for the author . - There is a dreadful sense of impasse over Darfur , with lots of hand-wringing but no progress , and recent events have rather added to that feeling .
In the absence of an agreement on a UN peacekeeping force , is the Council considering , among the further measures it is looking into at the moment , the possibility of an EU-enforced no-fly zone , with the enforcement planes based over the border in Chad ?
That has been discussed periodically since 2004 .
Does the President-in-Office feel that now is the moment to implement it ?
President-in-Office of the Council . ( DE ) The Council of Foreign Ministers discussed Sudan and Darfur again last Monday in Luxembourg .
As you may know , the United Nations special envoy , Jan Eliasson , took part .
The situation in the region , which was difficult in any case , has not been improved by the fact that , in addition to the existing conflicts between the different parties in Sudan , various tribes are suddenly making war on each other .
At the special envoy 's express request , however , the Council has not taken any further measures for the time being .
The special envoy asked that we should again seek by political and diplomatic means to secure agreement for a UN-backed mission , perhaps with a change of attitude on the part of China .
The foreign ministers stated , however , that the European Union is considering further effective measures against Sudan if there are no signs of that in the foreseeable future .
It cannot be put off for ever , we cannot postpone things for weeks and months on end and simply wait .
( LT ) Chancellor Merkel , when introducing the Berlin Declaration , mentioned Darfur as a wound shared by all of us , and she said that it was time for the European Union to take unilateral action .
I would like to check again : how long do we have to wait for these decisions ?
Are diplomatic negotiations still continuing , even though they have not produced any results so far , and most likely never will ?
President-in-Office of the Council . ( DE ) I have tried to make clear - it was what the Foreign Ministers Council before last wanted - that we want to get a fresh picture and to do that through the United Nations special envoy this time , but also by getting information from the African Union 's special envoy .
I readily acknowledge that it really is a sore point , but I must ask you to take this special envoy 's request seriously and try to see whether certain movements that have taken place in the last few days might not be conducive to a solution after all , making a joint mission possible .
I do repeat , however , that this is not a project where we will wait week after week without seeing results .
The European Union should start taking appropriate measures if this process , which Mr Eliasson wants and which we also want , fails to start .
( FI ) Mr Minister , the European Union has combat forces , with German , Finnish and Dutch troops in reserve these days .
Can you imagine a situation in which combat forces would be used to calm the situation in Darfur ?
Mr Pflüger , as has already been explained in the answer to question 619 / 2007 , the Council is aware of the extrajudicial executions in the Philippines .
The European Union regularly expresses its deep concern about these occurrences , urging the authorities to tackle the problem quickly and also to allow independent investigations so that the perpetrators can be brought to court and preventive measures taken .
As already stated in the answer to which I referred , the European Union is willing to assist the Philippines in developing its judicial system .
The EU is perfectly clear that what is needed in order to put an end to extrajudicial executions in the Philippines is not just specialist expertise but that political will on the part of the top leadership is also crucial .
The EU will continue to press for such will to be shown .
We hope that the proper investigation and prosecution of these crimes will also have a preventive effect .
In April , the EU Member States and the Commission will be making preparations to send a fact-finding mission to Manila in the near future to assess the need for specialist assistance .
This comes in answer to a request from Foreign Minister Romulo , who has asked for help in implementing the recommendations of the Melo Commission , which was charged with investigating the unexplained killings .
( DE ) Is the Council aware of the following extrajudicial executions : Cipriano Ligaspo , murdered on 14 March ; Carlito Getrosa , murdered on 11 March ; Che Che Gandinao , murdered on 10 March ; Felisa Timog Ocampo and Renato ' Atong ' Torrecampo Pacaide , murdered on 2 March ?
My question is , are sanctions in fact being considered ?
You have just said that the Philippines Government has asked for assistance and will be given it .
But the essential part of the problem is that the government is involved .
In view of that , is this the right approach ?
President-in-Office of the Council . ( DE ) The Council has no evidence that the Sri Lankan Government was connected with this incident .
No conclusions can therefore be drawn regarding the incident 's consequences for relations between the EU and the Sri Lankan Government .
Looking at the situation more generally , however , the Council is deeply concerned about developments in Sri Lanka .
The European Union is urging both sides to end the violence immediately and to return to the negotiating table without delay so that a workable solution to the conflict can be found based on constructive proposals .
Despite the obvious difficulties , as one of the co-chairs of the Tokyo Conference of donor countries the European Union is continuing to examine every possible way of supporting the peace process in Sri Lanka .
( DE ) You have just said that the Council is deeply concerned , but in that case my question is quite specific : what does the Council intend to do to bring pressure to bear on Sri Lanka to end the military offensive against the Tamil Eelam freedom fighters - which has already claimed many civilian casualties - and force them to return to the negotiating table ?
My second question is : is the Council aware that arms from EU Member States are also being used in this conflict ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( DE ) On the last point , I know nothing about this , but we will look into it and see whether there is any information available .
On the question of the measures the Council is thinking of taking , I can tell you that the Council is supporting the work of the Monitoring Mission in Sri Lanka and the Norwegian mediator .
We have repeatedly called on the warring parties to observe the 2002 armistice agreement and to respect human rights .
The European Union has also submitted its own draft resolution on the human rights situation in Sri Lanka to the Geneva Human Rights Council .
This draft expresses the EU 's concern at the recent escalation of violence in Sri Lanka and calls for an immediate end to the violence and the violations of human rights and basic humanitarian rights it entails .
I hope that will lead to a next step .
We will look again at the question you raise and let you have information on the subject .
( DE ) When the present escalation of the conflict in Sri Lanka began , this House debated whether the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam ( LTTE ) should be placed on the EU terror list .
What is your present view of the LTTE having been placed on the terror list now that the conflict has escalated enormously ?
Was it in retrospect the right thing to do ?
In particular , was it right at that point in time ?
A second question : Norway is playing a very positive role in this conflict , especially in negotiations , and Norway has criticised the EU through diplomatic channels , saying that the EU 's role has been rather biased towards the government .
What do you say to that ?
The Council plays no direct part in the planning or construction of the pipeline , because the implementation of Community law is the responsibility of the Member States and the Commission 's task is to ensure that the Member States apply the law properly .
( LT ) Without a doubt , I am not satisfied with that reply .
It does not mean that European Union Member States can do whatever they wish on EU territory .
Russian experts have already established that there is a lot of weaponry [ dumped on the seabed ] , and now they are thinking about changing the route of the gas pipeline .
The Russians think that Gazprom will be allowed to set up armed militia units , which together with Baltic navies will control the whole pipeline and all who sail in the area and use the environment .
The Baltic Sea belongs to all of us , and I do not think that this is a matter for just two countries .
President-in-Office of the Council . ( DE ) I would again like to make clear that this pipeline is not being planned by a state but by private companies .
These companies have to submit planning applications .
As different Member States are also concerned , the relevant regulations must be complied with .
As I have already said here some time ago , there are different aspects .
You mentioned the munitions that have indeed been found .
The ecosystem and other issues must be taken into account .
However , all of that can only be examined in the light of European law if an application has been made and the relevant procedures have been initiated .
There are no special rights for particular companies : national and European regulations , especially those concerned with environmental protection , must be complied with .
( SV ) If a dispute arises and an environmental test is carried out in Swedish waters , is it the European Court of Justice or the Swedish environmental court that decides the case ?
Very different information has been forthcoming as to whether the Council has approved the construction of a German-Russian gas pipeline under the Baltic Sea .
Has the Council taken such a decision ?
The Council as such is not involved in the initiatives relating to the Leipzig Charter for Sustainable European Cities and the EU territorial agenda .
These initiatives are taken by the Member States on an informal basis .
The Leipzig Charter and the EU territorial agenda are offers by the European ministers for regional and urban development to take better account of urban and territorial matters in the implementation of EU policies , for example in the question of how an integrated regional and urban development policy can contribute to the Lisbon and Gothenburg objectives of more sustainable economic growth and strengthening the European social model .
The results of the informal ministers ' meeting will therefore be passed on to all European institutions .
These can then examine independently to what extent taking account of urban and territorial matters will be helpful in achieving their political objectives .
( EL ) Madam President , I would like to thank the Minister for his response .
The territorial charter , however , is certainly a priority of the German Presidency and holds a significant place in its programme .
Therefore , I would like to ask the Minister to explain to us in greater detail , what the goals are of such a territorial agenda , how it is viewed by the German Presidency and how it is included in its future programme , up to the end of June .
President-in-Office of the Council . ( DE ) Particular results must first be evaluated , and then they can be passed on to the appropriate institutions , at least where topics have been identified .
The approach was that opportunities for integrated urban or regional development also exist in cross-border areas .
Our presidency has only slightly more than two months left to run .
I expect the President-in-Office will be presenting results at the end of his presidency and making them available to the institutions concerned .
Questions which had not been answered for lack of time would receive written answers ( see Annex ) .
I should like to thank the President-in-Office and colleagues .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 7 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Rapid Border Intervention Teams ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Deprez , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a mechanism for the creation of Rapid Border Intervention Teams and amending Council Regulation ( EC ) No 2007 / 2004 as regards that mechanism - C6-0253 / 2006 - .
Mr President , the Commission strongly welcomes the excellent compromise reached by the European Parliament and the Council on the Rapid Border Intervention Teams Regulation .
As you know , over the last few years the European Union has experienced an increasing need for providing operational assistance to the Member States which , due to their geographical location and the complexity of their external borders , have to shoulder the heaviest burdens in terms of border control .
In response , the European Union created the Frontex Agency in 2004 as a measure for channelling the solidarity between Member States and the Community in terms of operational cooperation .
Moreover , a new External Borders Fund will be used from next year for ensuring financial solidarity , by boosting the capacity of all Member States to deal with the challenges posed by their different external borders .
The establishment of a mechanism for the creation and deployment of Rapid Border Intervention Teams is a further measure of solidarity .
It is an important step forward in the cooperation between Member States and the Community , by controlling the external borders of the European Union and performing checks on people at these borders .
The Rapid Border Intervention Teams will become a highly trained and specialised reserve of border guards , which will be deployed at short notice , by the Frontex Agency , to a Member State in need of such assistance .
As something new and ground-breaking in this regard , the rapid teams will be enabled to carry out all necessary functions related to the checks on people at external borders , in the same way as checks are performed by the national border guards of the host Member State .
In this context , the Commission would like to make the following oral statement on the International Law of the Sea and international protection obligations .
Each Member State participating in operations coordinated by the Frontex Agency on the high seas remains fully bound by its individual obligation to respect the principle of non-refoulement as enshrined , in particular , in the Geneva Convention relating to the status of refugees of 28 July 1951 and the United Nations Convention against Torture and Other Cruel , Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment vis-à-vis all people under its jurisdiction .
When an interception or rescue operation is carried out in the territorial waters of a Member State , the Community acquis on asylum is applicable .
This includes the Dublin Regulation .
Consequently , in the absence of any other relevant criteria , the Member State on whose waters the interception or rescue operation is carried out , would be responsible for examining any asylum claims .
These principles remain fully valid in cases of future deployments of Rapid Border Intervention Teams following the adoption of this regulation .
As the Commission underlined in its communication of 30 November 2006 on reinforcing the management of the southern external maritime borders , it is not clear under what circumstances a state may be obliged to assume responsibility for the examination of an asylum claim when the interception or rescue operation takes place on the high seas or in the territorial waters of a third country .
Similarly , it is unclear under what circumstances the Member State hosting an operation coordinated by the Frontex Agency could be considered as ultimately responsible for compliance with this principle .
Evidently , the further development of an integrated system for managing the external maritime borders should be based on a clear common understanding of the Member States ' protection obligations .
To this effect , the Commission suggested that Member States should address these issues collectively and pragmatically , either in the context of broader bilateral or regional agreements or through the development of practical guidelines in close cooperation with the International Maritime Organisation , the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and other relevant stakeholders .
In order to support this process , the Commission will soon publish a study on the Law of the Sea addressing these and other relevant issues .
The publication of the study will be followed by an expert meeting with Member States to identify the practical follow-up , having regard to the limits of the Community 's responsibility in this area as well as the oral statement .
Finally , I would like to stress once again that the Commission is very pleased with the good cooperation between the three institutions involved in reaching agreement on this extremely important piece of new Community legislation and would like to warmly thank the rapporteur , Mr Deprez , the shadow rapporteurs and the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs for their excellent contributions to achieving success on this file .

rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , allow me to express my pleasure by saying straight away that , if the RABIT draft regulation can be put to the vote in this House tomorrow with a view to an agreement at first reading , it is thanks to the fact that our three institutions have cooperated in what I would describe as an exemplary fashion .
It is thanks to the Commission , firstly . Its initial proposal was of a high quality , and throughout the discussion process it has continually shown a great capacity for smoothing things over and for easing the way for compromise .
It is also thanks to the Council , particularly during the Finnish Presidency and now during the German Presidency . It has continually affirmed its desire to succeed and has spared no efforts in order to convince all of the Member States .
It is thanks , in particular , to the most recent presidency of Mrs Monika Schmitt-Vockenhausen .
For my part , on behalf of Parliament , I have been able to rely from the start on the solid support and confidence of the majority of the shadow rapporteurs from the other political groups within the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , and I should like publicly to thank them .
I hope that they find , in this , the expression of my gratitude .
The root of the problem to be dealt with , Mr President , is both simple and urgent .
It consists of organising assistance from the Member States for those of the Member States that have to cope with the sudden arrival of huge numbers of illegal immigrants , who are anxious to cross the Union 's external borders .
This problem now affects , as we know - and tragic images constantly remind us of the fact - the countries of the south of the Union .
Yet , no one can rule out the possibility that , in the future , other borders - particularly those to the south-east and to the east - will be under the same sudden , recurring pressure .
The draft regulation that has been submitted to this House confirms four major principles , which I have always vigorously defended on behalf of Parliament .
The first principle : solidarity in the area of external border control is not an option , but an obligation .
It is for this reason that the draft regulation stipulates that the Member States must contribute to the rapid intervention reserve and must make border guards available to Frontex , at its request , unless they themselves are faced with an emergency situation to which they must attend .
The second major principle : when deployed on the territory of another Member State within the rapid intervention teams , border guards posted to the reserve are not auxiliaries or second-rate agents compared with the border guards of the Member State .
Of course - and this goes without saying - members of the teams will receive their instructions from the Member State that is hosting them but , otherwise , they are on an equal footing with the national border guards .
The tasks that they may carry out are the same .
They have the right to wear their own uniform , with the addition of a European badge .
They may carry their service weapons , in accordance with the national law of their own Member State , except in the event of a disagreement between the two Member States concerned .
They may be authorised to consult European and national databases , and their accreditation document , which was provided for in the initial draft , has been stripped of all the cumbersome elements that I feel it contained .
The third major principle - and I say this , in particular , for Mr Catania 's benefit - is that respect for fundamental rights applies in all circumstances .
It is for this reason that the draft regulation stipulates : firstly , that the members of the teams , together with the national border guards , must abstain from any discriminatory behaviour ; secondly , that they must act in accordance with the Member States ' obligations with regard to international protection and non-refoulement ; and , thirdly , that the members of the teams must act fully in accordance with the obligations of international maritime law , especially in relation to search and rescue .
That is what the Commissioner has just reaffirmed to us here .
Therefore , Mr Catania , the amendment that you are tabling is unnecessary .
I would even say that it is insulting because it makes the assumption that , when they discover ships that are in distress , border guards , including those from Spain , Italy or Malta now , would not be particularly concerned about saving people .
Lastly , the draft regulation stipulates that the European directives on the protection of personal data must be applied in full .
The fourth principle : while the situation is urgent , it is urgent for everyone .
Given that the issue is one of dealing with emergency situations , the terms of the regulation provide for very short deadlines in which to intervene .
The director of Frontex has a maximum of five working days in which to decide how to intervene .
Once the operational plan has been established , the actual deployment of the rapid intervention teams must take place within those five working days at the latest .
That being the case , it was therefore only right that , in cases of interventions that are justified but where the budgetary resources of Frontex are not adequate to meet their costs , the budgetary authority should make a commitment , in accordance with the provisions of the financial regulation , urgently to find a budgetary solution .
That is the meaning of the amendment that has been added to the text of the draft regulation and that formalises the agreement reached in this regard between the Commission , Parliament and the Council .
So much , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , for the draft on which this House will have to vote tomorrow .
I do not doubt , and I hope , that it will receive your broad support .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , I am not going to use up the three minutes that I am allowed because we are dealing with a very well-produced report , employing a working method that is worthy of praise , and I would therefore like to congratulate Mr Deprez .

Secondly , I am also pleased with the great agreement reached between the Council , the Commission and the European Parliament .
I would finally like to express a few considerations .
I would point out - as I did at my party 's Bureau last week , in Granada- that competence for monitoring borders and external borders is one that falls to the Member States and only to the Member States .
What is FRONTEX then ?
FRONTEX and the RABITs essentially mean coordination , cooperation and collaboration .
The RABITs are additional cooperation and collaboration instruments for preventing the permeability of the Union 's external borders from being added to the permeability of the internal borders and between them creating a scene of humanitarian desolation .
Let us remember that , as a result of the practice of crossing the Atlantic using the criminal mechanisms of mafias , the European Union has just put at 10 000 the number of deaths recorded as a result of this inhuman epic journey .
The RABITs , which have been the subject of so much consensus and so much agreement , are an additional instrument for collaboration and cooperation .
That obligatory solidarity is not a contradiction in terms , Mr President .
It is a necessary reality that we have enshrined today in the agreement that I hope will be supported by a large majority in this House tomorrow .
The financial instrument that Mr Deprez has referred to is much more than a statement of intent for dealing with critical situations and mass invasions of a part of our territory .
It offers an immediate response demonstrating solidarity and providing budgetary resources .
I shall end as I began , Mr President , by expressing my pleasure at the achievement of an instrument which shows so much solidarity and is so useful in terms of controlling the Union 's borders .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , I shall use the mother tongue of our rapporteur in order to congratulate and to thank him for his meticulous work and for the outcome of that work : the excellent report that we are going to adopt tomorrow .
Mr Deprez , without straying into the realm of cheap puns , I believe that , together with the shadow rapporteurs , you have been able to create a veritable rapid intervention team within the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , which has enabled us to act quickly and to pass at first reading a text that was the subject of a very broad consensus during the vote in committee .
We have also been able to promote our proposals at the Council , thanks to the constructive dialogue that we have established with the German Presidency , which has included this regulation among its priorities and which has proved very receptive to our proposals .
( ES ) Ladies and gentlemen , together we have improved the text , which once again demonstrates the maturity of this House when it comes to legislating in such a sensitive field as the fight against illegal immigration .
We must therefore extend the field of codecision to all aspects of immigration policy .
We welcome the fact that the Justice and Home Affairs Council ( JHA ) approved the Regulation last Thursday in Luxembourg and the commitment reached by the three institutions to guarantee adequate funding of operations .
We hope that the teams are operational this summer , even before , as requested by the Vice-President of the Commission , Mr Frattini .
I believe that we are moving in the right direction , ladies and gentlemen .
We are moving slowly , but in the right direction .
We have taken a small step towards a common immigration policy .
Our respective governments have understood that immigration is a shared European challenge which requires a global and joint response based on solidarity , mutual trust and shared responsibility .
To this end , the obligatory principle of solidarity on the part of Member States laid down in Article 3 of the Regulation is extremely important .
This instrument is no panacea , but it represents progress in the fight against illegal immigration and people trafficking .
These teams will contribute to increasing solidarity and mutual assistance with a view to being able to monitor Europe 's external borders , saving lives - particularly in Atlantic and Mediterranean waters - and properly treating immigrants who try to enter the Union 's territory illegally .
Our citizens want the European Union to respond to their concerns .
The RABITs are a concrete response .
Our citizens and the immigrants deserve to see us treat the issue of illegal immigration seriously .
I would therefore call upon the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats to show consistency .
You cannot be in Granada criticising the regularisation implemented by the Spanish Government while at the same time , in Luxembourg , two governments led by your political family are announcing imminent regularisations , which we Socialists fully understand and respect , incidentally .
Ladies and gentlemen of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , do not allow yourselves to be led by the Spanish People 's Party , which is firing blanks at the Spanish Government .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , I should like to begin by congratulating the rapporteur , Mr Deprez , on his work .
I believe that this is a very rigorous , very interesting and very well executed piece of work on a genuinely difficult subject .
I think that one might speak in terms of an agreement in several stages .
We can speak in the long term , in the medium term or in the short term .
I think that this is a good report and a good solution for the problems we in the European Union are facing and have had to face before .
The Rapid Border Intervention Teams , under common rules , will be a good instrument for providing the necessary measures to deal with people entering the European Union illegally .
On the other hand , I think that Europe needs a common policy on immigration .
As a member of the European Free Alliance , I do not agree that the Member States should be the owners of the borders .
I consider that , in future , the borders of the European Union should be a common issue .
We have to work together on this issue and to consider a common policy on migration , always in accordance with the main European values and the principles of the European Union .
The European Union has to be more consistent in order to provide the best measures in these cases .
We also need to help the development of the ACP countries and , in particular , our neighbours in the southern Mediterranean .
Finding a solution in this part of the world is a guarantee for a solution to our current problem .
Solving problems in the countries from which people are migrating to the European Union is the main basis for avoiding this sometimes tragic situation .
It is not only the Member States but the whole European Union that should be aware of immigration policy , including regions with constitutional powers , for example the Canary Islands .
The Government of the Canary Islands should have had something to say in the recent crisis in this part of the world .
I would like to remark that today is the 300th anniversary of the Battle of Almansa , when the country of Valencia was defeated and the end of the Catalan nation began .
I think the regions , the stateless nations and all the political bodies in the European Union have something to say on issues of this kind .
As I said , I think that the report is complete , very good and very interesting .
We have some fears , perhaps from a sense of responsibility , including one that the teams ' actions might prevent people from seeking protection , thereby denying them the right to asylum under international conventions .
We saw it when we were talking to migrants who had illegally entered the Canary Islands .
It is not easy for these people to ask for asylum when they really want to , because information does not flow appropriately and because of other circumstances .
The Verts / ALE Group 's position is that the Rapid Border Intervention Teams form part of the toolbox developed under the Frontex Regulation and are to be used in particular to meet more urgent support requirements at external borders .
So it could be argued that the pros and cons are closely linked to the group 's position on the operations of Frontex .
We see the regulation as an instrument for immediate action in this sense .

on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank Mr Deprez for the work he has done , which is enabling us to adopt his report at first reading .
That demonstrates his ability to mediate with the political groups , the Council and the Commission .
I want to thank him even though I maintain all my reservations about this regulation , because I think that in reality its only purpose is to attribute a function to FRONTEX , that useless little agency set up by the Community institutions , which did not perform any function at all until yesterday .
I believe that setting up Rapid Border Intervention Teams is merely a propaganda exercise , because it is quite clear that in reality the EU 's illegal immigration crisis is not coming from southern Europe or from the boats that arrive by sea .
That is amply demonstrated by all the available data and statistics .
Even the Commission says that only 14 % of the illegal immigrants living in Europe arrive by sea .
I therefore do not understand the need to set up these rapid intervention teams .
The same also applies to the southern European countries - Italy , Spain and also Malta , a country that we ought to help .
Mr Borg certainly realises better than I do that we ought to try and help Malta , probably by amending the Dublin II regulation , and not by calling for rapid intervention teams that will find it difficult to intervene in that sea area and to tell whether they are in Italian or Maltese waters .
I believe , therefore , that we should try to implement a consistent , serious policy on this matter , probably by taking a different approach entirely .
That is why I repeat that the only serious function that these rapid intervention teams can have is to save lives at sea .
Mr Deprez , the question is not whether policemen are good or bad .
It has been amply demonstrated in recent years that disasters at sea are on the increase .
There are statistics that show beyond a shadow of a doubt that thousands and thousands of people have drowned in the Mediterranean and the Atlantic .
I therefore believe that there is a purpose for rapid intervention teams whose priority it is to rescue all the men and women that are trying to reach Europe .
It would not be superfluous , in my view , to stress that need in the report we are examining , and I therefore call on the House and Mr Deprez to support my amendment , which unequivocally states that one of the primary functions of these teams should be sea rescue .
I think that if we choose this way of thinking we can seriously help to make immigration policy and external border control a joint activity that is useful to the European Union .

on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , first of all , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur on the rapid handling of his report , which bodes well for the rapid intervention teams .
Last year , I was fortunate enough to join Mr Deprez and others on a visit to the Frontex agency in Warsaw , and this turned out to be a particularly valuable experience .

The agency was still in its infancy and work was gathering pace , with high expectations of it on the part of the public and politicians , something that can lead to disappointing results .
After all , the Frontex mandate is limited .
For the deployment of rapid intervention teams , the agency relies on the Member States working together .
Although I am concerned about the proposal 's implementation on two scores , Commissioner Borg may be able to respond and allay my concern in this connection .
My first concern is about the availability of manpower and equipment .
The Member States that are signed up to Frontex have committed to cooperation , and only in exceptional cases can they back out of that .
I should like to hear from the Commissioner what exceptions the Member States have managed to secure .
Also , has this been described in sufficient detail , so that Frontex can have the people and equipment available within the prescribed time ?
My second concern is about coordination in the Member States .
After all , Frontex requires specifically trained people .
Moreover , particularly in the Mediterranean region , sea-worthy equipment is essential .
It strikes me that it is mainly the defence organisation of the Member States that is able to make these people and this equipment available , while justice ministers make pledges at Council level in this area .
Accordingly , in my country , the justice minister has to consult the defence and home affairs ministers about the commitment of persons and equipment .
Each minister is fighting his own corner in this respect .
Can the Commissioner indicate whether this coordination problem also occurs in other Member States and to what extent the defence organisations are affected ?


( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should first of all like to thank Mr Deprez for the hard work he has put into this report and to offer him my heartiest congratulations on having reached a compromise with the Council in such a short time on such an important and urgent subject .
The waves of illegal immigration such as were seen last summer on the EU 's southern borders do not affect only the Member States directly involved , but rather all the Member States in the Union .
In Sicily , as Mr Catania knows only too well , one can see how urgent it is to address and resolve the problem .
In the coming months , as happens every year , illegal immigrants will be landing on Lampedusa and other islands relentlessly , day and night , in terrible weather and in extremely unsafe conditions .
The effective management of our external borders therefore requires realistic prevention policies for internal security and policies to combat illegal entry and people trafficking .
Setting up Rapid Border Intervention Teams is an initial , practical , joint-reaction measure , based on solidarity , respect for human rights and mutual assistance among the Member States , which are called on to take part in them by contributing financial and human resources .
Our national police forces can no longer be left on their own to carry out the massive task of defending our borders and also , more importantly , of receiving and aiding illegal immigrants .
Our citizens cannot go on living with this lack of security and stability and are constantly asking us for concrete measures to combat the organised criminal gangs that run the business of moving people illegally and all too often supply the clandestine work and prostitution market .
In order to meet these requests , I hope that the members of the rapid intervention teams can start work straight away this summer .
At the same time , we must continue our efforts on this front and go on seeking the best solutions to the immigration issue .
The Italian Government 's bill is not , in my view , a step in this direction ; rather than conducting a serious fight against illegal immigration alongside us , that government has chosen to go ahead with contradictory , improvised policies that are bound to cause serious repercussions throughout the European Union .
Commissioner , since there is a pressing need to ensure continuity between the European Union and its Member States , I urge you to devote the utmost attention to this burning issue , so that our overriding commitment to help the weak can be increasingly combined with our growing need for security .

( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I too would like to thank Mr Deprez most sincerely for his work on this subject and in other areas ; as usual , it was outstanding .
This project has taken us a step forward .
Solidarity between Member States is strengthened and responsibility shared .
We cannot allow countries like Spain , Malta or Italy to be left on their own with this problem .
We must also look at the green border , however .
There is large-scale immigration there , too .
For us socialists , however , it is also crucial that all aspects of human rights should be more than just on paper , that there should be no discrimination and that we in Parliament should check how this is translated into practice .
What happens to the people who are sent back ?
Will they be handed back to these governments , some of which are corrupt ?
We have seen the disaster in Morocco , when the people who were sent back were simply taken out into the Sahara and they would have preferred to let them die of thirst there without any water .
We must also include these matters and give them equal consideration .
We must not see FRONTEX and the Intervention Team as a panacea .
They are an instrument , but not the solution to the problem .
We need a common migration policy , not just a common deportation policy .
We do not need a new defensive wall for Europe , or an iron curtain in the Atlantic or the Mediterranean , what we need to do is to tackle the problem head on .
And that includes pressing on with solving the problems in the countries from which the migrants come .
Let me tell you something . If climate change gets worse , if the governments in the countries of origin become even more corrupt and remain corrupt , then we will have to expect an even greater influx .
Because we would do no differently , we would also seek our fortune somewhere else instead of dying of hunger or in poverty .
My congratulations again on the report .
I am glad we have done it .
We as Parliament must then also keep an eye on how things progress .
( EL ) Mr President , is it really necessary that we use rapid border intervention teams with state-of-the-art equipment , who have the right to make arrests , bear arms , have the right to use their weapons in the name of self-defence , use violence and act like special forces with advanced technological equipment , that is act as a military force , in order to deal with ragged immigrants or save those battling the seas in an attempt to find a better life ?
Do you really want us to believe that these forces will be used for these reasons ?
We consider that this Regulation and report reveals the true nature of your policy , which is aggressive : you are creating rapid intervention teams for external operations ; rapid intervention teams which can be used to deal with any type of crisis , even turn against their own people .
We disagree .
I think that your arguments that these teams will combat the mafia , underestimate common sense .
If the political will exists , all these smugglers will be found and the mafia will be dealt with .
How is it possible that these illegal immigrants can find them when various police agencies fail to do so ?
But no such political will exists because the mafia is the one supplying European capital with cheap ' meat ' , cheap labour , immigrants that is .
If you are really trying to save illegal immigrants , why do you not give more money to create national agencies that will intervene and save the lives of these people ?
We do not agree .
We find this anti-democratic , it is moving towards the direction of suppression of the masses , as is your entire policy .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by agreeing with Mr Díaz de Mera and Mr Castiglione , both from my group , in their praise for the rapporteur Mr Deprez , who has provided us with a characteristically excellent report .
Mr Deprez made strenuous efforts to reach a compromise between all of the political groups and the Council , with a view to obtaining agreement at first reading .
This is a most welcome initiative at a time when Europe is enduring the most significant migratory crisis in its history .
The massive influx of illegal immigrants to European shores has made it imperative for us to adopt measures as a matter of urgency .
Although the regions most directly affected are those of southern Europe , this problem cannot be viewed as exclusive to those Member States and regions .
Irregular mass immigration and the humanitarian tragedy that it represents have consequences for security and cohesion throughout the European Community .
I applaud the various operational measures relating to the management of our external maritime borders to the south , such as the establishment of an operational control centre to coordinate a patrol network for the Mediterranean coastline and the setting up of a central register of available technical equipment for use in control and monitoring of the external borders , whereby the necessary resources - for example boats , helicopters and aeroplanes - will be supplied for use in joint operations .
I also warmly welcome the creation of rapid border intervention teams , which will offer rapid technical and operational assistance to those Member States that may require it .
This will be a way of enhancing solidarity and mutual assistance between Member States .
This regulation concerns the deployment of rapid border intervention teams in order to provide rapid assistance in the event of a repetition of previous situations , for example in the Canary Islands .
I agree that assistance must be provided for a limited period , in exceptional situations or emergencies , and following a request by the Member State concerned .
Mr President , the European agency Frontex should play a crucial role in coordinating this assistance , which it should do promptly and effectively .
Within five days , a decision is made , and a plan drawn up , specifying the duration , geographical location , the mission to be undertaken , the composition , number and profile of experts that each Member State is to supply to the team .
All of us - in Parliament , the Commission and the Council - have to deliver the necessary human and financial resources at institutional level for the mission to proceed effectively .
( PL ) Mr President , thank you very much for your patience .
Just today Polish MEPs from various political groups met the head of the Polish Border Guards who is also the communications officer at our embassy in Belgium .
He informed us in detail about the severity of the problem we are discussing today .
I am a representative of Poland , which after Finland has the European Union 's longest external land border .
This makes the issue of effectively managing the external borders through control and protection and by combating illegal emigration and human trafficking a very relevant one to us .
The groups we are discussing today will become all the more necessary as the EU becomes an increasingly attractive economic haven for migrants from several continents , as well as the former Soviet Union .
I agree with Mr Coelho 's statements about the vast impending crisis that awaits us .
The only condition for setting up the Rapid Border Intervention Teams is our full agreement with the motion of the Member State whose borders are affected by the problem .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , illegal immigration has come to assume epidemic proportions .
Conservative estimates put the number of illegal immigrants in Europe at about 15 million .
You need only compare the figures for 2005 and 2006 to see that their number has multiplied sixfold .
Smuggling people into the EU has become big business and is part of the phenomenon of organised crime .
In this situation , many Member States are quite simply overburdened .
They cannot be left in the lurch ; they need help .
That is where the EU scheme comes in .
I welcome the fact that Frontex has been created , all the more so in view of the imminent establishment of a functioning instrument , in the form of the Rapid Border Intervention Teams , that can provide assistance within a particular area for a limited period of time at the request of Member States , and I also welcome the clear indication that , as Mr Díaz de Mera García Consuegra emphasised , responsibility for guarding borders will remain in the hands of the Member States .
The RABITs will render short-term assistance - we must be clear about that .
For the medium and long term we need additional measures .
I expect a cooperation agreement to materialise between Frontex and Europol so that the crime of human smuggling can be more effectively combated ; I also expect illegal residence to have consequences - we need to think about repatriation aid in this context - and I expect an immediate end to mass legalisation , for that invariably creates a knock-on effect and shifts the problems to other countries .
Moreover , we also need education campaigns as a preventive measure , so that potential migrants can learn how legal immigration works , what the consequences of illegal immigration are and what risks it entails .
We also need stabilisation and aid programmes in migrants ' countries of origin .
With these RABITs , we in the European Union are certainly demonstrating that we are on the way towards a security union and that we are reflecting at the same time on how we can solve migration problems , and especially the problem of illegal immigration , in the medium and long term .
Let me close by thanking the rapporteur for his excellent coordination .

Mr President , I first wish to join with my colleagues in thanking Mr Deprez the rapporteur for his excellent work and in particular for completing this report in time for first reading .
I warmly welcome this law because it is a solidarity instrument .
Coming from a southern Member State I welcome it even more , because I appreciate that solidarity does not come easy and it does not come cheap .
This law means that Member States are now binding themselves to assist other countries that face difficulty .
As Mr Deprez said , this solidarity is compulsory and not optional .
This makes it real solidarity .
It is not charity , because charity is voluntary .
This is a binding commitment .
Thanks to this law , countries facing emergency situations on immigration will finally start to feel that they are no longer completely on their own .
Therefore this law is a good step forward .
However , on its own it is not enough to overcome the challenge of illegal immigration .
We must , therefore , avoid raising public expectations that this law will solve everything : it will not .
Therefore we must also do more to strengthen the southern borders of the Union .
Last November the European Commission issued a communication on strengthening the southern maritime borders and I call on the Commission to press on with the initiatives listed in this communication .
Let us not forget that external border control is in the interests of all Member States and not just the countries facing difficulties and once it is in everybody 's interest , it must also be everybody 's responsibility - a shared responsibility .
Thank you very much , Mr Busuttil .
Thank you , too , for your understanding .
I know that you would have liked to have spoken in Maltese this evening , but unfortunately our teams were unavailable , and I would thank you for your flexibility .

( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I think we have achieved an important objective this evening , because the agreement on Rapid Border Intervention Teams has shown that all the EU institutions have realised that illegal immigration is a serious problem that cannot be faced alone by the regions exposed to massive migratory flows on account of their geographical location .
As we pointed out in the report on islands that was adopted in this Chamber , Europe cannot remain indifferent to the ongoing emergency situation in regions like my own , Sicily , with its peak in Lampedusa , or in the Canaries or Malta , which are unsustainably burdened by the arrival of illegal immigrants .
It cannot remain indifferent to the human tragedy of the makeshift boats that sink in the Mediterranean , or to the organised crime that takes advantage of those people 's desperation .
With the opening-up of our internal borders , our external borders have become our common frontier and , therefore , suitable , long-term solutions to the immigration issue can only be found at a European level .
The creation of rapid intervention teams is certainly only a start .
Europe needs to move quickly towards approving a legal immigration policy , since such an important issue cannot be left just in the hands of governments .
The Italian Government has just passed a law that changes and amends previous legislation , but these cannot be seen as permanent solutions that can lead to reception and the building of a better future .
Europe as a whole must do the opposite . It must draw up a legal immigration policy that can manage all immigration , which , like the wind , cannot be stopped but must be controlled .
( PL ) Mr President , Rapid intervention teams have the opportunity of becoming an effective tool for the Member States and FRONTEX , although incidentally this is nothing new for FRONTEX .
We have already been involved in joint operations before .
We need rapid intervention teams , but provided that they are not used as a way of shifting responsibility for patrolling one 's own border , which according to the present treaties is the responsibility of the Member States .
It is therefore important that these teams be reserved for real crisis situations falling beyond the scope of previous risk analyses .
Only then will the Member States have the right and the obligation to implement the mechanisms of European solidarity .
I am well aware that the burden of controlling the EU 's external borders is distributed unevenly among the Member States .
There are southern states with difficult sea borders , and countries with long land borders .
The teams , together with other elements in an integrated border management system , which I mention here as an important resource for our external borders , will contribute to improved cooperation and coordination of efforts and will help to combat illegal migration and people trafficking .
However , I do expect FRONTEX and RABITS to have consideration for the rights and needs of people crossing the border in good faith .
For this reason we also need to improve coordination as regards border services for this kind of traveller .
As regards RABITS I would like to point out the need for public information explaining the rapid intervention teams , and what the rights and duties of ordinary people are when they encounter these teams in order to avoid misunderstandings and unclear situations .
This will require information campaigns .
Finally , I would like to express my pleasure at the consensus we have found as regards setting up these teams and congratulate Mr Deprez on his excellent report .
Mr President , as I mentioned earlier , the Commission strongly welcomes the compromise reached between the three institutions on this file .
It is an important step in the cooperation between Member States and is an excellent example of solidarity in dealing with border controls .
With regard to the points raised during the debate , in particular by Mr Blokland , let me state that at the Justice and Home Affairs Council last week most Member States had already put technical equipment , etc. at the disposal of Frontex for joint operations .
In addition , Vice-President Frattini invited those Member States which have not already done so to consider making contributions .
On the other point concerning coordination , let me clarify that Frontex will coordinate operations involving the competent authorities of the many Member States concerned .
I should like to conclude by congratulating Mr Deprez the rapporteur on his hard work , and I welcome the agreement reached between the institutions on the Rapid Border Intervention Teams Regulation .
I repeat that it is an excellent example of solidarity and operational cooperation .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Thursday , at 12 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - Existing external border control surveillance lacks the appropriate and sufficient resources to effectively combat illegal immigration and trafficking of human beings .
This problem does not pertain to one country or one region but to all Member States .
In this context Mr Deprez 's report highlights the various shortcomings and addresses on the real issues surrounding the deployment of the Rapid Border Intervention Teams .
Admittedly the creation of this Rapid Intervention Team is a positive step in the right direction and therefore all the appropriate funds should be allocated in order to make this project function in a viable manner .
The effective management of external border control only resolves a small part of this fundamental issue .
Unfortunately I feel the institutions , especially the Council , are not tackling this tragic problem with the necessary commitment and urgency it deserves .
The serious application of the principle of burden-sharing is far from been implemented in a concrete and tangible manner .
in writing . - ( PL ) Mr President , in the eyes of EU law , Member States themselves , including Poland , are responsible for controlling their external borders .
Unfortunately we have to say that the aid currently provided at a European level for responses at the external borders , and the protection of these borders is not enough .
It is an issue that cannot be ignored because controlling the external borders of the European Union is really about combating people trafficking and illegal immigration on the one hand , and on the other averting threats to the internal security of Member States , public order , public health and international relations .
Border controls are therefore not just in the interest of the Member State that has the border , but it is equally important for all Member States that have removed controls on their internal borders .
The European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union ( FRONTEX ) has already been set up by order of the Council .
We now need to take the next step , which is to create rapid intervention teams that would be sent to the territory of a Member State needing such assistance , but which would not be designed to provide long-term support .
However , coordinating the composition , training and dispatch of such rapid intervention teams to borders should be the mandate of the Agency .
This approach will increase solidarity and mutual assistance among Member States .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , immigration is all too often hailed as a resource , even a vital resource , but that underestimates the terrible effects on those who really have to suffer it .
The ones who leave their peoples and countries are often not the poorest , but qualified young people and also - leaving aside any demagogy - people who are a potential workforce for organised crime in the host countries .
The need to establish common rules on the duties of border guards and rapid intervention teams is justified by the waves of individuals pushing at the Union 's borders .
These migratory flows supply the hateful traffic in human beings , in tragic and well-known circumstances , and I hold politicians to be morally complicit in this if they claim that it is right and appropriate or even our duty to receive these people , without taking account of their reasons or of whether they can be received .
Italy has even decided to accept everyone who turns up on its borders , without anyone having to guarantee that they will provide work and hospitality .
In such a situation , I wonder what the measures that have been announced are good for .
In Italy , they will only serve to provide assistance , and they will help the illegal arrival of people who will then go and fill the coffers of the NGOs .
What use is a European agency to manage cooperation on our external borders if the Member States ' immigration policies are so different ?
It is no use at all , unless it is to spend more taxpayers ' money and to play at demagogy , which only results in social unrest and disorder .
Public Finances in the EMU 2006 ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Lauk , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on Public Finances in EMU 2006 .
I would point out that Mr Schwab is standing in for the rapporteur .
deputy rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , at this late hour , I am pleased that we are speaking about the economic and monetary union of the EU .
The European Parliament , in this report presented on its own initiative , expresses itself for the first time on the revised version of the Stability and Growth Pact , adopted by the Heads of State or Government in March 2005 .
The revision concerned both the preventive and the remedial elements of the Pact .
The aim of the Pact was and remains the avoidance of an excessive deficit and the achievement in the medium and long term of a balanced budget and sound public finances .
The present report is an appraisal based on one year .
The reference period , in other words , is very short - too short , in fact ; moreover , it covers the year 2006 , a year characterised by very favourable economic trends .
These trends had a beneficial impact on the fiscal policies of the Member States .
It goes without saying that an assessment based entirely on this brief period cannot be the last word .
The real endurance test for the revised Pact awaits us in the coming years .
The report is an appraisal of the current situation .
The rapporteur , Kurt Joachim Lauk , who unfortunately cannot be with us this evening , has deliberately avoided naming the various Member States and assessing their individual levels of performance .
The point of this report was not to award exam marks ; the rapporteur saw no value in that approach .
What the report can usefully do is to make a general assessment of achievements to date .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs has dealt in great depth with this report , and our exchanges were highly constructive and fruitful .
On behalf of Mr Lauk , may I offer a special word of thanks to Mr Rosati , shadow rapporteur for the Socialists , and to his Liberal counterpart , Mrs in ' t Veld , for their close and constructive cooperation .
The report was adopted by an overwhelming majority in committee .
I only intend to deal briefly with the main points .
The statistical surveys show that the spread in deficit and growth levels is too wide as well as demonstrating a correlation between high deficits and low growth rates .
The figures for 2006 show that the 21 Member States with low deficits or even slight surpluses also had high growth rates .
This substantiates the view that reducing deficits stimulates activity and improves economic output , thereby cutting unemployment .
Against this backdrop , the report highlighted three key points .
Firstly , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs argues strenuously in this report that the economic good times should be used to put public budgets on a sound structural footing .
The Member States must take advantage of the economic upturn , and particularly of increases in tax revenue , to reduce their public debts .
We must keep reminding ourselves that a stimulation of growth leads to higher demand and higher employment levels .
On a critical note , it must be said that the Member States are not making sufficient use of the favourable cyclical climate to consolidate their budgets .
Secondly , we call on the Member States to declare new public debt unconstitutional or unlawful by 2015 , as has already been done by certain states and regions in the European Union .
The amendment to paragraph 20 tabled by the rapporteur , Kurt Joachim Lauk , is designed to clarify the scope of this call .
It states that what is being proposed is a binding obligation on the Member States within the euro zone alone , not on all 27 Member States of the European Union .
This seems logical , and may I ask you on behalf of the rapporteur to approve this amendment , tabled on behalf of the PPE _ DE Group .
Thirdly , the report calls for the Member States ' debts and deficits to be calculated in such a way as to make the figures comparable .
This is an important point , because a common basis for assessing the actual level of debt is essential in the context of increasing convergence within the framework of European economic and monetary union .
Allow me , in these last twenty seconds , to make two final remarks .
By and large , the revised Stability and Growth Pact worked well in 2006 .
It remains a rule-based framework .
Since it was revised , all deficits equivalent to more than 3 % of GDP have been regarded as excessive .
Nevertheless , the slow pace at which the level of public debt is being reduced in all Member States is a source of concern .
In the short term , then , the Stability and Growth Pact has worked .
Whether it will work in the long term remains to be seen .
The real test of its resilience will come in the next few years .
We expect the Member States to do whatever it takes to make the Pact succeed .

Mr President , the Commission warmly welcomes Mr Lauk 's report and is grateful for the high-quality work of Parliament 's Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
With a strong economic recovery currently under way in Europe and in the euro area , Member States have an outstanding opportunity to improve their public finances and to prepare for future challenges , such as the ageing population .
In this context , Mr Lauk 's report is a very timely one .
The Commission clearly agrees with the report 's statement that the revised Stability and Growth Pact is so far working as it should .
In particular , many Member States have made considerable efforts to meet their obligations under the Pact .
Since the reform of the Pact , both the corrective and preventative arms have been fully applied in accordance with the reform 's provisions .
In addition , it is clear that there has been no leniency in the enforcement of the reformed Pact .
Last year , a significant improvement in the general government deficit in the euro area , and in the individual Member States , was accomplished .
For the euro area , the improvement was 0.9 % , in nominal terms , and hence also appears likely to be higher in structural terms than the 0.3 % expected by the Commission last autumn .
The overall economic prospects for 2007 are equally encouraging .
The ongoing presence of cyclically favourable conditions in the euro area calls for further fiscal consolidation efforts in 2007 and beyond .
Adjustment towards the medium-term budgetary objectives should be stepped up and pro-cyclical budgetary policies ought to be avoided .
Euro-area Finance Ministers confirmed last week their commitment to make full use of current economic growth and better-than-expected tax revenues to pursue sound fiscal policies , as well as to use unexpected extra revenues for deficit and debt reduction .
The Commission also shares Parliament 's concerns regarding the long-term sustainability of public finances and is putting increased emphasis on its assessment .
In this respect , a new report on the long-term sustainability of public finances in the European Union was issued by the Commission in October 2006 .
That report is based on EU common ageing-related expenditure projections .
It confirms the importance of addressing the sustainability challenge with a combination of fiscal consolidation and structural reforms .
The Commission has continued its work on incorporating sustainability considerations in setting the medium-term budgetary objectives .
Indeed , the improvement of fiscal balances in the medium term contributes to meeting the long-term sustainability implications .
Another key development is the emphasis on improving the quality of public spending , in line with the Lisbon Strategy .
That policy guideline is indeed part of the integrated guidelines adopted by the European Council in March this year .
The Commission is also grateful for the report 's recognition of the efforts made to improve statistical governance .
The Commission recently reported to Parliament and to the Council on the quality of the data submitted by Member States .
Finally , while the corrective arm of the Stability and Growth Pact has delivered the expected results , the picture is more mixed regarding the preventative arm .
National fiscal rules and institutions can play an important role in this respect .
Progress was made last year in this field , and the Commission is currently working on further improving the effectiveness of the Pact 's preventative arm .
In this context , I fully appreciate Parliament 's support for this approach .


on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Schwab 's defence of Mr Lauk 's report was so brilliant and so accurate that I am going to continue broadly in the same vein as him .
I share Mr Schwab 's concern with regard to the progress of public debt .
We grew much more last year than in previous years , we have come closer to our growth potential , but public debt remains below the limits that we ourselves set in the Treaty of Maastricht .
According to all of the indicators , we will have good growth next year , but we will grow less than last year , and that means that public debt will continue to cause concern .
I would once again agree with the rapporteur and the Commissioner in saying that this concern is all the more urgent if we take account of the projections on the development of the population , what is known as the ageing of the population , which may be one of the great challenges of the century we have just begun .
Life expectancy is increasing , birth rates are still extremely low , and that means that the working-age population will be smaller and that , therefore , sooner or later , the labour market will contract and , as a result , we will have far more beneficiaries of the system and far fewer people contributing to the social security coffers .
Neither I nor Mr Schwab , who is a Christian Democrat like me , believe that the viability of the social protection system can be called into question .
We need to seek foundations to strengthen it , which make it possible for us to fulfil our social obligations .
There are certain recommendations in Mr Lauk 's report that I would like to stress , and I shall add a few of my own .
I agree that we should establish comparable bases for the budgets so that we can make comparisons homogeneous , but I would like us to borrow an accounting technique from the private sector , a form of budget forecasting , in order to take account of the obligations of which we are aware .
It seems to me to be obvious that we should take advantage of good times to reduce public debt further , but we are not doing so , or we are not doing so sufficiently .
Thirdly , I believe that we must rethink our entire system of public spending and revenue in order to make our economies more productive , so that we have more resources , amongst other things in order to meet social welfare spending needs .
I believe that we should stop looking at the retirement age as something that represents an obligation and think in terms of a right that opens up the possibility of retiring and orient public finances , since we are talking about public finances , in a way that encourages people to remain in work for longer .
Finally , I believe that we should consider replacing social security contributions , as a fundamental core - practically the only one - of social protection systems , with a system of taxes , essentially value-added tax , which the presidential candidate Sarkozy has brilliantly described as ' social VAT ' in the debate that is taking place in that country .
I would like once again to congratulate the rapporteur , who is not here today , the person representing him and the Commissioner on having taken up the majority of our positions .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , healthy public finances are the mainstay of sustainable economic development .
I am pleased to see that in the past year there has been a significant improvement in the European Union in this regard .
However , the current positive economic situation is an opportunity to reduce debts and deficits even further .
That is why in this year 's report by Mr Lauk , the European Parliament encourages Member States to make use of the favourable market situation to adjust their public finances as necessary and to speed up structural reforms such as labour market and service sector reforms , or reducing red tape for business .
I congratulate Mr Lauk on his excellent report and also thank him for his cooperation .
There are four matters to which I would like to draw your attention .
Firstly , in point 26 , this year 's report encourages the European Commission to explore the advantages of establishing independent national bodies in charge of determining the annual level of deficit consistently with the medium-term objective of a balanced budget .
However , through the intercession of Mr Borg , I appeal to Commissioner Alumnia to investigate whether fiscal policy councils , independent of political pressure , would be an effective instrument in fighting for a lower deficit .
This relates in particular to the better use of periods of economic boom to improve the situation in public finances .
I believe that on this matter I agree with my colleagues who have just taken the floor .
As numerous studies have shown , governments have a tendency to excessive deficits , and only implement reforms when there is a crisis .
Secondly , I should like to point out that we cannot agree with point 20 , rendering a new public debt as unconstitutional .
Every government has the right to act within the framework set out by the Maastricht Treaty , which allows a public debt level of up to sixty percent .
Obviously any debt which exceeds this level can be deemed unconstitutional , which is why I would support the amendment put forward by the ALDE Group , to define the limit in this way .
Thirdly , the report stresses that the revised Stability and Growth Pact is a key instrument for maintaining budgetary discipline in the Member States .
I agree with the rapporteur that reforming the pact increased both its flexibility and its effectiveness .
For this reason we appeal to the Commission to exercise close control of the way Member States observe the Pact .
Fourthly and finally , this House recommends a study on the feasibility of introducing a uniform budgetary procedure for all Member States .
Such a procedure would incorporate both a uniform calendar for budgetary procedures and uniform assumptions regarding basic macroeconomic parameters , to be assessed in a standard way across the European Union .
In my view these changes would not only make it possible to strengthen budgetary discipline in the Member States , but would also improve the coordination of fiscal policy at EU level .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , Mr Lauk 's report is an accurate description of the current situation , and is undoubtedly a lesson for the countries that have not yet joined the EMU .
Mr Lauk rightly underlined the main threats to the European Union , which are persistently high budget deficits and uncontrolled growth in budgetary expenditure because of the ageing populations in the EU .
It also says that increasing growth rates will make it possible to avoid disaster .
However , the report fails to answer the fundamental question of how this growth is to be achieved when the economies of the Member States are less competitive than world leaders , and there is no active policy to encourage families in any EU country .
Mr Lauk 's report clearly shows that the EMU , which is in effect a private members ' club for the EU , lacks any prescription as to how the impending threat could be avoided .
I have given two examples of how to avoid the main challenge facing the EU countries .
In EU debates , for example , delocalisation is not regarded as an opportunity , but a threat to jobs in countries where production costs are higher than in countries where they are lower .
These debates very frequently mention the ' demographic challenges ' , as if nobody realises that they are the result of a dramatic fall in the birth rate .
A great deal is said about avoiding pregnancy , the right to abortion , and numerous debates have been held on homophobia - today we have just had the third such debate in two years .
But what I would like to know is where is the debate on an active policy of encouraging childbirth in the EU ?
Only by increasing the birth rate can we avoid the deterioration of the mysterious ' demographic challenge ' .
The representatives of the Member States may debate on the maturity or otherwise of other countries , but for the countries that have adopted the euro , this is undoubtedly an important lesson .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in our opinion , this report takes us in quite the wrong direction .
It squanders the opportunity to support an urgently essential change of course .
It levels not a word of criticism at the policy of the European Central Bank , which is geared exclusively to price stability and thereby curbs and strangles the growth potential of the EU .
The report merely recommends to the authors of the Member States ' budgetary policies that they make spending cuts in order to lower their deficits .
Not a word does it say about the ruinous tax competition in the European Union that has been further fuelled by more cuts in business taxes .
In Germany we are currently experiencing another round in these dumping stakes .
It is perfectly obvious that public finances in the Member States would be far healthier if people of wealth and property , and above all the multinational corporations with their huge profits , were finally required to pay their fair share instead of receiving more and more tax breaks .
There is no shortage , on the other hand , of proposals in the report for a neo-liberal approach to regulatory policy .
For example , it calls for a restructuring of public expenditure with the aid of new public-private partnerships , even in the education sector .
Come hell or high water , another key area of our services of public interest is to be sacrificed to the profit motive .
The report calls on Member States to declare new public debt unconstitutional or unlawful by 2015 ; this , too , is downright foolhardy .
If such a ban were enforced , it would strangle any attempt to pursue a budgetary policy .
This report represents a wasted opportunity to support a European policy for development based on social justice and solidarity .
For this reason , my group will be voting against it .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , the rapporteur accepts that government finances in several euro zone countries are still not in good shape .
Sovereign debts in Italy and Greece have not fallen significantly , and although deficits have been falling , this is a result of some higher economic growth helped by global recovery .
It is not evidence that the Stability Pact is working .
However , this week 's news from Spain has shown that weak government finances are not the only threat to the functioning of the euro .
Spain has an awful trade deficit of 9.5 % of GDP , and its construction asset price boom , which has driven domestic demand , is now definitely over .
The boom was driven by euro interest rates which had been far too low but are now too high .
Spain can now look forward to serious economic difficulties , with rising unemployment and deteriorating government finances .
The normal solution to this dilemma would be for Spain to lower its interest rates and devalue , but neither of these options is available as it shares the single currency .
There are therefore three possible outcomes .
The first : to forestall a crisis , the European Central Bank reduces the euro interest rate .
Germany would not like this , as it would lead to rising inflation ; it would also mean the European Central Bank losing its hard-won reputation for holding down inflation expectations .
The second possible outcome is that Spain leaves the euro zone and re-establishes its own currency , enabling it to devalue and have suitably low interest rates .
Yes , we have come to the point when this may no longer be unthinkable .
It would lead to serious problems of private and public sector debt default that would spill over across the whole euro zone .
Other countries would not want this , which makes the third possible outcome maybe the most likely , and that is large-scale bailout by other countries , despite Maastricht rules against this , and this would be accompanied by centralisation of control over Spanish public finances .
I do not know which of these outcomes will take place , but it is time we faced up to the circumstances : Spain is a large country and the European Union would not find it easy to stand idle while it suffers in recession .

( HU ) I would like personally to congratulate Mr Lauk for the excellent report , which takes a clear position regarding the lack of sustainability in public finances within the euro zone .
For my part , I consider it important to have similar analyses not only of deficits in public finances but also , for instance , of the performance of Member States as regards compliance with the criteria on inflation .
Moreover , there is room here , too , for implementing an excessive procedure .
I would like to stress five points .
First : it is impossible to analyse the annual and cumulative deficits in static fashion , independently of economic growth , since the most important task of the new Member States striving to join the euro zone is to catch up to the others .
Stimulating this is the aim of the Structural and Cohesion Funds , and as a result , higher growth can temporarily be accompanied by an annual deficit in excess of 3 % .
Examples of this are the 2005 performance of the Czech Republic and the 2006 performance of Slovakia .
If the cumulative debt can be reduced , this may be considered the sign of a healthy trend .
Second : we must be especially careful that individual Member States do not attempt to conceal one-off privatised or PPP constructions and count these in the reduction of the deficit .
This practice and its danger have been clearly outlined by the rapporteur .
For those Member States that do so encourage undertakings with economically dubious results and reduce transparency .
With regard to this matter , the instruments available to the European Commission for detecting such tricks must be strengthened .
Let us see how each Member really stands ; assessment considerations should only come into the picture in the event of excessive deficit procedures .
This is important not only for the stability of the euro zone , but also because deficits that are identified only afterwards , or that have been covered up , reduce the credibility of EU institutions in the Member State concerned .
This is what happened most recently in Hungary , where , with the Commission looking on , a Member State that had been performing well ended up on the brink of national bankruptcy .
This question - the political role of the Commission - should be the subject of a separate debate .
Third : in my view , the fact that the criteria for entering the euro zone are higher than those that apply to the behaviour of its existing members is a political double standard , and therefore must be changed .
This practice has never been sanctioned , yet refusing a country entry into the euro zone is itself clearly a sanction .
One could point to the French , German or Italian performance by way of an example , for in fact not a hair on anyone 's head was harmed as a result , nor did even a single euro have to be paid by way of a deposit .
Fourth : from the perspective of the stability of the euro zone , I am in favour of building into national legislation a ban on further indebtedness .
Although every Member State has to resolve this problem for itself , and the situation of each is different , a minimum requirement of those in the euro area ought to be a positive primary balance .
Fifth : the main goal is to achieve the Lisbon Strategy and to improve fiscal policy , for instance with an appropriate response to the challenges presented by our aging population .
In this regard , the most important indicator is the rate of employment , which is more revealing , and gives a better measure of the sustainability of public finances , than the unemployment rate .
Therefore we should ask for this figure more frequently from the Member States that are at risk .
In addition , reducing the tax burden is also an important objective , since a good number of Member States boasts a redistribution rate in excess of 50 % , while their traditions do not suggest the Scandinavian model .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , I should like simply to say to the previous speaker that this report clearly does not relate to the issue of enlargement of the euro zone but indeed to the state of public finances within the European Union .
As such , I should like to warn this House against a temptation introduced by the rapporteur and unfortunately validated by our committee , which is to totally throw out of kilter the reform of the Stability and Growth Pact in the form in which it has been carried out , for the report proposes nothing less than for us to regard the public deficit as unconstitutional .
I hope that this House will have the wisdom to censure or put right this assessment , which I feel is completely at odds with the optimal use of public finances , which must obviously contribute to financial stability and make it possible for future generations not to have to fund our debt .
However , I also feel that , if we want to be consistent with our strategy - which requires long-term investment - the idea of regarding any public deficit as unconstitutional is a narrow-minded way of thinking , to say the least .
I should also like to emphasise that the contribution of this report to the greater coordination of economic policies and the dynamic vision of Mr Juncker and of Commissioner Almunia will enable us to progress slowly - too slowly , but safely , I hope - on the path to coordinating budgetary timetables and to taking better account of consistent macroeconomic data for the euro zone as a whole .
I have great hopes that what has just taken place at the Eurogroup , namely a dynamic discussion before each Member State launches into the definition of its own budgetary strategies , will become the rule , at the very least within the euro zone .
Allow me , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , to state that , if this were to become the rule , it would obviously be important for the parliamentary dimension of such an anticipation of national budgetary strategies to be strengthened , and that would depend on constructive cooperation being established or enhanced between the European Parliament and the national parliaments .
( PL ) Mr President , the rapporteur deserves our thanks for raising such an important issue and drawing attention to the challenge Member States face in the form of their ageing populations .
These words of thanks go to the rapporteur for his diagnosis and his prognosis for the disease .
However , what does arouse total opposition is the suggested cure , which is to restrict the budget deficits of the Member States , and to standardise their financial policies .
It is paradoxical that the cure is suggested by a Member representing Germany , a country that has not kept within the budget deficit limits , and which is increasing taxation , such as VAT .
The rapporteur 's proposed cure arouses disagreement on many points .
Because of the time restrictions , I will only mention the two I regard as being the most important .
Firstly , only an active strategy of supporting business , reducing red tape and a radical increase in infrastructure investments , abandoning the costly policy of farming subsidies and re-allocating the money to research and development and regional development can solve the dilemma of funding pensions .
Secondly , a uniform budget and tax policy is an attempt to strait-jacket the finances of the new Member States , ignoring their specific development needs , and thereby preventing them from eliminating any development gaps .
We therefore disagree with the rapporteur 's findings and take the opposite position .
The European Union needs greater freedom of budgetary and fiscal policy for its members , and only this would make it possible to eliminate the dilemma of a poor society .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the report and the debate show clearly that the Stability and Growth Pact has been a success .
It is a success because this type of public debate about government finances would never have been conducted in either the Member States or the European framework if there were no Stability and Growth Pact .
It is a success because it creates clarity and certainty and defines the same objectives for everyone .
It is a success because it establishes a regulatory structure for national budgetary policies .
The Stability and Growth Pact is the European political complement to the single currency , and the single currency is our most important and successful response to globalisation .
The success of the Stability and Growth Pact is also reflected in the percentage decrease in total indebtedness and in the annual amount of new debt .
We are still far from the finishing line , however , and we now have an opportunity to speed up the process .
The economic climate provides a tailwind that can help us to remove structural defects , to step up the liberalisation drive and to rise boldly to the challenges posed by demographic trends .
Incurring debt to service debt rather than to invest in the future saddles the young people of our nations with a heavy burden .
Incurring debt to service debt means selling our future down the river .
We need the annual surplus to reduce the government deficit in every Member State and to increase our scope for future action .
May the report give us fresh impetus for the pursuit of these goals .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , having sustainable public finances in the countries of the Union is of vital importance not as an aim in itself , but as a means to implement the European social model , which is characterised by research , investment , innovation and competitiveness , social cohesion , and environmental and energy sustainability .
The new , revised Stability and Growth Pact should not be seen as the only instrument for coordinating economic policies in the European Union , but it must be used in conjunction with the integrated growth and employment guidelines and with the goal of political and economic coordination of the euro zone .
The more the text we approve results in uniform procedures , common shared parameters and a joint debate on budget projections , the more significant it will be .
That does not mean , however , that we want a purely accountancy-based approach .
Ensuring that the deficit and public debt are reduced will require the implementation of strict measures , but proactive measures aiming at sustainable economic and social development are also needed .
I too should like to point out the fact that calling for the Member States to declare an excessive deficit as being nationally unconstitutional is highly debatable , not least from the legal standpoint of the formulation of relations of subsidiarity between the Union and the Member States .
To conclude , I think it is important to emphasise what role we want to play , that is to say , to lay the foundations for a sustainable European public finance system aimed at growth .
( PL ) Mr President , in my contribution to the debate on the report on public finances in the EMU countries for 2006 , I would like to make a few observations .
Firstly , while it is true that the public finances of the majority of EU countries improved significantly in 2006 , I have serious doubts as to whether this is a result of the reform of the Stability and Development Pact as the Commission makes out .
In my view it is more likely the result of a good economic climate .
Secondly , despite these improvements I do not regard the public finance situation in individual Member States as satisfactory .
In spite of the good economic climate , only three of the countries in the euro zone returned budget surpluses .
Over half of the countries in the zone have a public deficit in excess of 60 % of GDP .
Thirdly , I should point out that the state of public finances in the new Member States is better than in the old members , for example , the average public debt in the euro zone was over 63 % in the old fifteen , while it does not exceed the 60 % threshold in the new twelve .
And fourthly , I would like to state that despite the revision of the Pact , the Commission 's favouritism towards the largest Member States has not changed .
It continues to tolerate significant deficits , and even public debt among these countries , which contrasts with its strict attitude to the smaller Member States , and in particular the newly accepted members .
Mr President , on behalf of Commissioner Almunia , I would like to thank you for this very constructive debate .
He sends his apologies for not being here today owing to other unavoidable work engagements .
As mentioned by Members , the strong economic recovery currently under way in Europe and in the euro area presents Member States with an opportunity to improve public finances to prepare for future challenges such as the ageing population .
As a result of this , the Commission published its report on the long-term sustainability of public finances in October 2006 and emphasises the importance of addressing the sustainability challenge in the context of ageing-related expenditure .
The Commission considers the idea of setting a uniform calendar for budgetary procedures across the EU an interesting one .
We need , however , to be prudent , since it would need the support of the Member States .
Furthermore , its practical implementation would be somewhat complicated .
Having said that , last Friday the Ecofin informal meeting dealt with the medium-term review of stability objectives ahead of the Member States ' preparation of national budgets .
This is an important step towards a more consistent and coordinated way of establishing national budgets .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote on this item will take place tomorrow , at 12 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - The worsening budget deficit in some of the new Member States calls for determined and sustained action to implement , through adjusted convergence programmes , a viable fiscal consolidation strategy .
Nevertheless , arbitrariness in the implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact is likely to reduce incentives for fiscal adjustment in these Member States .
This report on Public Finances in EMU 2006 is therefore an opportunity to raise concerns about too rigid an approach when it comes to deal with the management of excessive public deficits .
To avoid the regular infringements by Member States facing difficulties in balancing their public finances , the SGP should remain an incentive to induce fiscal adjustment in EU members and thus the revision should avoid the emergence of an increased arbitrariness in the implementation of the SGP .
Of course , fiscal discipline is a key element in the convergence of the income levels of new Member States with the EU-15 .
However , increased implementation transparency avoiding rigid and arbitrary procedures , as well as better comparability and reliability of data are necessary not only to facilitate new Member States ' entry into the single currency , but also for the prospect of genuinely enhancing growth and competitiveness in these countries .
Strengthening European legislation in the field of information and consultation of workers ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement : Strengthening European legislation in the field of information and consultation of workers .
Mr President , honourable Members , keeping workers informed and consulting with them is a significant element of the European Social Model 's response to the challenges posed by globalisation , economic competition and technological change .
Included in that response is change management , the anticipation of change and social dialogue .
I do not have to remind the House of the importance the Commission attaches to European Works Councils .
They enable us to reduce the imbalance arising from inadequate representation , in other words due to the fact that a growing number of decisions are taken at supranational level , whereas the law on informing employees and problem resolution is implemented mainly at national level .
They provide support for the social partners in each country and facilitate general understanding of the strategic problems of businesses and the search for solutions .
In particular they allow for the anticipation and management of change .
In the era of globalisation , Europe must address a number of economic and social problems .
We are well aware that business restructuring is something feared not only by the employees affected but also by other citizens .
We also know that when it comes to addressing this phenomenon there is only one possible approach , and that is to be decisive , proactive and dynamic .
The EU must contribute towards preparing for the changes brought about by restructuring and towards managing them in a responsible way - whether by means of the structural funds , in particular the European Social Fund or through political dialogue in the context of the restructuring forums introduced by the Commission - and towards the implementation of the Community 's regulatory framework for the information and consultation of workers .
The recent situation in the VW car works demonstrated in particular the need to inform and consult with workers in the decision-making process at the earliest opportunity , so that they are prepared for restructuring and so that this is carried out in everyone 's best interests .
European Works Councils must be capable of carrying out this function in the context of supranational operations .
How to achieve this goal ?
First and foremost , is essential to ensure compliance with Community legislation when it comes to informing and consulting with employees .
I would emphasise , though , that the task of upholding Community legislation falls primarily to the Member States .
Questions should also be asked about the review of the Directive on European Works Councils .
I am well aware of how sensitive this issue is .
As you know , the Commission initiated the process of reviewing the Directive on European Works Councils in 2004 .
In the context of the 2005 communication on restructuring and employment the Commission encouraged the European social partners to enter negotiations on this issue .
The social partners have incorporated support and evaluation of the joint texts relating to European Works Councils and restructuring into their working programmes for 2006 to 2008 .
We await the results of this work with great interest .
I know that the social partners have different approaches to the issue of European Works Councils .
Everyone agrees that there is an increasing need for social dialogue at a national level , and many are aware that the work of the European Works Councils is often overlooked or underestimated .
The question is whether a review of the European legal framework will improve the way they function or whether it would be enough to step up the exchange of tried and tested approaches between the social partners .
We welcome all proposals contributing to the development of the legal framework .
It appears that this development will prove useful in guaranteeing greater cohesion and effectiveness when it comes to informing and consulting with workers , reducing legal uncertainty in cases involving major changes to the size of businesses , and clarifying the extent of the process of informing and consulting with employees at European and national level and the role it has to play .
It is clear that the Commission 's initiative takes account of actions initiated by the social partners with a view to supporting the use of proven approaches .
It also takes account of the requirements of the Economic and Social Committee .
The Commission will support the search for solutions arising from the partnership and linking up the economic , social and environmental aspects .
This approach is also backed in the 2005 Commission communication on restructuring and employment and the 2006 communication on corporate responsibility .
The Commission awaits with interest Parliament 's resolution on the issue , which will play an important role regarding the Commission 's next steps .
The Commission is ready to discuss the issue of informing and consulting with workers with Parliament . Thank you .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , let me begin with a special word of thanks to Commissioner Špidla for his remarks on the subject of information and consultation of workers .
We all know how much importance attaches to workers ' participatory rights as a source of good industrial relations and as the basis of a contented and motivated workforce .
That is why these rights are also , and indeed particularly , in the interests of companies and employers .
We in Europe can be proud of our tradition of worker participation .
These rights feature prominently among our economic success factors .
Although consultation rights vary between Member States of the EU - in the country I come from , for instance , worker participation extends to a right of codetermination in the realm of business management - information and consultation rights are undoubtedly part of what we call the European social model .
The European Works Council Directive of 1994 is acknowledged as the pinnacle of Community legislation in this field .
By common accord , it has proved its worth too ; one token of its necessity was the fact that some companies with operations in several countries had voluntarily established works councils even before the Directive entered into force .
I also believe that now , in 2007 , the time has come to revise the Directive .
The 1994 Directive had actually designated 1999 as the revision date .
There have been many changes since the Directive was enacted .
Corporate economic structures have changed , and globalisation has made further advances , but the expectations of employees and those who represent their interests have grown too .
As representatives of the people in Europe , we shall gladly play our part in adapting the rules to the changes in the world of business and employment , for we all know that the only successful employers of the future will be those who act responsibly and with due regard to the rights and welfare of their employees , while well-informed employees who are involved in corporate decision-making processes will give of their best and be committed to the success of their company .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , Airbus , Alcatel , Lucent and Delphi Systems are just the latest in a never-ending stream of instances of major restructuring that have led delegations of workers to come to us complaining of breaches of EU information and consultation laws , not just the Works Council Directive , but others too : directives on collective redundancies and transfers dating from the 1970s , and the Directive establishing a General Framework for Information and Consultation of Workers .

We have quite a body of information on consultation laws , but the inconsistencies and contradictions between them and the loopholes in them mean that they are often avoided altogether .
There is often no attempt at meaningful information or consultation in good time in avoiding or mitigating job losses .
We urgently need a clear definition of the concepts of information and consultation in EU law .
We have different definitions in several different directives .
The Works Council Directive does not define either notion clearly , while the later directives on a company statute and the general framework have different definitions .
This is an open door to abuse and avoidance .
The need for a revision to the Works Council Directive is now glaringly obvious : it was due for revision eight years ago .
The deficiencies and loopholes are well known : failure to provide timely information and consultation , to fully recognise the role of trade unions , to provide expert support , the inadequacy of sanctions , the misuse of confidentiality rules to withhold information and so on .
These deficiencies must now be addressed to give workers the effective tools they need .
I know there is a view that a revision should not be launched because we might end up with a weaker , not a stronger , instrument .
The view of my group is that the avoidance and abuse of this legislation is now of such scale and breadth that we have nothing to lose in insisting on a revision .
I urge the Commissioner to bring that provision forward as a matter of urgency .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( PT ) At a time when we are celebrating the 33rd anniversary of the April Revolution in my country , Portugal , it is with particular pleasure that I am here in this Chamber talking about strengthening the legislation on the information and consultation of workers .
As we all know , the directives on the information and consultation of workers and the European Works Councils lay down that information should be made available regarding the development of economic and social aspects of the company and regarding decisions that cause substantial change as regards the organisation of work and work contracts .
Experience has shown , however , that this is not enough and does not address the increasingly serious problems of company restructuring and relocations , which have serious economic and social repercussions .
Workers from various companies continue to report such problems in the hi-tech industry , in the cases of Alcatel-Lucent , Delphi and Yasak , footwear , for example Rodhe , the car industry and the textiles sector . Community legislation therefore needs to go much further .
Workers ' organisations must be kept fully informed and must play a central role throughout the process , in the European Works Councils , including the right of veto .
Flexi-insecurity , the liberalisation of redundancies and the unacceptable attack on the rights gained by the workers down the years must not be allowed to flourish .
I hope that you will be able to answer the questions you face , Commissioner .
If it means celebrating the Carnation Revolution , I am sure , Mrs Figueiredo , that he will reply to you .

( NL ) Mr President , I shall try to make my statement in one minute ; it mainly has to do with the financial markets and what is happening there at the moment in the area of private equity and hedge funds which , via shareholders ' rights , are gaining influence in businesses .
It is very disappointing , in my view , that the present Commission has failed to table any proposals on employees ' rights , particularly in those large transnational businesses , while everything possible is being done to improve shareholders ' rights .
We adopted a report on this very subject in February last .
There is clearly an enormous imbalance between what is being done for shareholders in order to gain more influence in businesses - which they can do purely from their financial perspective - while no consideration is being given to the repercussions on employment , on the quality of work or on employees ' rights .
As I see it , the balance should be restored in that area at the earliest opportunity , and it may be advisable to revisit the fifth Company Law Directive and to ensure that , when monitoring businesses , a better balance is struck between the interests of shareholders and those of employees .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , recent events in the European Union have shown that information and consultation within the framework of the European Works Council function only in a highly inadequate manner .
We are now at the stage where worker representation bodies in different countries - France , Germany and so on - are being played off one against the other , yet this is not some sort of international sports match .
Consultation and information within the framework of the committee of the European Works Council simply no longer exist .
For that reason there is a need for a change in this regard .
I would point out that the first revision was supposed to have taken place back in 1999 .
The subject was brought up again in 2004 and now we are at the stage where we are recognising the need for revision .
I am very pleased that it was Mrs Stauner of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats who prepared this subject for us , as it was former German Chancellor Kohl who , when the European Works Council Directive came into the world , was first in line in the delivery room .
At that time , though , our industries were still in a quite different condition to the one they are in today ; there have been a lot of changes .
Business organisations have got smaller , methods of communication have changed .
There is much in this sector that has to be changed .
All I can do is call on us to seize the opportunity currently before us to undertake this revision .
Let us bring the European Works Council up to date !
Let us update the regulations and bring them into line with reality !
It is tremendously important , from the point of view of democratic politics , for this to work within companies , because if it does not work there is an enormous potential for conflict , and that is what has to be prevented .
All I can do , then , Commissioner , is to entreat you to get this under way quickly and to push the Council as necessary in order to make this happen .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , 13 years after the adoption of the European Works Councils Directive , much remains to be done if this legislation is fully to achieve its objectives .
Over the last few months , many companies have carried out major restructuring projects , without consultation and regardless of this directive and of other European laws and without any of these companies having ever been punished .
The crises that Airbus is going through now , that Alcatel and Volkswagen went through in the past and that Peugeot will perhaps go through in the future , are harsh examples of just what is lacking in European social dialogue .
In the case of Airbus , the trade unionists and workers that we met in Parliament or in our respective countries rightly deplored the absence of any prior consultation or true cooperation with regard to the Power 8 restructuring plan .
Although we know that managerial errors are at the root of the current difficulties being experienced by Airbus and , at the same time , that it is the skills of its employees that have made it a success , the employees are the last to be informed but the first to be affected - and the most tragically affected - by this plan .
As for the managers , they are shielded , because they are covered by the millions of euros of their gilded parachute .
We can no longer tolerate a situation in which employees learn through the press that they are being made redundant .
We need to act urgently if we are to ensure greater transparency .
For several years now , we in the Socialist Group in the European Parliament have been calling for these texts to be revised in a bid to ensure that information and consultation of workers early on , at regular intervals and at all levels of decision making will enable them genuinely to make their presence felt in the decision-making process .
Thus , employee representatives ought to be able to sit on the management board of companies .
This is a crucial element when it comes to workers being informed about , and monitoring , strategic decisions .
This is what would make it possible , too , to ensure that these restructuring measures were really crucial to the business and not just linked to managerial errors or to the quest for immediate profit .
We also think it crucial to ensure that companies within the Union assume their social and financial responsibilities and act in accordance with a method of governance that is responsible and fair towards all of the parties involved - workers , trade unions , local and regional authorities and communities in the area in which they are based .
The Commission must make a commitment to induce companies to act responsibly , including by considering legislation on their social responsibility .
It seems to me that , in a globalised setting and in an ever-changing economic situation , it is our duty today , as it was 13 years ago , to ensure that the existing directives are applied in full , including by means of sanctions against irresponsible companies but , even more so , to ensure that the existing directives are revised so that they go further with regard to information and consultation of workers , and to works councils .
By doing so , we will make it clear that we are strongly attached to a socially responsible Europe .
( ES ) I would like to thank the Commissioner for his fine words , although we would like more details on the timetable and the measures to increase the transparency and good governance of companies .
The participation of workers is required if we are to maintain the competitiveness and quality of European industry in flagship projects such as Airbus and others that are less well-known , but crucial if we are to turn Europe into the competitive economy that we want to see .
Delphi is a painful wound in my country in this regard .
It is not right to attribute the problems we are experiencing exclusively to globalisation , since if we look carefully , we will see that the books of both Airbus and Boeing are full of orders , and therefore more workers are needed rather than fewer , both here in Europe and in other places .
I would like to call upon the Commission , in addition to the worker participation that we are demanding , now to consider new measures to ensure transparency in the activities and decisions of executives who , with their armour-plated contracts and exorbitant salaries , allow negligence , lack of transparency and criminal errors to take place for which the European Community does not currently have a sufficient instrument .
Commissioner , does the Commission intend to create instruments to restrict this irresponsible power within the context of the so-called social responsibility of companies and their codes of conduct , which so far are not obligatory ?
Could measures be implemented to oblige executives to manage in a more transparent way , firstly for the sake of the workers and also for the sake of society ?
If we are talking about good European governance in companies , we cannot continue to resign ourselves to this situation .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it seems that something bad must always happen before the Commission advances an opinion on a subject as important as strengthening the rights of workers in the area of information and consultation .
Airbus 's Power8 restructuring programme and the consequent threat of job losses and sales of factories shook European Airbus employees to the core .
In the discussion with the works councils of the areas affected , Varel and Nordenham , and at a meeting of trade union representatives from all over Europe that took place in Brussels recently , the workers pointed out time and again the inadequate supply of information to and consultation with Airbus employees .
For this reason , the rights of European works councils must , first of all , at long last be fully implemented and then extended and given greater depth .
It is indefensible for workers not to be provided with comprehensive information and consultation if their companies are being restructured or if there are possible job losses .
This indefensible situation can be remedied only by finally getting the long-overdue revision of the European Works Council Directive under way .
So far , I have not heard of a single company anywhere in Europe that has got into difficulties because of its works council .
On the contrary , in fact , consultation and providing early information to workers could definitely have saved large numbers of companies and jobs in Europe and fixed management mistakes .
After 13 years it is time for this legislation to be fully brought to bear in order to ensure social peace in Europe .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , it is true , thirteen years ago now , on reading the texts , it was pointed out that , in our primary law , we had to incorporate social dialogue as the European social model 's distinguishing mark .
That was why the Directive was drawn up .
It was pointed out thirteen years ago that the internal market had a transnational dimension and that that could lead to problems amongst workers in companies of a transnational nature , since they should take decisions in consultation with everybody without prejudicing a few or prejudicing everybody .
Given what we have seen in Delphi , in Renault and in Airbus , we are now much more acutely aware of the need to improve these mechanisms .
Europe is in danger of appearing to lack legitimacy amongst the workers , because they are seeing two very dangerous things simultaneously , Commissioner .
Firstly , they see that we do not have any instruments , but at the same time they hear us in Europe saying that we are with them , that we are not going to abandon them in the face of globalisation and restructuring .
The revision of the Directive , therefore , though not sufficient , is nevertheless necessary , because it is an instrument that is showing itself to be neither used nor useful in dealing with the extremely serious problems that we are seeing on the ground and which are turning a very significant proportion of the European population against each other and against Brussels .
This is urgent , Commissioner .
We must continue to move forward . We shall support you fully if you tackle such a difficult and risky situation .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , uncertainty is always a bad thing , especially when it relates to the future of jobs .
The sword of Damocles that being laid off represents has been hanging over the heads of thousands of Airbus employees since January .
That is an intolerable situation .
It is no way to treat human beings .
In my constituency there was talk , with the advent of Power8 , first of 1 200 job losses , then of 700 , then of job losses solely amongst temporary workers and now we hear that Airbus actually wants to start hiring again !
All of this cannot fail to make one dizzy .
The approach taken by the top management at EADS is , as we all know , no longer an isolated incident .
We have heard this a number of times today .
The fact that something like this occurs despite the European Works Council Directive is simply scandalous and makes it glaringly evident that action is needed .
For that reason , there is an urgent need to introduce specific measures to provide a stronger reminder to employers of their obligations in terms of informing and consulting with their employees .
We must ensure , above all , that sanctions against contravention of the directive are rigorously enforced right across the EU and also that employees and their representatives are represented on the supervisory boards .
Commissioner Špidla , I genuinely expect the Commission finally to get on with the long overdue task of updating this directive , for , as is well known , the EU 's competitiveness and productivity stand and fall by good , safe jobs .
Mr President , honourable Members , firstly , a number of cases were mentioned in which the directive on information and consultation of workers was not applied appropriately .
This did indeed happen , the Commission took action in each case and in some cases there was a clear improvement in the situation .
I should like to emphasise , however , that the directive is not as weak as would appear from some of the opinions expressed .
How it is applied is ultimately a matter of national discretion .
I should like to point out that a number of companies have been brought before the French and Belgian courts recently for not upholding the directive and that in some cases , for example British Airways , the restructuring process has been put on hold until the law on consultation and information has been implemented in full .
There are therefore possibilities for a relatively effective approach , which is something that in my opinion we should bear in mind .
The second question mentioned was that of the prospective review of the directive .
I would point out that the Commission has launched a review of this directive and that our aim is in any event to contribute to a solution leading to stable , effective social dialogue and consultation and the right to consultation with workers and for them to be informed .
This is the Commission 's goal and I am sure that we will achieve it during this legislative period .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote on the motions for resolutions tabled at the end of the debate will take place during the next part-session , in Brussels , on Thursday 10 May .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - The reason for this statement and next month 's resolution is the appalling situation regarding Airbus in Europe .
A combination of mismanagement , unfair competition and poor judgement has threatened the success of this most vital of European industries .
I find it inconceivable that the US with Boeing should totally dominate the world market for medium- and larger-scale aircraft .
Boeing has its civilian sales and R [ amp ] D underpinned by military contracts and military R [ amp ] D : a sad indictment of Europe 's lack of a common defence and security policy .
Nevertheless , the key problem here is that despite massive EU and national governments loans to Airbus , it was run like some kind of Edwardian corner shop with minimum consultation with the workforce .
Workers possess one of the most important resources for any industrial enterprise - craft knowledge and experience .
It may well be that by focusing on that , management could have avoided some of its worst mistakes .
Now a minimum of 10 000 families face the prospect of suffering job losses .
If this company in the vanguard of European industry pays so little attention to its most important asset , its workforce , it can only be time for the Commission to strengthen and reinforce legislation that is clearly not strong enough .
Directives concerning the protection of health and safety of workers : simplifying and rationalising practical implementation reports ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Figueiredo , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Directive 89 / 391 / EEC , its individual Directives and Council Directives 83 / 477 / EEC , 91 / 383 / EEC , 92 / 29 / EEC and 94 / 33 / EC with a view to simplifying and rationalising the reports on practical implementation - C6-0242 / 2006 - .
Member of the Commission .
( CS ) Madam President , Mrs Figueiredo , honourable Members , I should first like to thank Parliament and the Council for their efforts in reaching agreement so quickly on this proposal .
I also welcome the Figueiredo report , which kick-started the constructive dialogue chaired by the Council , where the foundations were laid for the adoption of the proposed directive at first reading .
The Commission 's proposed directive forms part of the process of simplifying the legal environment .
The purpose of this proposal is to simplify and rationalise the responsibilities of the Member States and the Commission as regards reports on the implementation of directives relating to worker health and safety , without backsliding on the principle of protection .
This is a fundamental condition .
The new text harmonises the timeframes for delivering national reports that will be published once every five years , and this obligation is extended to all existing directives .
The plan is for only one report , including a general section dealing with the general principles of the framework directive , supplemented by special chapters on aspects relating to the individual directives .
This will allow for a general overview of practical implementation .
The simplification will apply to the national bodies , which will draw up only one report every five years , the Commission , which will draw up only one national report per Member State instead of the current 500 reports , and the social partners , which will also contribute one report every five years .
The Commission , in close cooperation with the consultative committee on health and safety at work , will set up a body charged with helping the Member States to draw up coherent reports .
The Commission is ready to adopt the amendments for which you voted .
I will strengthen the role of the tripartite advisory committee on health and safety at work in defining the structure of the reports , in clearly establishing the content of the reports and in setting deadlines for the Member States and the Commission to draw up the reports . Thank you .
rapporteur .
( PT ) Issues of workers ' health and working conditions , the organisation of health , hygiene and safety services in the workplace and the list of occupational diseases were first debated in Community circles in 1989 with the publication of Framework Directive 89 / 391 .
Since then , other directives have been adopted covering workers ' health , the organisation of occupational health services , working conditions , young workers , temporary workers , and those manning ships , thereby fulfilling the International Labour Organisation Conventions .
Almost all of these and other directives stipulate that the Member States should submit a report to the Commission on their practical implementation and the points of view of the social partners . The truth is that some Member States have not done so .
With the proposal before us , it is hoped that greater attention will be paid to the effective implementation of the directives concerned and to working conditions . It is an attempt to reduce the millions of accidents at work per year and thousands of deaths and injuries leading to permanent incapacity across the EU .
As I have said , the drafting of practical implementation reports by the Member States , is laid down in several different directives , but required at different intervals , some every four years , some every five , and others without any specific timeframe .
Now , as the Commissioner has just told us , the Commission is proposing that one single report be drawn up every five years .
In order that the proposal for one report every five years meets the needs of safeguarding health and safety at work , the specific aspects of each directive must not in any way be watered down or underplayed , and this is something that this report seeks to address .
We have accordingly tabled a number of proposals , of which I should like to highlight those that refer to the structure of the report itself , which should include a specific questionnaire .
The report should accordingly include a general section dealing with the common principles and aspects applicable to all the directives and other specific chapters regarding the implementation of each of the particular characteristics of each directive , with the inclusion of specific indicators , when available .
The five-yearly report will provide a practical assessment of the various directives and , where appropriate and available , separate data by gender on equality between men and women .
It will also include relevant information on the prevention measures taken by the Member States in order to make a suitable assessment of how the legislation is working in practice .
We strongly believe that there needs to be a policy of genuinely improving the practices of the various Member States .
The Commission must also , as a matter of urgency , submit a more thorough report on the current situation in the Member States in the various areas of workers ' safety and health in the workplace .
Lastly , I should like to highlight the close cooperation that was possible with the MEPs from the different political groups in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , with the Executive Committee and with the Council . This cooperation will certainly enable us to obtain agreement at first reading .
I thank you all for the work that has been done .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( SL ) First of all , I would like to express satisfaction with this report on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , because it constitutes one of the first steps towards a significant relaxation of the burden imposed on Member States with regard to various administrative tasks .
At the same time , this directive will contribute to the simplification and clarification of the work of the Commission .
In the PPE-DE Group we are very pleased to note that the agreement with the rapporteur has worked and that we have been able to secure such a broad consensus within our committee .
If I remember rightly , we adopted this report with only one vote against .
In terms of its contents , the report sends yet another clear message to the European public that the Commission , the Council and Parliament are taking decisions to rationalise procedures and to improve communication between the Member States and EU institutions so that everyone can reap the benefits of such action .
This directive and the single report will in no respect lead to any watering down of standards relating to health and safety at work .
My political group considers this report in its entirety , that is the directive , as an important step forward , but , of course , we would like to see similar initiatives being taken in other fields and by other commissioners .
Let me mention just one example : in the field of terrorism , for instance , the European Parliament has adopted around 60 different documents , directives , regulations etc .
Things are quite hard to fathom out , for instance the Schengen Treaty , the single market and a host of other examples .
In a nutshell , this report is a fine example of how we can secure broad consensus within political groups about regulating our common concerns in the future .
I would also like to thank Commissioner Špidla for his participation .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Mrs Figueiredo for her work .
She worked closely with the shadow rapporteur and produced a sound draft report for the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
The Commission proposal aims towards systematisation and a uniform model for the directives on worker protection .
In a single implementation report to be submitted every five years and for which we have been waiting quite a long time already , the Member States are to report to the Commission on the practical application of the directives in question .
This plan will certainly provide the single-state authorities - which is the truth of the matter - with a better overview .
Comprehensive and effective worker protection is a basic prerequisite for ensuring and maintaining the health of workers .
4 500 employees die in the EU every year as a result of accidents in the workplace , while over 4 million people are affected by accidents at work each year .
A summary report of this nature can provide us with important information with regard to what preventive measures we need to implement and make a contribution to improving the quality of worker protection in the EU .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the report on simplifying and rationalising reports and the practical implementation of directives is extremely important for employment policy .
The emerging common jobs market requires constant health and safety monitoring for our citizens in EU countries .
Different conditions in individual countries require constant monitoring to ensure that the directives are adhered to , and five-yearly analyses of their suitability , effectiveness , transparency , costs and effects are needed .
These analyses , based on clear and transparent guidelines , should help to improve the legal situation and common policy as regards health and safety .
There is also a need to continuously monitor health and safety directives , and the effect of these directives on the health and safety strategy within the Member States .
In this regard , the European Agency for Health and Safety at Work and the European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions have an important role to play .
I thank Mrs Ilda Figueiredo for her report .

on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , the modern working world has brought with it new phenomena , ranging from the growth of psychiatric problems , via the taking of more and more sick leave and increasing burn-out to new forms of aggression such as workplace bullying .
It almost seems to be good form in the working environment to put workers under permanent time pressure and to impose on them unplanned extra burdens and tight deadlines .
Anyone who succumbs to the long-term negative impact of this on their health has to explain themselves in interviews when they return to work after a period of sick leave , the idea being that illness is a result of personal misconduct .
Older workers are being pushed off into early retirement en masse , and younger ones labelled as unproductive .
Initiatives such as Move Europe which relate to workplace health management are , of course , to be welcomed .
However , such health promotion programmes are often run in companies that are organised in such a way that illness is simply not permitted .
It is pressure within companies , in combination with the fear of losing their jobs , that ensures that employees struggle into work against the advice of their doctors .
Moreover , short-term contracted activities and part-time work bring with them the constant fear of not having a job and financial worries which are then reflected in psychological problems .
Absenteeism and unfitness for work , however , not only generate high costs within the companies concerned , but also burden public health budgets .
Against this backdrop we should not be surprised about the rising numbers of those suffering from eating disorders , obesity and mental illness , nor about falling birth rates .
As long as work means permanent stress and children represent a poverty trap , the demographic change that is resulting in a lack of children and an overaging of the population will continue .
With this in mind , we must ensure more job security .
It must be possible for a sole breadwinner to feed a family and it must be possible for a woman to decide to have children without that meaning impoverishment .
Those who are sick must be allowed to get better .
If we could achieve that then we would surely have taken a big step forwards on the road to meeting the Lisbon objectives .
( EL ) Mr President , with regard to all the previous directives we are given the impression that we exerted insufficient control , which did not help with their comprehensive implementation .
Even the directive 's explicit provision regarding the submission of reports by Member States on their state legislative provisions , which includes opinions of social partners , has not helped solve the problem , to date .
Therefore , I too applaud your proposal Commissioner , considering that it complies with the goals of other European Union policies , especially with regard to the improvement of the regulatory framework on increasing corporate competitiveness .
The present proposal has added value , considering that it allows - through a single report every five years - for a better evaluation of the consequences and community provisions in the fields of health and safety at work as well as hygiene services ; the need for a reduction in accidents at work is urgent and work-related diseases must be combated in order for workers , corporations and society in general , to benefit .
I congratulate the rapporteur because she cooperated with the political groups , reached a consensus within the Council and managed to include in the recitals one of my amendments referring to the utilisation of the work of both the European Agency for Safety and Health at Work ( Bilbao ) and the European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions ( Dublin ) , in the context of the results from the evaluation of national policies on health and safety at work .
It is important that the European Commission takes into consideration the findings of the two aforementioned institutions , in order to draft the basic questionnaire for the Member States , which will substitute the multiple reports .
The question is whether a reduction in quantity can bring about an improvement in quality .
We certainly hope so .
Honourable Members , I should like , once again , to thank you for the work you have done on this proposal .
I am sure that the vote will pave the way for us to agree on the proposal , which will lead to a substantial simplification of the administrative process , a reduction in unnecessary , bureaucratic obstacles and most importantly to a more effective implementation of the directive on health and safety at work .
I should like , if I may , to make one further remark , because some speeches did not directly relate solely to the subject of this directive , but to health and safety at work in general .
Obviously , the figure of 4 500 fatal accidents per year seems relatively low in comparison to the 250 million workers , but we are talking about 4 500 human lives .
From this perspective , the figure is excessively high and it is up to us to do all we can to bring that figure down . Thank you .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of sitting
( The sitting was closed at 11.25 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 10.00 a.m. )
Mr President , I do not wish to hold up the proceedings , but I and others tabled a text for a written declaration concerning the fact that the Bureau of this Parliament had reversed its decision to introduce a total ban on smoking in the European Parliament .
I have received communications from the services and now from the President stating that a written declaration on an internal matter of the Parliament is not within the rules .
However , if you look at the Rules of Procedure it is very clear that a written declaration may concern any matter within the field of responsibilities of the European Union , which clearly this is .
Could I therefore ask through you that the President refer the matter of interpreting the rules on this point to the committee that is responsible for interpreting the rules , namely the Committee on Constitutional Affairs ?
Yes , we will proceed like that , Mr Corbett .
Any recommendation you make concerning the Rules should be listened to very carefully !
Therefore , we will proceed as you say .
Documents received : see Minutes
Transfers of appropriations : see Minutes
Relations between EU and Switzerland ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on relations between the European Union and Switzerland .
Member of the Commission .
( ES ) Mr President , I am going to read the Commission statement on relations between the European Union and Switzerland , and although you and I speak the same language , I shall do so in English .
Mr President , the Commission is pleased that this item has been put on the agenda because it is now more than two years since we last discussed Switzerland .
It was in 2004 , on the occasion of the conclusion of the 10 new bilateral agreements .
Let me start , therefore , with a general remark .
The bilateral and multilateral relations that link the EU and Switzerland are very good .
Switzerland is a highly valued partner for the EU in many areas .
Our bilateral relations are based on a solid foundation of around 20 important and over 100 smaller sector-specific agreements .
These agreements range from free trade in goods and the free movement of persons to Swiss participation in our research and Schengen cooperation .
Any existing differences should not have an inordinate impact on our relations .
In February , the Commission adopted a state aid decision on Swiss cantonal tax favours for certain types of companies , in particular holding companies .
This decision has received much media attention in Switzerland and has been dramatised , by some , into a major conflict .
Legally , the Commission has no doubts that the cantonal tax schemes qualify as subsidies , because these tax regimes offer unfair tax advantages to companies established in Switzerland for profits generated in the European Union .
Income generated in Switzerland is taxed higher than profits made in the EU .
This unequal treatment is at the heart of the state aid problem .
The rules in question are liable to distort competition and may affect trade between Switzerland and the EU .
All criteria of Article 23 of the agreement of 1972 , the provision which declares such state aid incompatible with the proper functioning of the agreement , are therefore fulfilled .
Politically , too , it seems hard to accept that a neighbouring country that enjoys privileged access to our internal market and takes part in a large number of our programmes and other activities should grant such tax favours .
The benefiting companies are often set up with the sole aim of avoiding the taxation of profits in our Member States .
I would like to point out that tax schemes of this kind or similar are not allowed inside the EU , pursuant to the state aid rules set out in the EC Treaty .
In the past , the Commission has adopted decisions against them .
We are not against tax competition , which also takes place among the Member States , but it must be fair .
The Commission wants to find a mutually acceptable solution .
Therefore , we also asked the Council in February for a mandate to start negotiations with Switzerland on this topic .
Member States support the Commission in this respect , and such a mandate is currently being prepared in the Council .
I am also counting very much on Parliament 's support in this matter .
We proceed from the belief that we will find a solution for this problem , just as we have always found solutions for problems in our relations with Switzerland in the past .
On a different matter of importance , I would like to express the Commission 's expectation that Switzerland will , hopefully , soon be ready to negotiate the inclusion of Bulgaria and Romania in the Agreement on the Free Movement of Persons .
If Switzerland were to exclude the citizens of two Member States from this very important agreement , it would be unacceptable for legal , institutional and political reasons .
Bulgaria and Romania should also receive a financial contribution from Switzerland for the reduction of economic and social disparities , on the same terms as the other 10 new Member States .
In view of the Swiss position on EU accession and the European Economic Area , there is currently no alternative to further strengthening of bilateral relations .
With that in mind , the Commission is prepared to look into the Swiss proposal for the negotiation of a general framework agreement , provided that it brings an added value to our relations , for instance with regard to the updating of existing agreements in line with the evolving Community acquis .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I welcome the statements made today by Commissioner Almunia .
I believe that these statements also largely meet with the consent of my group .
The relationship between the European Union and Switzerland has been a special one since time immemorial .
Commissioner Almunia touched on the various agreements .
In this respect , our partnership with Switzerland is characterised by particularly close cooperation but which has not , as yet , ended up with Switzerland becoming a member of the European Union .
Nevertheless , Switzerland is an extremely important trading partner as well as being a friend and neighbour .
I find this particularly congenial since my electoral district directly borders Switzerland .
I would therefore like to appeal to all sides not to jeopardise these good neighbourly relations by means of stubbornness or excessive demands placed on one side or the other .
The tax dispute has already been touched on .
The topic of Switzerland would certainly also be cause for a comprehensive discussion here in Parliament .
Today , however , as has been described by Commissioner Almunia , we are obviously concerned with the subject of fiscal practices .
On this theme , I would like to say that , unlike our colleagues from Great Britain , for instance , and representations to the contrary coming out of Switzerland , we are of the opinion that this issue does not involve intervention in a country 's right to levy taxes , but is more an issue of whether enterprises which belong to the European single market , and which may enjoy the advantages afforded by this single market , are receiving unjustified subsidies .
We are talking about the principle of equal treatment and the abolition of hidden subsidies .
In this respect , the approach adopted by the Commission , that the Swiss have to apply some finishing touches here , is the correct one , even if it may have been more prudent to begin with negotiations instead of a procedure .
The statement that it is a matter for the canton is neither applicable nor effective in my opinion because what we are talking about are hidden subsidies which must be abolished .
For its part , the EU must clarify the fact that while it naturally respects Switzerland 's sovereignty on tax matters , the EU 's basic principles , which Swiss enterprises also benefit from , must apply to all enterprises within the internal market .
Finally , I would like to point out that we must find a solution to this problem in the interests of European enterprises , as well as its citizens , to which both parties have contributed .
That is why I am calling on both the Commission and our Swiss neighbours .

Mr President , Commissioner , I welcome your statement , because you have taken note of what we have been saying for some time now , namely that the practice that is being developed in certain Swiss cantons - without mentioning the main ones of Zug , Vaud and Schwyz - constitutes a violation of the 1972 agreement on forms of State aid that contradict the rules of fair competition and that affect the nature of trade between the European Union and Switzerland .
The fact is that Switzerland , as a friend of the European Union , benefits from the same conditions of access to the EU internal market as any Member State .
You cannot have your cake and eat it , meaning , in this case , that you cannot have both the internal market and exceptions for certain Swiss cantons .
It is not a question here of referring to this or that media figure among natural persons , but indeed of referring to substantial sums that are at stake due to the practices being developed by certain legal persons .
Therefore , once a problem has been identified between friends , it should be dealt with .
This is what you are proposing to do .
You will have my group 's full support in this matter , and I am delighted that other groups in this House share this approach .
As far as Switzerland is concerned , we are told that Swiss internal affairs are being interfered with .
However , in an international trade environment , freedom is not unilateral .
Account must be taken of others ' circumstances , and the freedom of one party stops where that of the other begins .
I believe that , when it comes to our excellent relations with Switzerland - and President Barroso reiterated this when he was in Bern the other day - this is how we must act .
At times , Switzerland has been able to divide and rule among Europeans , and everyone will recall the circumstances in which , after the Feira conclusions had come out and we wanted to adopt the Directive on the taxation of savings within the Union , some people used Switzerland to divide us .
I am delighted that the conditions for negotiating the mandate granted to the Commission will clearly enable the Member States to speak with one voice , while showing respect for Swiss sovereignty .
That is a very good sign , in my view .
To conclude , I should like simply to make an obvious point : when one considers the logic of the Swiss taxation system , the idea that a taxation system should take account of external costs is absolutely integral to the Swiss thinking on taxation .
To put it plainly , certain Swiss practices confirm the fact that , from the moment that production does not take place on Swiss soil , the cost of infrastructure or of employing qualified workers does not have to be incorporated in the taxation system .
We must - at the very least in terms of trade with the European Union - highlight the following situation : as the taxation system developed in certain Swiss cantons currently stands in relation to that of the EU Member States , we are losing revenue , since these production activities are being developed on our territory and the tax on the capital gains generated in this way is being channelled into Switzerland to avoid the need to provide any funding for these external costs .
I wish you luck in the negotiations .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I wish to thank the Commissioner for his statement .
Here in Parliament we have long wanted to discuss the whole of our relationship with Switzerland and to celebrate Swiss success in three successive referendums on EU issues - referendums that would scarcely have passed in many of our Member States .
Although Switzerland is not a Member State , Swiss people are informed Europeans .
We wanted to discuss the interesting government report on European policy last autumn to recognise that , yes , the Swiss wish at present to pursue their own national interests outside membership , but also perhaps to counter some misconceptions about what might be on offer here .
In my view it amounts , as the Commissioner has said , to building on the bilaterals and perhaps a framework agreement that simplifies the administrative load on both sides .
However , what some of us would call ' membership-light ' is not on offer , and that is where the current difficulties over cantonal tax might stem from .
Either you are a member of the European Union or you are not .
Switzerland is not , and both sides do well to recall that .
Switzerland does not enjoy the benefits of membership , nor is that country subject to all of the obligations .
That is the difficulty of such an atypical , variable geometry : it will forever throw up problems and sources of irritation .
However , those problems should be solved with goodwill .
Let us take the tax issue head on .
If what the Commission really wants from Switzerland - which I suspect to be the case - is to extend the Code of Conduct for Business Taxation , then let us talk about that .
Even between Member States it is a voluntary code .
I have no doubt that there are offshore taxation arrangements in a Member State I know only too well that would not bear close scrutiny , yet I do not see such activity from the Commission in that direction .
We need a discussion as benefits the relationship between the EU and our nearest geographic neighbour in the heart of Europe , a country providing our second largest export market and an inspiration to us and many in terms of its democratic structures and internationalism .
Instead , we tell the Swiss that their cantonal tax systems are ' predatory ' .
That is a strong and unpleasant word .
If they are indeed predatory , I would expect to see a line of obvious cases of actual harm to Community trade : practical examples that could be cited and demonstrated as having this predatory effect .
I have seen none mentioned .
Indeed , the Commission relies instead on an argument that it does not have to demonstrate but merely show that the structures could have this effect .
However , there are no actual examples and I wonder whether that is because , under examination , they would not stand up against the strained argument that is put forward - an argument against a non-member state , based on an old free trade agreement , designed primarily to deal with the trade in goods .
Let us look at it in another way .
Perhaps my voters in Yorkshire might wonder why I spend so much time on Switzerland . However , if my northerly region of England had enjoyed over the years the level of fiscal autonomy vis-à-vis London that Swiss cantons have in their country , maybe we would not have been such a drain on EU Structural Funds .
Switzerland contributes financially to our enlargement process with popular consent .
This is a deep and complicated relationship , one that over the years I have found exasperating and frustrating , but never , ever dull !
We are often told to be nice to the Swiss before a referendum .
We are asked continuously what we will do if they vote ' no ' .
The answer is that the choice is always that of the Swiss people , but if they wish to work with us , we have to work with them in a respectful and proper way .
The best I would like to see is that one day there are Swiss ministers in the Council , a Swiss Commissioner and Swiss colleagues here with us to debate these issues , not us doing so at second remove .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this debate on relations between the European Union and the Swiss Confederation provides us with an interesting and timely opportunity to reflect briefly on what we can learn from the ancient democracy of the small , yet historically important federal republic of Switzerland .
If the Swiss federal tax system were well known to the taxpayers of the EU Member States , it would be a model to be imitated - as indeed it is - especially with a view to protecting economic freedom .
I would remind the Member States ' taxpayers that Swiss legislation is based on important principles , such as the principle of legal equality , the principle of economic freedom and , above all , the principle of the guarantee to property .
The principle of legal equality imposes the duty to tax according to economic capacity .
Thanks to constitutional provisions , the principle of economic freedom forbids the collection of certain taxes on trade that would be prohibitive in the context of trade policy .
Lastly , the important principle of the guarantee to property , enshrined in Article 26 of the Federal Constitution , forbids the imposition of tax when it takes the form of expropriation ; thus the guarantee to property constitutes a limit to taxation .
That is what needs to be learnt by those Member States which , like Italy , still oppress taxpayers with their tax legislation and tax burden , which in Italy exceeds 40 % .
From this great historical experience , we need to learn the principles of economic freedom contained in the Swiss Constitution .
Those of us from Padania have the good fortune to be the next-door neighbours of those free people of Switzerland .
Lastly , let us also think about the principle of freedom of belief , on the basis of which people are not obliged to contribute taxes to pay for the costs of religion if they do not belong to that religion , and also the fundamental right to express one 's wishes directly through the referendum on taxes .
It is time to do away with the Member States ' fiscal dictatorship over taxpayers !
Let the people have their say on taxes !
on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , when Swiss citizens rejected entry to the European Economic Area back in 1992 , no one would have been able to imagine today 's emerging developments .
On the one hand , both the EU and Switzerland are benefiting from cooperation and bilateral agreements , for instance , in connection with security and asylum . On the other , we have relentless negotiations , demands and even blackmailing , for example , in connection with the extended freedom of movement of persons and the taxation of savings income , or currently in connection with company taxation as regards which , it is the intention to use derogations relating to rail transit , which are so important as far as Switzerland is concerned , as a means of exerting pressure .
When Switzerland tightened its Asylum Act many years ago , the European Union did not hold back with its criticism .
This was designed to clamp down on the 75 % of applications for asylum which were incorrectly submitted every year , which is actually what happened .
This about-turn by Switzerland , which has traditionally been so welcoming to visitors , forced those persons within our Union who dream of multiculturalism to reconsider , and the Union actually had to make an example of this Swiss Asylum Act .
Now is the time for us to seek solutions together to common problems which we face in the tax sector , as well as with regard to migration and integration .
Above all , we should use Switzerland as an example in terms of direct democracy , for only if EU citizens are once again under the impression that their intentions are being taken seriously , that they can have their say in matters , might we then be able to extricate ourselves from the crisis currently facing the EU .
The disputes surrounding the EU Constitution and additional EU enlargement offer adequate opportunity to use Switzerland as an example .
Mr President , the European Union has many bilateral agreements with Switzerland .
These have seen the prospering of both the Swiss and Member States of the European Union .
The bilateral agreements should be recognised by all representatives of a joint and shared desire for prosperity .
There are further indicators that show the things we share and the direction we are heading : amongst other things , Switzerland is the second-largest trading partner of the European Union after the United States .
900 000 EU citizens live and work in Switzerland , while many more travel between these borders on a regular basis .
However , the present disagreement between the Commission and the Swiss Government is disconcerting and should be addressed swiftly .
I realise that the issue of double taxation which the EU and Switzerland are facing is no small one , but I would not like to see threats made in the preliminary rounds of negotiations , or in later rounds for that matter .
The issue of double taxation does not offer an easy way to investment , jobs and revenue for the Swiss cantons that allow the double standards .
The Council and Commission and Parliament should do its utmost to protect the interests of the Member States .
I wish you well in your negotiations and look forward to a positive outcome .
( LT ) First of all , I would like to thank Commissioner Almunia for the information he has presented about relations between the European Union and Switzerland .
However , I would like to hear what Mr Almunia has to say about the ultimate political goal of these relations .
In other words , is the development of closer relations between the European Union and Switzerland undertaken with an eye to membership of Switzerland in the European Union at a future date ; if so , when can we expect this , and what must Switzerland and the European Union do before then ?
If the development of closer relations is not aimed at Switzerland 's membership , but is aimed instead at a privileged partnership for Switzerland with the European Union , then what should be the principles of such a partnership ?
I do not think that bilateral agreements definitively solve the problem of Switzerland 's political future ; therefore , I would like to hear from Mr Almunia something similar to a road map , from which one would be able to see the direction of the Commission 's work in developing the European Union 's relations with Switzerland .
From the material presented it is hard for me to say whether the Commission has such a road map , or whether temporary agreements are a substitute for it .
My proposal would be as follows : it is necessary to produce a road map of the development of relations between the European Union and Switzerland , the ultimate goal of which would be either Switzerland 's membership in the EU , or its privileged partnership in terms of the yet-to-be approved Constitutional agreement .
In order to choose either solution , it is essential to know the Swiss people 's own opinion about the prospects for their country .
Until we solve this political problem , we will continue to make various agreements , and both parties to the negotiations will try to demand more favourable conditions for themselves at the expense of the other party .
As I study the existing and planned agreements , I have serious doubts as to whether we might just be making greater demands on Switzerland , which is still not a member of the European Union , than on the European Union Member States themselves .
In my opinion , the opposite should be the case .
I hope that Commissioner Almunia might disperse my stated doubts by responding to the issues I have raised .
( PL ) Mr President , Switzerland is viewed as a historic example of European integration by many people .
We need only to think of Jean Jacques Rousseau or Johannes von Müller .
However , it seems to remain an island , a Sonderfall , beyond the united Europe which surrounds it on all sides .
Let us remember that , in a referendum held in 1992 , 50.3 % of Swiss citizens themselves voted against their country joining the European Economic Area .
I do not wish to interfere in the internal affairs of the Confederation in any way .
In highlighting the good cooperation between Switzerland and the European Union in almost all areas , I hope that the right solution can also quickly be found in terms of taxation .
This is extremely important in order to achieve transparency in terms of our cooperation .
On behalf of the new Member States , including my own country , I would specifically like to welcome the outcome of the referendum held on 26 November 2006 , which accepted the establishment of a Swiss Financial Instrument to the tune of one billion francs .
For their part , these countries have flung open their doors to Swiss capital investments .
In Poland , for example , imports from Switzerland rose by 20 % during this period , while exports increased by only 5 % less .
I am sure that Swiss funds will be used sensibly for innovative purposes , including scientific research , providing support for small and medium-sized companies , as well as protecting the environment and fostering regional development .
Finally , I would like to add that Switzerland has a particularly positive image in the European Union .
According to my data , around 72 % of Europeans would be happy to welcome the Swiss Confederation into our common European home .
Perhaps it would be wise to make the most of this positive attitude .
Mr President , why are the Swiss doing so much better than us ?
Why is the Helvetic Confederation richer , more content , more orderly and better administered than the European Union ?
Allow me to suggest a reason .
Switzerland is founded on what one might call the ' Jeffersonian principle ' : the notion that decisions should be taken as closely as possible to the people they affect .
The European Union , by contrast , is founded on the converse principle .
The very first line of the very first article of the Treaty of Rome commits us to an ever-closer union .
Whereas power in Switzerland is dispersed , power in the EU is concentrated , and from that one structural flaw come most of our present discontents : the unintended consequences of our directives and regulations , the inflexibility of our policies , the sense that the government has become remote from the governed , the determination of our national electorates to vote ' no ' to Brussels at every opportunity .
Why then do we keep bullying and hectoring the Swiss over their refusal to join us ?
Why do we attack their success in keeping their cantonal taxes down ?
Why do we encourage that minority of Swiss legislators who see EU membership precisely as a way of sidestepping their voters and escaping their system of direct democracy ?
Is it that we envy our neighbours their success or is it that we fear that our own citizens will be encouraged by their example to demand independence for their own states ?
Let me propose an alternative approach .
Instead of seeking to drag Switzerland into our Union , why do our Member States not instead apply to become cantons of their confederation ?
They are , after all , getting something right , these Switzers !
( PL ) Mr President , there are many referenda in Switzerland and this is one of the reasons why I would not want to be a canton in even such a pleasant country .
Switzerland is a wealthy country , which does not have to be a member of the Union and , at the moment , does not wish to join the Union .
At the same time , it is a good , strategic partner for the European Union .
When one has such a partner , Commissioner , one negotiates and discusses , rather than initiating proceedings .
I agree here with my colleague from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats .
As a Polish MEP , the case of Switzerland reminds me of the unfortunate and , until now , unsuccessful attempts of certain German and French politicians , such as Mr Nicolas Sarkozy , to unify taxation in the European Union , which would de facto lead to an increase in tax in my country .
There will be no consent to this move .
I am therefore not surprised that the Swiss now complain about Brussels interfering in the internal affairs of their country .
This whole matter shows that the Union should take a look at itself .
It should reform its own economy in such a way as to make it truly competitive , without resorting to proceedings , penalties and demands addressed to third countries or its own members .
Mr President , allow me just a few words .
Firstly , I wish to insist that the Commission considers relations between the EU and Switzerland to be very good .
Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner had the opportunity to meet the President of the Helvetic Confederation on 3 April .
They discussed these very good relations , which do not exclude some legal problems , which can be likened to those which exist among the EU Member States .
Every time the Commission considers that the Treaties or Community legal provisions are not fully respected , as guardian of the Treaties , it is obliged to react .
This has been the case with the issue under discussion : the tax decisions adopted in some cantons of the Helvetic Confederation .
It is not about tax competition .
It is about the enforcement of the rules that were adopted in our Agreement with Switzerland of 1972 .
It is not about tax competition but state aid .
The Commission very often opens this kind of procedure on the grounds of failure to enforce state aid rules in the Member States , and it is a very important issue .
I do not know whether you are aware that over 20 000 letter-box companies have been established in Switzerland with the sole purpose of avoiding taxation in the European Union Member States .
We have been discussing this issue with the Swiss authorities since 2005 . We have not found a solution other than to open this procedure .
We are asking the Council for a mandate to negotiate with the Swiss authorities to reach a solution to this conflict .
I hope that , in the coming weeks , the Council will give us this mandate with the backing of a very large majority of the Member States .
I hope that during the negotiations , these issues , which constitute sizeable problems for thousands of European companies , will be resolved .
That concludes this item .
Communication of Council common positions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 11.20 a.m. and resumed at 12.00 noon )

Announcement by the President
Ladies and gentlemen , the Conference of Presidents has asked me to issue a statement in this connection and I can say , quite categorically , that there will be no debate or discussions on this matter .
No speeches will be accepted .
The Conference of Presidents has instructed me to provide you with the wording of a press release issued yesterday by the President of Parliament and to make an additional comment in relation to this statement .
By a very large majority , the Conference of Presidents adopted the content of a press release which the President of the European Parliament issued yesterday on the issue of Mr Bronisław Geremek 's mandate .
Yesterday 's press release reads as follows :
' The European Parliament has not , as yet , received any communication from the Polish authorities concerning Mr Geremek 's mandate : Bronisław Geremek is a politician of high standing who has always supported democracy in his own country and European integration .
We will examine all legal avenues to ensure that Mr Bronisław Geremek may continue his work . '

( Loud applause )
My statement from yesterday continues as follows : ' According to our information , the Constitutional Court in Poland is currently also investigating the questionable law on which the withdrawal of Mr Geremek 's mandate is based .
A decision by the court is expected over the next week .
I have commissioned the European Parliament 's legal service to check the exact legal position .
This topic will also be discussed tomorrow by the Conference of Presidents . '
Ladies and gentlemen , this has just happened and the Conference of Presidents conveys its sympathy and solidarity to our fellow Member , Mr Bronisław Geremek .
( Loud applause )
1 .
Directives concerning the protection of health and safety of workers : simplifying and rationalising practical implementation reports ( vote )
- Figueiredo report
2 .
Compensation for certain fishery products ( vote )
- Freitas report
3 .
Common Fisheries Policy ( Regional Advisory Councils ) ( vote )
- Attwooll report
4 .
Situation of disabled women in the European Union ( vote )
- Herranz García report
5 .
Basic information on purchasing power parities ( vote )
- Bowles report
6 .
Rapid Border Intervention Teams ( vote )
- Deprez report
7 .
Conservation and sustainable exploitation of fisheries resources ( vote )
- Gklavakis report
8 .
Galileo ( vote )
- Motion for a resolution :
9 .
Human rights in the world 2006 and the EU 's policy on the matter ( vote )
- Coveney report
- Before the vote on Amendment 19 :
Mr President , I wish to move an oral amendment to Amendment 19 so that the second half of the paragraph includes the words ' urges expansion of the temporary international mechanism and ' , with it then continuing ' urges the Council and the Commission to monitor changing circumstances closely ' , etc .
This oral amendment would therefore simply add some words from the original paragraph 28 to the text of Amendment 19 .
rapporteur . - Mr President , as rapporteur , I have no problem with that addition of wording .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
- Before the vote on paragraph 94 :
rapporteur . - Mr President , for the purposes of accuracy and updating the facts , as regards paragraph 94 , I propose through our oral amendment the addition of the words ' welcomes , however , the resumption of this aid from February 2007 ' .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
- Before the vote on Amendment 13 :
Mr President , I promise that this is the last time .
I would like to propose a small and efficient amendment to Amendment 13 , so that it reads : ' calls on its committees to make every reasonable effort to respect gender balance ' .
This would allow the ALDE Group to vote for this amendment .
Otherwise , we will have to abstain , because the original text is too prescriptive .
I hope that this oral amendment can be accepted and that it will maybe even allow the rapporteur to accept the amendment .
rapporteur . - Mr President , as PPE-DE Group members will know , I recommended that we reject this amendment because I felt it was too prescriptive .
However , on the basis of the oral amendment , as rapporteur I can accept the overall amendment .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
- Before the vote on paragraph 150 :
Mr President , I wish to propose that the word ' welcomes ' be replaced with the word ' notes ' in Paragraph 150 .
The rest of the sentence would remain the same .
( The oral amendment was not accepted )
10 .
Moratorium on the death penalty ( vote )
- Motion for a resolution :
- Before the vote :
( IT ) Mr President , in the fourth citation , where it says that the statement was signed by 85 countries , I should like to add the word ' initially ' , so that the citation will read ' which was initially signed by 85 countries ' .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
11 .
Homophobia in Europe ( vote )
- Motion for a resolution :
- Before the vote :
( DE ) Mr President , before we vote , I would like to make a brief observation .
In terms of semantics , the content of the resolution does not correspond to the concept of homophobia .
The word in the title has been incorrectly used .
- Before the vote on paragraph 12a :
Mr President , following the debate on the Commission statement , we would like to update the motion for a resolution by adding a new paragraph 12a which would read : ' Welcomes the fact that the European Commission has started the procedure for a new directive that would enlarge the scope of Directive 2000 / 78 / EC on equal treatment in employment and social occupation to include areas of discrimination outside the labour market ; ' .
( The oral amendment was not accepted )
12 .
Public Finances in the EMU 2006 ( vote )
- Lauk report
That concludes voting time .
Voting time
The next item is voting time .
( For results and other details of the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
( DE ) Mr President , the increasing fear of job losses , which has not only resulted in an increase in the incidence of various illnesses and , consequently , high costs on the part of enterprises and health insurance companies , combined with the associated risk of poverty , also diminishes the possibility and inclination of European women to have children .
However , children should no longer be the cause of a poverty trap and the conscious decision to have a home and family should not be punished by living the life of a pauper .
If we continue to drive forward with our policy of putting people in full-time employment and safeguarding jobs , we will not only reduce the level of absence caused by illness but may also help bring about a rise in the number of children again .
The questions of workers ' health and working conditions , the organisation of health , hygiene and safety services in the workplace and the list of occupational diseases came to the fore in the Community in 1989 with the publication of Framework Directive 89 / 391 .
Other directives covering various aspects of hygiene and safety at work have since been adopted .
The adoption of this report will hopefully lead to greater attention being paid to the effective implementation of these directives and to working conditions , with a view to reducing the figure of over 4 million accidents at work per year and over 4 500 deaths and injuries leading to permanent incapacity across the EU .
We strongly believe that there needs to be a policy of real improvement in the practices of the various Member States .
The Commission must , as a matter of urgency , submit a more thorough report on the current situation regarding workers ' safety and health in the workplace .
Furthermore , the International Labour Organisation conventions and other legislation in these areas must be implemented .
The Freitas report being put to the vote today concerns the outermost regions and , in particular , Réunion .
The outermost regions suffer from geographical and geopolitical constraints that make them more isolated and less able to export their goods to the European continent .
Designed as it is to compensate for additional costs , this scheme offers support to local fisheries sectors by processing fishery products and transporting them to , and marketing them on , the European continent .
It also helps to increase the competitiveness of local companies and of the fisheries sector at European level .
The effectiveness of this scheme can be illustrated by the fact that this compensation has enabled Réunion to increase the volume and value of its exports since 2000 .
Renewing this compensation scheme will enable us to continue our efforts to integrate the industrial , longline and coastal fishing sectors of the outermost regions into the internal market .
These efforts must be supported by other factors such as the taking into account of the variation in oil prices , because it ought not to be forgotten that the outermost regions rely heavily on oil and that transport costs constrain the export of local goods .
We are delighted that the report adopted today has incorporated all of the proposals that were tabled by the Portuguese Communist Party ( PCP ) . These proposals were already contained in the Committee on Regional Development 's opinion , which we drew up .
Given their importance , we should like to highlight the following proposals submitted to Parliament by the PCP regarding the increase in the overall budget :
the increase of EUR 2 million in the overall budget from EUR 15 to 17 million , of which EUR 570 000 is earmarked for the Azores and Madeira .
the removal of the 75 % compensation limit for transport and other related costs , thereby guaranteeing 100 % complete coverage of these costs to continental Europe and for local markets in the outermost regions ;
the removal of the expiry date , thus making the compensation scheme permanent , with a five-yearly review ;
the local processing industry continues to be permitted to use fish caught by Community vessels where the local fleets ' catch is insufficient to supply that industry ;
positive discrimination in favour of traditional , small-scale inshore fishing ;
the eligibility [ for costs to be covered ] of transport within each outermost region , in order to address the problem of geographical fragmentation , as in the case of the Azores .
I voted in favour of the Freitas report , for the following reasons :
1 .
It takes account of the particular characteristics of the fisheries sector in the outermost regions , by ensuring compensation for additional costs incurred by the economic operators involved in fishing .
2 .
The report proposes that the compensation scheme should become permanent , in view of the permanent difficulties faced by the fisheries sector in the outermost regions .
3 .
It proposes the possibility of supplementing the Community compensation scheme with national aid .
4 .
It proposes greater flexibility in the financial management of the scheme , by providing for variations in the funds allocated to each region or Member State .
5 .
It proposes an increase from EUR 15 to 17 million in financial resources , which will fund the compensation scheme every year during the period 2007-2013 .
In other words , although the Commission 's proposal was good to begin with , Parliament 's proposals have managed to make substantial improvements , by meeting in full the need to compensate the additional costs involved in fishing in Madeira and the Azores , which will now have an annual overall budget of EUR 5 million for the purpose .
The completion of the internal market and the gradual removal of trade barriers has helped considerably to boost economies of scale in the outermost regions .
However , the natural barriers to trade that remain in these regions put companies located there at a distinct disadvantage compared to those deriving full benefit from access to the Community market .
It is these geographical and structural conditions peculiar to the outermost regions that justify the compensation we pay for the additional costs incurred in marketing fisheries products from the outermost regions for the market in continental Europe .
Accordingly , the continuation of the compensation scheme for the Azores , Madeira , the Canary Islands and the French departments of Guiana and Réunion into the period 2007-2013 means that we must finally adopt a specific development aid strategy for these regions , in particular in the fisheries sector , by strengthening the partnership .
Accordingly , this should be a permanent scheme , with the possibility of a certain degree of flexibility , in view of the specific conditions in these regions and in order to make best use of the scheme .
It is therefore vital we lend these measures our wholehearted backing .
in writing . - ( FR ) I am very pleased with Mr Freitas 's report , which takes full account of the additional costs faced by some French overseas departments when they export their fishery products .
The interests of Guiana and Réunion , as exporters of these kinds of products , have well and truly been protected .
The European Parliament has issued the following four requests , in particular .
Firstly , that the initial ceiling on compensation of additional costs , which has been set arbitrarily at 75 % , be abolished .
On the one hand , this rate is not based on any logical criteria and , on the other , there is no reason why fishery products should not benefit from such a favourable scheme as agricultural products .
Secondly , that State aid for the production , processing and marketing of fishery products sourced from these regions be possible and that compensation be awarded for imported products , such as salt and oil , that are used during the processing of fishery products .
Thirdly , that recourse to intra-Community imports be permitted , if the catches of the outermost regions ' fleets are not large enough to guarantee the profitability of the processing industries in these regions .
Finally , that the financial envelope for Guiana and Réunion be increased to EUR 5 518 000 .
The Regional Advisory Councils ( RACs ) were established following the reform of the common fisheries policy adopted in 2002 .
Council Decision 2004 / 585 / EC defines a general framework for the running of the RACs in order to ensure that they are dealt with in a consistent and balanced manner .
The Commission 's proposal , supported in full by Parliament 's rapporteur , is aimed at putting the RACs on a sounder operational basis by improving the conditions under which they are funded .
The amendments introduced are intended to ensure that the Community contribution is not digressive , as originally proposed .
I shall be voting in favour of this report .
We support this report , which improves the operating conditions of the Regional Advisory Councils ( RACs ) .
Their mainstreaming into the budget means that the Community contribution will no longer be digressive and that they will become subject to a single method of accounting .
The key issue that needs to be addressed , however , is that of the RACs ' long-term financial viability .
Given that the RACs are an integral part of the common fisheries policy ( CFP ) , Community funding for their normal operations should be guaranteed on a permanent basis .
The report before us applies to funding and not to other aspects of the Council decision such as the number , composition and functioning of the RACs , which will be dealt with in another review of Decision 2004 / 585 / EC .
It is difficult at present to carry out an assessment of the RACs given that only four of the seven are operational .
Our support for this proposal is based , however , on a vision of the RACs as an instrument for encouraging the decentralisation of the CFP , for ensuring that the fishermen and their representative bodies are involved in the decision-making process regarding the CFP - which we feel is not completely the case at the moment - and for guaranteeing that the interests of all Member States on the issue of fisheries are fairly represented .
( SK ) I voted for the report produced by Esther Herranz García because it sends an important message to people with disabilities , especially women who experience various difficulties in everyday life and cannot make full use of their rights .
In my view there are still improvements to be made in helping the disabled , and I therefore welcome the European Parliament 's efforts to improve social provision for people who cannot look after themselves and are dependent on help .
We should not forget the important contribution made by disabled people 's families and organisations for the disabled , who provide us with a detailed picture of the difficulties and the barriers - including architectural barriers - which they face , and who suggest solutions for improving their quality of life and for helping them fully integrate into society .
I have a strong belief in the value of reaching out to people from whom something has been taken , but who have been gifted with the ability to see and perceive the world differently .
They perceive the world through different eyes and can perceive things the rest of us often fail to notice , or whose beauty often escapes us .
And the wonderful thing is that they can repay us many times over with their boundless dedication and appreciation .
in writing . ( SV ) This report concerns the Community 's strategy for doing more to achieve the very important objective of improving the situation of women with disabilities in the EU .
We have voted against the report because we are confident that the respective national parliaments of the Member States can deal appropriately with this important issue .
We object in principle to the general trend whereby the institutions of the EU seek to achieve influence and competence within ever more areas .
( NL ) Mr President , in 2006 , 31 000 illegal refugees found their way to the Canary Islands and tried to emigrate from there to the European mainland - six times more than did so the year before .
We have seen similar scenes in Southern Italy and Lampedusa .
If the human tragedy of the refugees is to be addressed , it must be done by tackling the hopeless situation in their countries of origin , not by importing transitory social tension .
Accordingly , our group welcomes Frontex and the establishment of intervention brigades in the countries that are facing the problem of mass immigration , on the condition that this new instrument is deployed efficiently and not simply serves as a media spectacle .
External border control falls within the Member States ' remit , but the flows of refugees that are common today illustrate that these external borders have become too permeable .
The exponential influx of illegal immigrants can therefore only be addressed by taking additional , but not replacement , measures to support the Member States , which , it is to be hoped , is where Frontex will come in .

( NL ) Mr President , I have voted in favour of the Deprez report , because the amendments to the Commission 's text generally contain technical corrections .
Frontex 's rapid intervention teams are desperately needed , certainly in light of the huge shortcomings of various Member States when it comes to protecting external borders .
We will have to wait and see how efficient these teams will prove to be in practice .
The entire concept hinges on the willingness of all Member States to meet their Schengen obligations .
There is currently far too much apathy , far too much leniency , and mass regularisations of illegal immigrants have put the entire Schengen concept at risk .
Even if the Frontex rapid intervention teams work well and efficiently , this will all be in vain if some Member States refuse to face up to their political responsibility .
( DE ) Mr President , I also voted for the Deprez report since , in my opinion , it is undoubtedly sensible at this time to use the planned troop deployment to strengthen the southern borders in order to bring the threat posed by hordes of refugees under control .
In this connection , however , we should not forget the other main routes , above all , our external borders with Eastern Europe .
In this context , I believe that the resources available under Frontex should be substantially increased .
At the same time , we must demonstrate the realities of Europe in the countries of origin of illegal immigrants , so that the dream of a land of milk and honey no longer prompts such acts of desperation and ensures that cooperation with these countries in the area of repatriation , which is indeed largely financed by us , functions more effectively .
We are opposed to the creation at EU level of what are called Rapid Border Intervention Teams along the borders of the different Member States , as it is indicative of the EU 's repressive , military nature .
This measure forms part of the current trend towards security at all costs and reflects the policy of criminalising immigration , which illustrates a lack of respect for human dignity and for fundamental human rights .
These rapid border intervention teams , the walls and the immigrant detention centres are instruments for implementing a Fortress Europe policy , to which we are vehemently opposed .
This measure is being justified on the grounds of combating illegal immigration .
I wish to highlight the fact that one of the main components of the policy put forward is repression , whilst overlooking the real causes of immigration , namely poverty , hunger , war , the lack of prospects of a decent life for millions and millions of human beings , including Portuguese people , caused by capitalist exploitation and the brutal centralisation of wealth .
On the other hand , given that border protection falls under the competences of a State , we feel that this proposal - despite some safeguards - represents a further step towards creating a European coastguard , which , if it materialised , would constitute an attack on national sovereignty .
Hence our vote against the report .
in writing . ( SV ) I voted in favour of the report because I believe that the RABIT mechanism is necessary for coping with the extraordinary migratory pressure to which a number of EU Member States are periodically subject .
RABIT has a voluntary basis and is not an attempt to build walls to shut out the surrounding world .
I believe , rather , that it is important for the Member States to cooperate if they are effectively to combat trafficking in human beings and illegal people-smuggling , which often put at risk the lives of those who , in desperation , have been forced to leave their home countries .
Thousands of people die each year in attempting to reach Europe in ways that are unsafe .
RABIT is part of the work designed to prevent people from dying in the hands of cynical people-smugglers .
As a Social Democrat , I am working to achieve a generous and humane refugee policy and want to increase people 's opportunities for finding their way to Europe legally .
in writing . - ( FR ) The regulation submitted to us establishes a mechanism that is designed to provide a Member State that is faced with a massive influx of illegal immigrants with assistance , in the form of Rapid Border Intervention Teams , for a limited period of time .
This reserve , which consists of 250 to 500 border guards within the European Borders Agency ( Frontex ) , will be made available to those Member States that need it in order to protect their external borders .
It is true that , although the control of the external borders is incumbent on the Member States and comes under the intergovernmental remit , the massive influx of illegal immigrants that occurred , for example , between 15 August and 15 December 2006 , when immigrants left the coasts of West Africa for the Canary Islands , showed just how wide open the Union 's external borders were to a rapidly increasing number of immigrants .
Cooperation among Member States would therefore seem vital in this area .
More than 31 000 illegal immigrants landed in the Canary Islands in 2006 , that is to say , six times as many as in the previous year .
Although we are in favour of the principle of the Member States ' cooperating in order to protect the EU 's external borders , we shall remain very vigilant regarding the trivialisation of Frontex for what are , essentially , media-motivated reasons , and to any federalist and supranational abuses of this agency .
I voted in favour of the creation of rapid border intervention teams , provided these are only used in exceptional cases and emergency situations .
In my opinion , when a Member State is confronted with a massive , illegal flow of nationals from a third country , this would constitute such a situation .
It must be emphasised in this connection that the human dignity of the immigrants must be observed and that individuals are not discriminated against on account of their gender , race , ethnic origin , religion or outlook on life , any disability they may have , their age or sexual orientation , nor should the Regulation have a negative impact on the rights of persons seeking protection .
Various principles and justifications - all of which are valid - can be put forward in support of maximum cooperation in monitoring , and taking action to protect , our external borders .
The EU as a whole is also defined by its borders .
In this context , it is clear that the Union 's external borders are a territory under the exclusive sovereignty of the Member States , but also territories whose integrity , monitoring and protection is in everyone 's interests , given that problems that arise on those borders tend to have ramifications for the other Member States .
First and foremost , one thinks of illegal immigration . Yet there is also illegal trafficking and - on a rather different tack but an issue for which the rationale still holds - environmental threats .
It is entirely right and extremely important that we share the disproportionate burden carried by the Member States that , due to geographical reasons , have the most vulnerable external borders .
Quite apart from being an expression of solidarity among EU Member States , cooperation of this nature arises above all from the need to make border protection as effective as possible .
The idea of defending those borders should not be confused with that of protectionism or isolationism ; it is merely a matter of observing the rules .
in writing . - ( FR ) Due to the fact that several Member States have been confronted with critical situations in the shape of massive influxes of illegal immigrants arriving by sea , the European Union has deemed it necessary to create Rapid Border Intervention Teams .
It is the solidarity among the Member States that is the cornerstone of this project .
These teams have not been put in place with the aim of turning back these people .
Rather , the aim is to provide European assistance to those Member States that admit too great an influx of illegal immigrants .
Indeed , the events of last summer have confirmed the urgent need for difficult situations to be anticipated , as much for the Member States of destination or of transit as for the immigrants themselves .
These teams will therefore have the task of patrolling the areas surrounding the EU 's external borders under the authority of the national border guards of the host Member State .
Members of the rapid intervention teams will be able to exercise all of the powers necessary to carry out the activities of checking or monitoring the borders .
However , it is stipulated that they shall have to fully respect people 's human dignity when carrying out their activities ; equally , they shall have to respect the fundamental rights recognised by the European Union .
To conclude , the concerns expressed in some quarters about the use of these rapid border intervention teams must not become a reality over time .
in writing . ( SV ) We have chosen to vote against the report because we believe that the tonnage redistribution levels proposed by the Commission are adequate .
Moreover , we question the need for increased aid for an already over-established sector .
The EU already has considerable over-capacity in its fishing fleet , together with limited fisheries resources .
The difficulties , discussed in the Council , of checking that the catch capacity does not increase with conversion is therefore one of the reasons why we have chosen not to support an increase in the levels concerned .
In June 2006 , after the political agreement reached in the Council on the new European Fisheries Fund , a decision was taken to amend two provisions of the basic regulation on the revised common fisheries policy ( 2371 / 2002 ) applying to the management of fishing fleet capacity .
The amendment is aimed at permitting some adaptations of the fleet to improve safety , working conditions and hygiene , product quality on board and energy efficiency .
The amendment will give the Member States the possibility for a limited increase in the capacity of their fleet for the purpose of improving safety , working conditions , hygiene and product quality on board , as well as energy efficiency .
I shall be voting in favour of this report .
This report concerns the amendment of Articles 11 and 13 of Regulation 2371 / 2002 , the main instrument for reviewing the 2002 common fisheries policy .
One of the problems with the European Fisheries Fund ( EFF ) was that it jeopardised Community aid for modernising and renovating the fleets provided for in the previous financial instrument .
The current proposal , from June 2006 , subsequent to the EFF , provides for limited aid for modernising the fleet to improve safety , working conditions and hygiene .
It covers energy efficiency , providing for the use of 4 % of the tonnage withdrawn with public aid . Furthermore , it states that the reduction in power following the replacement of an engine with public aid may not be restored .
In spite of our reservations regarding the Commission 's proposal , our vote in favour is based on two proposals made by the rapporteur , which are as follows :
the 10 % of the tonnage scrapped can be used for modernisation , which , being limited , will allow for prioritising the modernisation of small-scale coastal fishing vessels , that is to say , vessels with an overall length of less than 12 metres ;
making aid for replacing engines for the purposes of energy efficiency more flexible .
The Galileo Programme ( the European satellite radio navigation programme ) can be an important instrument . By providing a public service , it will provide an opportunity for cooperation , scientific advancement and the exchange of accessibility and information .
The project should be rooted in a strategy of public investment and monitoring . Solutions ensuring its funding must be found in the context of international cooperation .
The Galileo system is viewed with interest by countries such as China and India , which could be important partners in the project . This will help end the GPS monopoly and create instead a project based on broad international cooperation .
We feel that all users should be guaranteed universal access and that the general public should have access to available information free of charge .
It is necessary to reaffirm , however , that , when it comes to this project , the citizens ' rights , guarantees and freedoms must be guaranteed and that it is not used for military purposes - the rejection of the militarisation of space and its use for military purposes - and / or for the purposes of enforcing excessive security , in contravention of what is currently laid down .
The Galileo Programme is , without question , one of the cornerstones of the Lisbon Strategy , given its technological scope and the expected added value in terms of not only jobs but also technological progress .
The potential economic growth from the programme is a very important factor for the European economy .
We are responsible for guaranteeing that the conditions for its implementation are created with the necessary clarity , effectiveness and speed .
Accordingly , I share my colleagues ' concern that the negotiations on the concession contract are deadlocked , because these delays will have a considerable impact on the overall cost of the project .
At the moment , I feel it is vital that we channel our efforts into ensuring that , in June , the Commission submits a clear , credible timetable , solutions for the future financial obligations and alternative scenarios for carrying out the programme .
The Council will then be in possession of all the necessary data to ensure the continuity of the process , in order to make up for the delays .
The resolution therefore has my full backing .
in writing . - ( FR ) We voted in favour of the resolution on the Galileo satellite navigation project .
We have had the opportunity on several occasions in this Chamber to express our support for an ambitious industrial project , in which , for once , the European dimension had a full part to play , even though we have also highlighted the project 's shortcomings and flaws , such as its purely civil dimension and the transfer of technology to non-European countries such as China , that Communist dictatorship and exponent of unfair commercial competition .
Today , the negotiations on the deployment and use of the system are at a standstill .
Furthermore , it occurs to me that it was because of the political will of States that were very pragmatic in their efforts to cooperate with each other that all of the technical , human and financial resources were provided for the construction of a European aerospace industry and that Airbus came about .
In the case of Galileo , because the Eurocracy has extended its powers , it is the Brussels-centred Commission that is struggling to negotiate with private partners , and the discussions are stalling over money-related issues .
Clearly , the first method was by far the best .
in writing . ( SV ) We believe that human rights are universal and inviolable and that they need to be among the foundation stones of all societies .
Unfortunately , violations occur in many places around the world , including in the EU Member States .
A large part of the European Parliament and its Members see themselves as the guarantors of human rights in the world .
These Members must not be thought any the less of , because they undoubtedly have good intentions , and it is essential to fight for these fundamental rights .
The difficulty arises when human rights are used as a means of promoting the EU 's positions on , for example , developing a common foreign and security policy .
We have voted against quite a few amendments that we basically think are logical , fair and , in certain cases , also desirable but that should not under any circumstances be tabled , or decided on , by this House .
Once again , the majority in Parliament has drawn up a report on human rights around the world , which , although it contains some points with which we agree , is essentially characterised by an overriding manipulative and reductive view of human rights - political , social , economic and cultural - using them as grounds for interventionism and for exerting political pressure in some countries , always for the EU 's interests and convenience .
It is a strategy of using human rights that involves an attempt to exploit the United Nations Human Rights Council , where the idea is to isolate those countries that do not kowtow to the dictates of imperialism .
As we have highlighted before , this is an act of extreme hypocrisy in which countries referred to as ' friends ' are safeguarded and the ' others ' , which the USA and the EU have pinpointed as a target , are criticised .
This is an exercise with which we can have no truck .
Once again , the report is completely remiss when it comes to Israel ; it completely overlooks Israel 's brutal policy of aggression and occupation of Palestine , and the fact that Israel systematically violates international law and undermines the Palestinian people 's inalienable right to their own sovereign , independent and viable state .
in writing . - ( FR ) Despite its claim to be exhaustive , the report on human rights in 2006 does not mention any of the main causes of the violation of these rights : Communism , which still oppresses more than one and a half billion people , in China , North Korea , Vietnam , Laos , Cuba , Zimbabwe , and I could go on .
In every country in which they are in power , Communists deny people 's fundamental rights , persecute their opponents , and send them in their millions to concentration camps .
On our continent , Communism has enslaved 300 million Europeans .
Today , despite the fall of the Berlin Wall , it continues to exercise its intellectual terrorism .
The fact that Mr Coveney does not dare mention the word in his report proves this .
Some of our fellow Members , such as Mr Cohn-Bendit , go as far as to want to ban the people of Poland from de-Communising their country .
That is an insult to the memory of the workers of Gdansk , of the insurgents of Berlin in 1953 , of Budapest in 1956 , of Prague in 1968 and of all the freedom fighters .
Since 1917 , Communism has killed more than 100 million people .
Our Parliament , which has so much to say on the subject of human rights , should demand that Communism be put on trial .
Why I cannot vote in favour of the resolution on the Human Rights Report :
1 .
The report fails to mention social , economic and cultural rights ; neither does it call for these rights to be treated as an EU priority .
While millions of people worldwide die of hunger , have neither housing nor work and live in deepest poverty , the EU report does not refer to these violations .
It reduces human rights to civil liberties only , thereby disregarding the principle of indivisibility of human rights as set forth in the UN Charter ;
2 .
The report does not mention human rights violations committed or supported by EU Member States .
However , in order to avoid hypocrisy the EU needs to investigate and tackle human rights violations committed with the involvement or support of EU Member states in third countries or against third-country nationals ;
3 .
The resolution calls for military intervention in Sudan .
This is wrong because the protection of human rights must be through civilian , not military , action .
War remains the most severe human rights violation , yet it is not mentioned in the report .
No reference is made to the killing of civilians by EU Member State forces in Afghanistan and Iraq .
Among the various points raised in the report there is one that should be stressed repeatedly . I refer to point 10 : ' Reiterates that , in their future Annual Reports on Human Rights , the Council and the Commission should analyse the ways in which human rights are dealt with in other EU policies , such as the Common Foreign and Security Policy , the policies on development and trade and immigration , and other relevant policies relating to the EU 's external relations ... '
The EU 's role in the world and in particular in its immediate neighbourhood involves its ability to use soft power to increase universal respect for human rights .
On the other side of that coin , the time has come for us to address seriously the enormous threat to the spread of human rights arising from China 's cooperation strategy and international aid , China being an emerging power in this area .
The time has come for us to rethink our strategy so that we follow the most effective path , in accordance with the values that we advocate and seek to promote .
British Conservatives recognise the important role of the EU in promoting human rights and democracy in the world , as it is highlighted in the Coveney report .
However , there are a number of paragraphs that we fundamentally disagree with , for instance paragraphs 4 , 16 , 28 , 31 , 47 and 132 .
For this reason , British Conservatives abstained overall in the final vote on the report .
As we have said before , we welcome the initiative of tabling a motion for a resolution to the United Nations General Assembly calling for the adoption of a universal moratorium on the death penalty , which , according to reports , has the support of 88 countries .
The abolition of the death penalty is something to which millions of men and women throughout the world aspire . Indeed , an increasing number of countries have removed it from their national law or have established a moratorium on its use .
We feel that this step is of benefit to civilisation and that ideally it should be extended to other countries . This initiative could be a positive step in that direction .
I voted in favour of this Resolution as I believe in the dignity of the human being , which should never be taken away through sentencing to death .
If there is one cause to which we can and must adhere without any doubt or hesitation , this would be it . The reasons are self-explanatory .
A society that does not consider life to be the highest value , the standard , the foundation , will always be a society that is capable of the worst atrocities .
For this reason , I am not surprised by the bloodthirsty countries that sentence their opponents to death without compunction . I believe that we have a duty , and perhaps the ability , to stop them .
What surprises me more are the democratic countries that impose the death penalty , as though they had been struck by a sudden inability to judge right from wrong or by a breakdown of values .
I do not wish to digress here , but I must say I am struck by the notion of condemning the death of an adult citizen , even if that person is guilty of a heinous crime , whereas the life of an unborn baby is not deemed worthy of protection .
I shall conclude by saying that this commitment on the part of the EU is one to which I lend my backing . I would also express the wish that the Member States and the EU as a whole follow up their words with action .
( FI ) Mr President , I am absolutely opposed to discrimination against homosexuals , but I hope that this House will one day draw up a resolution which no longer needs to be confused with the unsatisfactory concept of homophobia .
I have spoken about this before and I wish to do so again .
If we are talking here about a real problem , discrimination , which we really must do something about , why on earth do we use the inappropriate word ' phobia ' in this connection ?
Phobias are different types of anxiety : they are states of fear considered neurotic disturbances .
Therapy is needed to help cure them , and they cannot be cured through political action , just as claustrophobia , the fear of enclosed spaces , or arachnophobia , the fear of spiders , cannot .
I am sorry if people are starting to be made to feel guilty about their feelings or phobias .
That will only result in another new form of discrimination and manipulation .
I am sorry too if this resolution has discriminated against Poland by giving a mistaken picture of events and views there .
Because of these points relating to Poland and after thinking long and hard , I ended up abstaining .
I wish , however , to express my sympathy for all those homosexuals who have had to suffer real discrimination and injustice .
( NL ) Mr President , it goes without saying - and I do not know anybody in this House who will beg to differ - that discrimination of homosexuals on account of their orientation is unacceptable in our Member States .
This does not mean , though , that the right of deeply religious people to express their opinions freely should be called into question on account of the suffocating atmosphere of political correctness and intellectual terrorism that is taking hold in this House .
As Mr Claeys briefly mentioned yesterday , a freedom of speech phobia is beginning to set in here , an irrational fear of letting people express their opinions freely .
This is one phobia we must fight with all our might , because this resolution is overshooting the mark .
Where in the past , debates on homophobia were held on many occasions , these days , it is more about everyone indulging in a bit of Poland-bashing .
After all , as in the Geremek issue on which nobody spoke with any authority yesterday , this is how the Left-wing inquisition on the issue of so-called homophobia in Poland took the moral high ground without any knowledge of the subject , or intellectual honesty for that matter .
This is why I have voted against this resolution .
( DE ) Mr President , I wish to state here in relation to the way I voted that I have not voted against this resolution because I am in favour of discriminating against minority groups .
I also condemn the statement made by the Polish Minister .
I voted against because I believe that there are more important subjects which we should be addressing this week , also in the form of a resolution , namely , the murder of Christians in Turkey .
We should be able to address the theme of Turkish women being forced to marry , including those living in Europe , or the genocide perpetrated by Muslim mounted militias in Darfur , or human rights violations in Venezuela as well .
I therefore voted against because I am of the opinion that we should have been dealing with more important topics .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to make a statement on behalf of the entire Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats .
The Group of the European People 's Party today abstained from voting since it does not agree with the procedure at the present time .
The PPE-DE Group declares its support for the decisions taken by the European Parliament in relation to homophobia , in particular , the decision of 16 January 2006 .
In this spirit , the Group of the European People 's Party emphatically rejects any form of homophobia as well as all forms of discrimination .
At the same time , the PPE-DE Group has the utmost confidence in the institutions of the European Union , in particular , the Commission as the guardian of the treaties .
Given the existing legal position , key word - ' the anti-discrimination Directive ' , the Commission will take the necessary steps , as far as there is a need on the part of EU Member States , in order to put a stop to these initiatives which must be rejected in every respect .
In addition , our group wholly supports the bringing in of the Agency for Fundamental Rights to investigate homophobia in Europe and would like to await the results of this investigation before taking further steps .
The PPE-DE Group absolutely trusts in the fact that Polish society will take the appropriate steps against these homophobic trends which have started to appear .
in writing . - ( FR ) I abstained in the vote on the motion for a resolution on homophobia in Europe .
Firstly , this document does not cover the whole of Europe by focusing on Poland , and the title of the resolution is therefore , in my view , too general .
Furthermore , I find it simplistic that the fight against homophobia is being treated mainly as a fight against discrimination based on a person 's sexual orientation .
This confusion between homophobia , which is defined as ' the fear of one 's fellow man ' , and an aversion to homosexuality is a source of misunderstandings .
I am naturally in favour of the fight against all forms of discrimination based on a person 's sexual orientation , marriage- and child-related issues apart . These are issues on which political thought needs to develop in line with the demand within society .
Nevertheless , I believe that the issue of the unequal treatment of human beings and the fear of our fellow men deserve better than this resolution , even though I agree with many points made in this document .
The UK Independence Party will not support this resolution because we believe the European Parliament has no business laying down moral standards in different Member States .
in writing . ( DA ) In today 's vote on homophobia in Europe , I chose to vote neither in favour of the report as a whole , nor against it , in spite of the fact that I very much agree with what the report says .
I voted neither in favour of the report , nor against it , because I do not think that there should be a ' people 's court ' that condemns Poland . Instead , I think that there should be a proper court .
The European Parliament does not have the competence to act in this area .
If human rights are infringed , the matter should be put before the International Court of Human Rights .
We voted in favour of this resolution on account of its general defence of human rights in the EU Member States , although we do have some criticisms with regard to the wording of one of the points .
It is unacceptable to continue to foster homophobic practice and any form of discrimination against people on the grounds of sexual orientation .
We therefore support the call on the Commission for an anti-discrimination package based on Article 13 of the Treaty on European Union , aimed at putting an end to discrimination on various grounds including that of sexual orientation .
We advocate a range of measures to encourage the fostering of equal rights and opportunities for all , rather than mere formal statements not backed by legislative or budgetary substance .
We also support the call for stepping up the practical enforcement of existing legislation in these areas , to defend and promote human rights . We object to discriminatory comments by politicians aimed at homosexuals , given that such comments more often than not incite hatred and violence .
in writing . ( SV ) We voted in favour of this resolution because it expresses the importance of preventing discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation .
We do not support those parts of the resolution 's conclusions proposing that the EU have increased power and the right to take decisions .
Our support for this resolution is simply a vote against loathsome discrimination against people because of their sexual orientation .
However , we oppose all those conclusions in the resolution concerning more power for the EU within various areas .
I and my British Conservative colleagues have abstained on this joint motion for a resolution .
While we abhor all discrimination against gay people and all aspects of homophobia , we believe this motion has been brought forward on a politically speculative basis with a serious lack of factual information .
We believe it would be wise to await the developments with regard to Poland referred to in the motion , rather than commenting on generalised allegations .
I am proud to have voted for this resolution and very much regret the antagonistic approach taken by some colleagues to its being tabled .
This is the European Year of Equal Opportunities in a Union which prides itself on its commitment to human rights .
However , we still have certain Member States , such as Poland , where the Government has yet to realise what such a commitment means in reality .
It means delivering on equality at work ; it means that you do not use language which incites hatred and attacks on individuals simply because of who they are ; it means respecting the human rights of others , including their right to assembly and to be protected from violence - including state violence .
I sincerely hope that this is the last time that this House has to address this issue as I trust that Member States will fulfil their duties under the law and under International Convention .
I extend my thanks to those Members from the states concerned who have also voted for this resolution .
in writing . ( PL ) The European Parliament 's resolution might have been better or more precise .
However , caring about the image of our country cannot be an excuse for keeping silent in the face of discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation .
Homosexuality is not a disease , as some of the Polish participants in today 's debate have claimed .
Homophobia is the real disease which plagues many societies , including Poland .
The resolution touches upon a fundamental issue ; the serious situation facing thousands of European citizens , including thousands of my compatriots .
In Poland , as in other Member States , there is a feeling of dislike towards homosexuals .
However , in no other Member State do members of the government and people in the public eye make statements which infringe fundamental civil rights and , as such , infringe the principles and values which form the basis of our democratic system .
In Poland , it saddens me to say , that homosexual people are harassed and insulted .
If they come out , they encounter verbal or even physical aggression .
If those in power do not go as far as to support these actions , they certainly do not oppose them .
Just as there is no place for racism or anti-Semitism in a modern democracy , there can be no place for discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation .
Certainly not in the twenty-first century !
That is why , following my own conscience , I intend to vote in favour of the resolution on homophobia in Europe , as it calls for the rights of those people to be upheld whose rights many others , particularly in Poland , would otherwise deny .
in writing . ( PL ) I am voting against the resolution on homophobia in Europe .
I do not entirely agree with some of the contents of the European Parliament 's resolution .
The text , which is based solely on information from Poland , does not reflect the intentions and the title of the resolution ( ' Resolution on homophobia in Europe ' ) .
Unfortunately , in the European Union , we encounter homophobia at every step .
The failure to mention the infringements of the rights of homosexuals in other European countries makes this document incomplete .
The statements made by politicians such as Maciej Giertych , Jarosław Kaczyński or Ewa Sowińska fortunately do not translate into specific legislative measures .
No legislation has been drafted which infringes the rights of homosexuals .
However , I am afraid that this state of affairs may change .
There is no support for the view that teachers who promote homosexuality among their students should be dismissed .
These kinds of irresponsible statements are offensive to those who wish to live in a free , tolerant and open Poland .
They are a threat to democracy and they do not reflect the views of the majority of Polish people .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats has abstained from voting on the resolution against homophobia in Europe since it does not agree with the procedure at the present time .
The PPE-DE Group declares its support for the decisions taken by the European Parliament in relation to homophobia ( in particular , the decision of 16 January 2006 ) .
In this spirit , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats emphatically rejects any form of homophobia as well as all forms of discrimination , whatever its nature .
At the same time , the PPE-DE Group has the utmost confidence in the institutions of the European Union , in particular , the European Commission as the ' guardian of the treaties ' .
Given the existing legal position ( the anti-discrimination Directive ) , the Commission will take the necessary steps , as far as there is a need on the part of EU Member States , in order to put a stop to these initiatives which must be rejected in every respect .
In addition , the PPE-DE Group wholly supports the appointment of the European Agency for Fundamental Rights to investigate the situation relating to homophobia in Europe and does not wish to take further action before the results of the study are known .
Polish society enjoys the wholehearted confidence of the PPE-DE Group in that it will take the appropriate steps against these homophobic trends which have started to appear .
in writing . - ( FR ) Everyone is equal when it comes to their dignity , which must be respected and promoted .
This approach must forever guide all of our actions .
The procedure in Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure specifies that ' when placing a statement with debate on its agenda , Parliament shall decide whether or not to wind up the debate with a resolution ' .
What is the point of the exercise if , even before the debate takes place , all of the motions for resolutions need already to have been tabled and the deadline for tabling amendments has already expired ?
A dialogue of the deaf , then .
This resolution is not a repeat of the interinstitutional debate in which , I might add , only the initiated were able to take part .
The procedure can be criticised all the more for the fact that Parliament 's services , which have already been consulted , are refuting the allegations that have been adopted .
Poland itself had already responded , on 5 March , on its Prime Minister 's official website , to the fresh accusations being made by Parliament .
Although the title claims to be talking about homophobia in Europe , we have unjustly accused a sovereign State and its democratically-elected government .
This resolution will certainly be used for purposes other than to fulfil our desire to show solidarity with all humankind against all forms of discrimination .
The Conservative Party in the European Parliament has consistently opposed ( and remains opposed ) to the entry of the United Kingdom into the euro zone , and in doing so usually abstains with regard to reports on the operation of economic and monetary union , as these are matters for those countries who are in the euro zone .
However , we understand that the health of the economies of those countries which have opted to join the EMU is important to that of the UK and we support all measures which seek to ensure the economic stability of our major trading partners .
We are abstaining in this instance , but wish to state our endorsement of the rapporteur 's strong commitments to sound public finances and the proper application of the Stability and Growth Pact .
Such principles are essential to healthy economic and trading conditions and a good relationship between the UK economy and the economies of the euro zone .
Parliament 's annual reports on public finances put forward the same recipe regardless of the economic situation at the time .
The implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact is one of the biggest hindrances to economic and social development in the EU and in the least developed Member States that suffer from economic difficulties , such as Portugal .
The report clearly states the objective of using ' the economic recovery to cut their budget deficits and by making labour markets more competitive ' . The idea , in other words , is to cut the State 's social functions and to deregulate the labour market in terms of salaries and the job security of public administration workers .
The primary objective of this report is no longer zero deficit but budgetary excess .
Naturally , the rapporteur is not comfortable with the 2005 pseudo review of the Pact , when there is clear evidence of the Pact 's irrationality given the economic recession the EU was experiencing .
This , as we all know , is a political pact , the fruit of the prevailing neoliberal ideology , in which economic justification is just an alibi .
This has been our position since 1997 , since which time we have been calling for the abolition of the Stability and Growth Pact .
Hence our vote against the report before us .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 12.50 p.m. and resumed at 3.00 p.m. )

Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Agenda : see Minutes
Zimbabwe ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on Zimbabwe .
Madam President , honourable Members , the events of March have dramatically served to underline the fact that the crisis which has long been smouldering in Zimbabwe has escalated .
The brutal treatment of peaceful demonstrators and opposition politicians , as well as the threats made against Western ambassadors , show a regime whose ' rule of law mask ' has finally dropped .
President Mugabe is battling to hold on to power using all means at his disposal .
Given the deplorable economic situation ( I can only recall an unemployment rate of 80 % and an inflation rate above 1 700 % ) and increasing levels of repression , public opinion in the country is openly turning against him more and more .
This is now no longer restricted to just the general population .
Even his own party , the Zanu-PF party , is no longer fully behind him .
His attempt at the party congress in December 2006 to postpone the Presidential elections by two years to coincide with the date of Parliamentary elections in 2010 was referred back to committee , where it failed .
In our capacity as the country holding the EU Council Presidency , we have , over recent weeks , made it quite clear where we stand in relation to events in Zimbabwe .
In two statements on 12 and 14 March , the criminalisation of the peaceful ' Prayers Meeting ' , which took place in Harare on 11 March , was condemned , and the release demanded of those persons under arrest , along with a call for legal and medical aid to be granted .
In its note dated 13 March 2007 , the German embassy in Harare , on behalf of all EU partners , emphatically called on the Zimbabwean Government to observe the principles of the constitution .
Coordinating closely between themselves , EU ambassadors in the country expressed to the Zimbabwean Government the fact that they were ready at any time to look after those persons arrested and injured by the government , and were also prepared to do this personally .
In our capacity as the country holding the EU Council Presidency , we condemned in the strongest possible terms in our statement of 18 March the renewed arrests and mistreatment of members of the opposition on 17 and 18 March , as well as the imposition of a ban on leaving the country against two female opposition members seriously injured in the attacks on 11 March who wanted to undergo medical examination in South Africa .
Following this , the injured opposition members were able to fly to South Africa .
The majority of members of the opposition who had been arrested were released .
At the behest of the EU , in its debate on 29 March , the UN Human Rights Council dealt exclusively with Zimbabwe .
In a declaration supported by 50 countries in total , the EU made it perfectly clear where it stood in relation to the current situation in Zimbabwe and called on the Mugabe Government to respect law and order , defend human rights and cooperate with the UN 's human rights mechanisms .
We are all paying very close attention to the reactions of Zimbabwe 's neighbours .
Our embassies in the region are involved in an intensive political dialogue with the governments of their host countries .
We all agree in terms of our analysis that there are increasing signs that solidarity with the Mugabe regime is crumbling throughout the region as a whole , not least under the pressure exerted by civil society .
In this regard , we are particularly hoping that our African partners will now openly show for the first time how important the solution of the Zimbabwe crisis is to them .
In addition to individual remarks such as those made by Zambia 's President Mwanawasa when he compared Zimbabwe with the sinking Titanic , the policy change by the Southern African Development Community ( SADC ) has particularly caught our attention .
At a special summit on 28 and 29 March 2007 , its Heads of Government acknowledged their regional responsibility in the Zimbabwe conflict for the first time .
President Mbeki has been provided with a clear mandate to set a dialogue in motion between the government and the opposition .
His activities are to be supported by his Tanzanian counterpart , Mr Kikwete , in his capacity as current Chair of the SADC organ on politics , defence and security .
The Secretary General of the SADC will present a report on the economic situation in Zimbabwe .
The principal demands placed on Mugabe by the SADC are to keep to the date set for the Presidential elections in 2008 and to cease repression of the opposition .
On 30 March , the central committee of the Zanu-PF party decided to hold Presidential elections in March 2008 and to bring forward the Parliamentary elections , originally scheduled for 2010 , to 2008 as well .
Mugabe has been chosen as the leading candidate without any internal discussions .
At the same time , changes were announced which would forcibly improve the starting position of Mugabe and his party in the run-up to the elections .
These include , inter alia , the increase in wards and , consequently , their gerrymandering , the appointment , not through direct elections , of senate members in proportion to the strength of the party in Parliament , and the fact that if the office of President remains vacant , the new President shall be determined by Parliament and not through new elections .
These new regulations still have to become law as a result of changes to the constitution .
The government has not stopped the use of force against individual members of the opposition .
It has branded members of the Tsvangirai wing of the MDC opposition party terrorists and , in so doing , is trying to drive a wedge between the opposition which united for the first time following the March unrest .
The State has , however , refrained from prohibiting or breaking up large-scale events such as the ' Prayers Meeting ' referred to in the country 's two largest cities .
The ban on gatherings and demonstrations has also been lifted , except for several areas in Harare .
Already by the end of 2006 , the party congress of the Zanu-PF party had demonstrated that Mugabe 's position was no longer undisputed .
In the meantime , Mugabe has increasingly been developing a siege mentality , which has manifested itself , not least , in the formation of parallel organisations such as the youth militia , which falls outside the military and police hierarchy .
Their impressive , even oppressive , presence in front of the central committee 's session building certainly had an impact on the decision-making process of politburo members in favour of Mugabe 's appointment as a Presidential candidate .
Despite Mugabe 's tactical victory at the central committee meeting on 30 March , which gave him the nomination as a Presidential candidate in 2008 and thereby weakened the position of his critics within the party , the feeling in Zimbabwe is that a sort of apocalyptic mood seems to be holding sway .
Therefore , within the EU , in addition to discussions on current developments , thoughts have turned to the post-Mugabe era .
Over recent days , both the EU / Africa working group and the EU / Africa Directors have looked into Zimbabwe intensively .
Monday 's Council of Foreign Ministers discussed the crisis in Zimbabwe in detail .
In its conclusions , the Council welcomed the SADC initiative and declared its willingness to support it , if called on to do so .
It has underlined its view that only a broad , constructive dialogue can form the basis for genuine reform and national reconciliation in Zimbabwe .
At the same time , it has stressed that the EU will also implement humanitarian measures in future which will benefit the population directly .
In its communiqué following the special summit in March , the SADC called on the EU to put an end to sanctions .
In view of the current situation in the country , we will not comply .
Our policy must remain credible .
Reacting to the unrest which took place in March , and this is something which the Council also decided upon on Monday , we will widen the consolidated list of persons subject to sanctions to include the police officers who are primarily responsible for the current crisis and the human rights violations .
There is agreement between the EU partners that a solution to the crisis in Zimbabwe can only be achieved with African help .
Following their political about-turn in March , our African partners expressly called on the EU to be patient .
We will continue to monitor closely , however , whether , and to what extent , the SADC policy which is being striven for is acquiring some sort of shape .
We are conscious of the fact , however , that we cannot sit back indefinitely .
In the foreseeable future , the EU will have to adopt a stance in relation to the SADC initiative in terms of its content .
We will also react with the necessary vigour to events in the country .
The EU cannot , and will not , remain silent on human rights violations .
Madam President , the Commission is very concerned about the current deterioration of the political and socio-economic situation in Zimbabwe .
In particular , we condemn the recent acts of violent repression against the opposition .
The Commission has also fully supported the statements issued by the German Presidency condemning the recent violence , arrests and mistreatment of detainees .
The Government of Zimbabwe was also called upon to release those detainees and to respect fundamental rights .
The crisis should be resolved through dialogue with all political forces .
Last Monday , the General Affairs Council also issued conclusions to this effect .
In this context , the Commission continues to attach great importance to enhanced dialogue with Zimbabwe 's regional peers .
We fully acknowledge the major role they can play in promoting national reconciliation in this country .
The Commission therefore welcomed the Extraordinary Summit of Heads of States of the Southern African Development Community ( SADC ) , which took place on 28 and 29 March 2007 in Dar es Salaam .
The regional leaders decided to engage in the resolution of the Zimbabwe crisis by appointing the South African President , Thabo Mbeki , as a mediator .
It was agreed with all the European Member States that a high-level message would be delivered to SADC on the subject .
Firstly , to recognise the major role the organisation can play in the resolution of the crisis and , secondly , to give SADC real breathing space in its mediation efforts .
We feel , therefore , that nothing should be done to jeopardise the SADC initiative and that the EU should be seen to be ready to follow SADC efforts to resolve the Zimbabwean crisis .
Furthermore , it was agreed to make an effort to properly inform the region and Africa at large of the content of EU measures , or sanctions , regarding Zimbabwe .
They consist of a visa ban for the Zimbabwean leadership and the freezing of their assets , in addition to an arms embargo .
Trade , economic and essential aid cooperation has not been affected by the EU measures .
In this sense , the level of aid committed to Zimbabwe in 2006 alone was around EUR 193 million : EUR 86 million by the Commission and EUR 107 million by Member States .
This kind of assistance , for the direct benefit of the Zimbabwean population , is due to be continued .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , I wish to thank the Commission and the Council for their statements .
Every Member of this House will be aware of the appalling situation in Zimbabwe .
We have expressed our views in some 16 resolutions in recent years , but the Mugabe regime persistently reminds us that no matter how bad the situation , it can always make matters tragically worse .

Millions have fled the country ; many of those who remain are on food aid ; hyper-inflation is expected to reach 5000 % by the end of this year ; unemployment stands at 80 % ; 3000 people a week die from HIV-AIDS ; and Zimbabwe has the world 's highest orphan rate .

Those are the grim statistics .
When people try to gather or make any sort of protest , they are , as we have seen , brutally attacked by the regime 's police .
I agree that there has been one positive development : Mugabe 's latest brutalities have at last provoked a response from neighbouring African countries .
This must be encouraged .
The Southern African Development Community has finally recognised that a crisis exists in Zimbabwe .
That is a very significant development .
It is further evidence that opinion across Africa is shifting .
Mugabe is now seen by his peers as a dictator who has selfishly abused his own people and whose actions threaten wider economic development across the whole continent .
They no longer accept Mugabe 's tired excuse that Zimbabwe 's problems came from outside .
It is clear for all to see that it is Mugabe who has brought his country and its people to their knees .
He went into the SADC summit expecting endorsement of his policies , but instead left with a flea in his ear and the appointment of South African President Mbeki as facilitator of the dialogue between Zanu-PF and the opposition .
Mbeki 's task will be to create conditions for free and fair elections .
However , until freedom is restored to Zimbabwe there must be no let-up on the pressure on the regime .
All too often , European governments have on spurious grounds failed even to apply the EU 's own travel ban and other restrictive measures .
When Mugabe finally falls from power , the international community must be ready to act without delay .
I call upon the Commission and the Council to begin serious planning now for a massive , comprehensive and urgent programme of assistance to Zimbabwe for the post-Mugabe era .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , the Zimbabwe that I knew was a proud country , leading in the region , proud of its hard-earned freedom , a beautiful country , where black and white Zimbabweans believed in the future , where black and white together tried to heal the painful wounds of the Rhodesia era 's racism , a country where citizens worked at building a democracy .
This is in stark contrast with the Zimbabwe of today , with its appalling statistics .


Life expectancy in Zimbabwe is currently one of the world 's lowest : 37 for men and not more than 34 for women ; 80 % of the Zimbabweans are living below the poverty line ; one third of the population have fled the country , with millions of people having sought refuge in neighbouring countries , and 50 000 more refugees being added to their number every month .
The economy of the country that was once known as Africa 's grain basket , has plunged by 40 % in one decade , and there is no improvement in sight .
The Zimbabwean economy is still shrinking by 5.7 % , which makes Zimbabwe the only country in Africa whose economy is not growing .
The hyperinflation , to which reference has already been made , means it is impossible for the many Zimbabweans who stayed in Zimbabwe , with its mass unemployment , to meet their daily basic needs .
The European Union was right to decide to penalise with even more extensive personal sanctions the Zimbabwean leaders , who , with their state terror , have brought about this level of devastation .
As we all know , there is a great deal more needed to find a way-out .
This way-out is described in our joint resolution .
It outlines how the country might go forward into a post-Mugabe era , describes concrete steps and measures , and , rightly , makes a dramatic call on Mbeki and the SADC members to block the door to state terror , with as heavy a hand as necessary , and to clear the path for dialogue in the post-Mugabe era .
We are behind the broadest possible opposition to Mugabe and in favour of Zimbabwe .
We would ask the Council to extend the scope of the sanctions .
Anyone who is responsible for this ever steeper downward spiral in this country that was once so proud must be called to account , including ministers , representatives , army leaders , the police and the secret service , as well as the governor of the central bank .
We would ask the United Kingdom to use its presidency in the Security Council to add Zimbabwe to the agenda .
Finally , we really do hope that Mbeki , playing an even bigger role , will bring the Mugabe regime to an end , for , after nearly three decades , it is time for it to be done away with for good .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , if a specific country is often mentioned in Parliament it is a bad sign , as it means that the human rights situation in that country must be serious .
We are afraid that , in the foreseeable future , Zimbabwe was , is and will remain precisely such a country .
The paradox lies in the fact that we are celebrating the 27th anniversary of this country 's independence .
Unfortunately , this independence does not involve freedom .
For example , one and a half months ago , the opposition was brutally crushed .
Two people were killed and 300 were arrested .
This is the political side of the situation , which we frequently most like to discuss in Parliament .
However , there is also an economic side to the problem which is perhaps even more serious .
In Zimbabwe , nearly 4.5 million people are malnourished , one third of whom have been helped by the World Food Programme , and have received food as part of that programme .
This is a country where the average life expectancy is 35.5 years .
As the previous speaker mentioned , Zimbabwe is one of the world record holders ( in negative terms ) in this respect .
One fifth of its population is infected with HIV , and there 3 200 new cases every week .
Zimbabwe has the highest rate of orphans in the world .
The unemployment rate in this country stands at 80 % !
Eighty per cent of the population also live below the poverty line !
Every month , a few thousand people flee the country .
Over 30 % of its citizens have already emigrated to neighbouring countries .
Zimbabwe is the only African country in which the economy is in decline .
During the last decade , economic turnover in this country fell by 40 % , and this year it fell by almost another 6 % .
Last year , the average rate of inflation rose to 2 200 % .
This year , it will no doubt exceed 5 000 % !
Since 1998 , agricultural production has fallen by four fifths !
Zimbabwe 's two main industries , namely tobacco and gold mining are teetering on the brink of collapse .
These are all just statistics and , tragic and telling though they may be , I am afraid that dry figures , percentages and numbers may obscure the individual tragedies faced by millions of people .
Zimbabwe may be far away , but let us remember the words of Ernest Hemingway : ' Do not ask for whom the bell tolls , it tolls for thee . '
Zimbabwe is a country which has fallen into a ' black hole ' .
It is disappearing before our eyes , it is ceasing to exist economically and socially , and the only sign of a functioning government is political repression .
We cannot remain silent .
We cannot pretend that sympathy , without any political decisions , will be enough .
That is why we need this debate ; that is why we need this resolution .
We need a joint resolution , a resolution that is above political divisions .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( EL ) Madam President , it sounds rather ironic and tragic when those who made Zimbabwe a colony , those who plundered its natural resources all these years , are today fighting for its independence and freedom .
Why does the European Parliament keep addressing the subject of Zimbabwe ?
Is it because human rights are being infringed ?
No , ladies and gentlemen .
Let us call a spade a spade . It is because Great Britain dreams of making it a colony once again and because the other large countries in the European Union are again dreaming of new colonies on the African continent .
These are the facts .
Zimbabwe acquired its independence through a hard and bloody fight against the British colonists .
Are there problems ?
Of course there are .
Is the situation as it is described ?
Of course it is , but it is the result of years of colonialism , it is the result of the measures imposed all these years by the European Union and other imperialist countries , measures designed to achieve an economic stranglehold on and the political isolation of the Zimbabwe regime .
In the final analysis , if and how the situation changes in Zimbabwe is a matter for its people and neither the European Union nor anyone else is entitled to interfere in its internal affairs .
Today there is a plan which has been developing for many years .
What is this plan ?
To fund and buy out the opposition .
Millions are being given to various persons who stand as political opponents to the regime .
Non-governmental organisations are being funded that consist of paid employees who stand for nothing in the community in Zimbabwe .
There are sanctions and , at the same time , Great Britain does not keep to the agreements it has made with Zimbabwe .
Even the illegal arms trade continued and Margaret Thatcher 's son was arrested and that is a known fact and was reported in all the newspapers .
We therefore consider that the European Union has no right to interfere in the internal affairs of Zimbabwe or any other country .
Any problems there may need to be resolved by the people themselves as they so choose .
That is why we voted against the joint motion for a resolution and we are saddened by the fact that , although you know that all the measures you take and the embargo you impose on Zimbabwe makes things worse and causes thousands of people to die , you continue with the same barbaric policy .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , Mr Mugabe and mouse hunters .
Is there a connection between Zimbabwe 's President and these people indulging in this rather curious pursuit ?
Very much so , because in the immediate vicinity of Mugabe 's estate - Africa 's largest private residence - respectable citizens keep their heads above water by hunting mice on a daily basis .
Indeed , these animals are , according to them , like beef to us .
This is how deep Zimbabwe , up to recently Africa 's grain basket , has sunk under Robert Mugabe 's tyrannical regime .
This regime is founded on a campaign that is absurd and criminal in equal measure , as a result of which since 2000 , thousands of productive farms have been confiscated from their white owners and handed over to Mugabe 's incompetent and indifferent figureheads , resulting in a large-scale famine .
By the way , Mugabe 's Zanu-PF Party uses the food shortage as a weapon against the opposition .
The correspondent R.W. Johnson recently levelled ultimate criticism of Mugabe 's tyranny .
He reported that in Zimbabwe , people are eliminated on a mass-scale like animals and that most casualties are the direct result of intentional government policy .
This genocide is probably ten times worse than that in Darfur , yet it is ignored by the UN .
Arnold Tsunga , chairman of the human rights organisation Crisis in Zimbabwe Coalition , used identical words to describe the situation .
Tsunga called Mugabe 's policy ' cunning genocide ' , because it is not being noticed by governments , aid organisations or the press .
My message to the Council , the Commission , and to this House , is that this indictment of cunning , implicit genocide should never give us one moment 's peace until such time as it can be withdrawn .
( DE ) Madam President , Mr Pafilis , four minutes ago , you gave the most cynical speech on Zimbabwe which has been heard in this House since 1999 .
You will actually stop at nothing and are legitimising a dictatorship .
I recommend that you again take to heart the moving appeal given by Bishop Tutu , for I consider him to be above suspicion .
It is sometimes believed that it is impossible to sink any lower in a country if it has the lowest life expectancy worldwide , has the highest rate of inflation across the globe , if unemployment is running at 80 % , if just as many people are living below the absolute poverty level , and if the economy has shrunk by 40 % over the last decade .
Unfortunately , the power of the regimes in these very countries is still sufficient to hit out at the population , as happened most recently on 11 March .
Many were arrested and tortured .
As members of Parliament , we are particularly horrified by the brutal mistreatment of our colleague , Nelson Chamisa , who , en route to Brussels for a committee meeting of our Joint Parliamentary Assembly , was brutally beaten up at Harare airport by regime thugs , losing an eye in the process .
My thanks go to the Council which clearly expressed its views on the Council situation on 13 and 18 March and in the General Council as well on 23 April , and also expanded the list of travel bans imposed on leading supporters of the regime .
At least the SADC has recognised that there is a crisis in Zimbabwe and has employed President Mbeki as a mediator .
We are aware that unfortunately , Mugabe feels somewhat encouraged following the SADC meeting and repression is also continuing throughout the whole of the country without the international community paying any attention .
South Africa always plays a key role .
President Mbeki must play the role of mediator in a credible fashion .
We know how difficult it is to accept that a liberator can evolve into a tyrant , but it is in Mbeki 's hands to go down in the annals of history as someone who , in the end , has also helped human rights and democracy in Africa on the road to success by taking the side of the long-suffering people .
( PT ) The Catholic Archbishop of Bulawayo , Pius Ncube , recently condemned the poverty and oppression that Mugabe has brought to Zimbabwe in recent years and called on the people to take to the streets and confront the regime 's armed forces .
He said the following :
' Mugabe is mad for power and he will cling to it , even if it means destroying the economy and destroying Zimbabwe .
Mugabe is an evil man , a bully and a murderer .
I will not be bullied or bought by him .
I accept that it may mean that I lose my life . '
( PT ) Are the opposition leaders , human rights activists , those campaigning for Zimbabwe 's development and this courageous archbishop receiving proper support from the Commission and the Council ?
That support implies mobilising the necessary solidarity from other Africans of the African Union and the Southern African Development Community . In the name of serious debate on Africa 's problems and of positive interaction between Europe and Africa , will they too be invited and made welcome in Lisbon on the occasion of the EU-Africa summit during the Portuguese Presidency ?
This Parliament resolution is important and timely in order for us to have clear answers .

Madam President , I am in total agreement with what Mr Gahler said with regard to Mr Pafilis .
I have never heard such perversion of the truth in my life as what he just said in this House .
First of all , I welcome the joint motion that seeks strongly to uphold the sanctions against the ruthless violence of the regime that is plaguing Zimbabwe in the worst possible way .
I thank those who have worked hard on this motion for a resolution , and I am pleased with the result .
Isolating Mugabe and other members of his regime is of the utmost importance in showing both the international community and the other African nations that the European Union Member States will not tolerate these blatant abuses of human rights and dignity .
We have consistently opposed this brutal menace and will continue to do so together .
Mugabe should remember his promise to step down and do so now .
This is the only action that he could take to benefit Zimbabwe .
Absolute power corrupts absolutely .
Members of Zimbabwe 's illegitimate government are not allowed to enter any EU Member State and I refer , in particular , to the EU-Africa Summit scheduled to be held in Lisbon in December .
The joint motion for a resolution makes clear and reasserts that this move would seriously undermine the European Union 's resolve .
It would hamper the future use of soft power wherever we might need it .
The European Union sanctions in place put real pressure on Mugabe 's brutal regime .
As such , they need to be reinforced , strengthened and taken to the next level .
As regards the next level , it is well known that Mugabe is seeking financial backing and support from countries , such as China , that are not always as firm on issues of freedom and democracy as I and many others would like .
This joint motion shows Parliament 's determination to take this issue to the UN Security Council .
Finally , the money that we give to Zimbabwe must be spent in the proper way and must not swell the dictator 's coffers .
I end by stating very clearly that we are for the Zimbabwean people but we are not in any way for Mr Mugabe .
( PL ) Madam President , we were all impressed by the fight for independence of the people of Zimbabwe twenty-seven years ago .
At that time , Zimbabwean society was seen as an example of colonial struggle by other developing world countries .
This respect for the people of Zimbabwe now provides the main moral imperative to support the fight for democracy and the rule of law in Zimbabwe .
Exactly a month ago , during the plenary session of the European Parliament , we saw the bloodied face of the democratic opposition leader , Morgan Tsvangirai , on the television screens in this building .
He is now the true leader of Zimbabwean society .
Now , the oppressed leaders of the student movement , civil society , the trade unions , the European Union , the institutions and the European Parliament all have to do everything they can to help the people of Zimbabwe , to help civil society in that country and to help Zimbabwe return to democracy , freedom and the rule of law .
The Republic of South Africa and its president , Mr Mbeki , have a particularly important role to play in this process .
The European Parliament supports all actions to foster democracy and the rule of law in Zimbabwe .
I have received six motions for resolution tabled in accordance with Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place shortly .
1 .
Recent repression of demonstrations in Russia
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions on recent repression of demonstrations in Russia .
author . - ( LT ) As it goes about its activities and in its dealings with other countries , the European Union acts in accordance with its fundamental values , the most important of which are democracy and human rights and freedoms .
When addressing the European Parliament , Russian Duma delegates state they profess the same values as the European Union .
However , Russia is not about to listen to anyone 's advice on how to deal with domestic matters .
The brutality against peaceful demonstrations by residents in Moscow , Saint Petersburg and Nizhny Novgorod expose the Russian Government 's intolerance and fear of independent thinkers , especially as the presidential elections of 2008 approach .
As soon as Russia experienced the political and economic power of its energy supply ' weapon ' , it ceased to pay any attention to international public opinion and the signals it sends about breaches of human rights in the country .
Russia is a strategic partner of the European Union , and for the sake of energy policy we apply a double standard : one for Russia and another for the rest of the world .
As we negotiate a new treaty of cooperation between the European Union and Russia , I invite the Council to take a look at events in Russia and not to make any concessions to it .
author . - ( PL ) Madam President , it is a good thing that we have managed , in this House , to draw up a compromise version of the resolution on human rights infringements in Russia , as it is important for the European Parliament to have a united position and to address both Russian society and the Russian president , Vladimir Putin , with one voice .
In the sad days following the loss of the first democratic Russian president , Boris Yeltsin , it is especially important for all those who have been rooting for democracy in Russia and for whom a democratic Russia ought to be an important partner for Europe , to now acknowledge that the Russia of today has not fulfilled all the dreams which we shared when Boris Yeltsin appeared on the political stage in that country .
Unfortunately , these hopes have remained unfulfilled .
We have to acknowledge this fact and that is what our resolution expresses .
I would like to once again point out that I am pleased that the resolution is the result of a compromise between many , diverse political groups .
I have to say that , for me , the images shown on television of how the demonstrations held by human rights campaigners in Russia were repressed , were indeed traumatic , as they also reminded me of the worst times in my country when street protests were brutally crushed by the police .
I would like to point out that , surprisingly , the Russian Human Rights Ombudsman shares this assessment of the brutality of the Russian police .
That is why our declaration contains an appeal to the Russian Duma and to our colleagues , namely Russian Members of Parliament , to set up a special committee to deal with this issue .
In appealing to you , Members of this House , to adopt this resolution , I would like to also appeal to the Russian citizens , who sadly currently do not have access to real information , to be aware that our actions are not a sign of Russophobia , as the Kremlin 's propaganda often claims .
In fact , quite the opposite is the case .
Our actions , our struggle to defend human rights in Russia , to bring democracy back to Russia stem from our deep feelings of friendship towards this country and our deep respect for great Russian literature and for Russia as a great nation .
We want that nation to enjoy the same freedoms that we enjoy in the European Union and I would like the European Parliament to be an institution that is like a beacon of light for Russians , illuminating the path to democracy .
( DE ) Madam President , this week , the European Parliament has dealt with Russia on several occasions , in the sub-committee on human rights with Commissioner Piebalgs , at a joint meeting of the Delegation for relations with Russia , Belarus and Ukraine , and now here in plenary , because the problems are becoming more and more acute .
We have observed the massive human rights violations in Moscow and St. Petersburg with dismay , where peaceful demonstrations against the authoritarian bias of the system were suppressed by violent intervention by the police , with attacks made against passers-by who were not involved and western journalists .
The intimidation and suppression of the freedom of speech , the freedom of assembly and the freedom of the press in Russia has become systematic .
We are familiar with this type of disinformation and lies from the war in Chechnya .
Many media are under government control or operate self-censorship .
Independent journalists such as Anna Politkovskaya were murdered .
With 13 journalist murders during Putin 's time in office alone , Russia occupies third place after Iraq and Algeria - an alarming result .
The political opposition cannot find any mouthpiece .
The freedom of the press and freedom of speech are under immense threat .
Potential political opponents of Putin , such as Chodorkovsky and Lebedev are sitting in prison without a fair trial and Gary Kasparov was arrested repeatedly .
Non-governmental organisations are harassed by means of laws which curtail the rights of civil society .
The Russian leadership is not only using its courts but the entire security apparatus as well in the meantime in order to intimidate political opponents .
The powers that be in the Kremlin are hitting out .
As a result , progress towards the rule of law and an independent justice system are also under threat .
It is a perfidious strategy to brand people who are calling for genuine democracy in the country as extremists so as to take away their credibility .
Putin is not a flawless democrat .
He comes from the KGB and his origins leave their mark .
Russia is a member of the Council of Europe , the OSCE and the United Nations , yet it violates basic fundamental and human rights .
The EU is negotiating a new partnership agreement .
This agreement must contain a section on human rights which is also a constituent part of all agreements and treaties .
We are showing our solidarity with our friends in Russia who are fighting for a peaceful and democratic future .
author . - Madam President , the clampdown on peaceful demonstrators some weeks ago sends an alarming message about the future of basic freedoms in Russia : freedoms of speech , the media and demonstrations .
The Russian Government committed itself to guaranteeing these freedoms as a condition for being admitted to the Council of Europe in 1996 .
Today , 11 years later , the majority of people in Russia feel insecure and have no trust in law and justice .
Sixty-five per cent claim to be unhappy , and more than half disapprove of the Government , which is already heading beyond mere authoritarianism , as one opposition leader put it .
We expect the Russian Government to react to this resolution , which is a unanimous expression of serious but friendly concern .
We also expect the European Council and Commission to make it absolutely clear at the forthcoming EU-Russia Summit that restoration of these basic freedoms will be a crucial test of Russia 's ability and willingness to be a credible international partner .
At this point , Russia has become essentially an authoritarian state .
EU leaders will share responsibility for the further worsening of the situation there if they are not willing or able to face these new realities with determination and clarity .
Speaking with one voice , on the basis of European values , is the only way to help Russia back to the road of democracy .
It is vital that Russian citizens should enjoy the same freedoms - including freedom from fear and police violence - that we have been enjoying .
author . - ( NL ) Madam President , for a long time , the countries of the old European Communities laboured under the illusion that the authoritarian one-party state and the violent oppression of any form of organised opposition in Russia were a product of Communism .
I remember that the German radical student leader Rudi Dutschke , who has been dead for a long time now and was nick-named the Bürgerschreck , warned the Left in Western Europe against this position .
In his view , what happened in Russia at the time was completely unrelated to Socialism or Communism , but very much related to what he referred to as an ' Asian ' tradition .
This is a tradition in which a small group , using the toughest measures , manages to remain in charge in a large and sparsely populated country .
Every time someone in Russia is put in power who wishes to resolve this unsatisfactory situation , there has , to date , been every chance that his successor would have resorted to the old abuses .
Khrushchev in the 50s and 60s , and Gorbachev in the 80s and 90s failed to change Russia from the top down .
The current President , Putin , like the tsars and Stalin previously , seamlessly fits into this old Russian mould .
He managed to gain power when his chaotic predecessor , Yeltsin , was no longer able to run the country , and , having gained popularity among the Russians by destroying Chechnya , is now in the process of taking away their democracy .
Unfortunate is the country that owns oil or natural gas , because the possession of them , and of the wealth that exports bring in , puts the leaders in a stronger position of power and makes domestic change virtually impossible .
Moreover , the criticism levelled by most of the outside world that wants to buy energy will quickly subside .
Russia now finds itself in the same position as Saudi Arabia or Iran .
Even in the two largest cities , which , so far , offered the most scope for criticism and diversity , demonstrations by opponents are made impossible .
The European countries and their residents should not accept this lying down , but should act in solidarity with those who want to turn Russia into a decent democracy .
author . - ( EL ) Madam President , the need to develop relations between the European Union and Russia and the creation of a new dynamic strategic partnership , as required under the geo-economic and geo-strategic circumstances , cannot lessen or negate our criticism about the continuing infringements of human rights and fundamental freedoms in Russia .
I understand and comprehend the European Union 's ' Realpolitik ' vis-à-vis Russia ; at the same time , however , we also need to defend the basic principles of our collective European democratic civilisation .
From this point of view , I consider it necessary for the question of human rights to be placed high on the European Union 's agenda and within the framework of reinforced political dialogue with Russia and its political leadership .
A first opportunity will be the summit on 17 May and the meeting with President Putin .
However , I should like to comment on something else .
It would be a serious political mistake for the European Union to equate human rights in Russia and the situation that prevails there with just certain circles which are openly funded by specific Russian political refugees within the known clique of oligarchs .
The recent statements by Mr Berezovsky in London are typical of the intentions of certain circles .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Russia is a land of culture .
Its achievements in the fields of literature , music and the performing arts time and again gain our admiration and respect .
In this respect , Russia is a true member of the European family of nations .
However , Russia also has its shady side .
The measures currently being taken by the Russian Government against human rights and fundamental freedoms are casting very dark shadows .
To act against its own citizens in the manner it did on 14 and 15 April in Moscow and St. Petersburg is unworthy of a genuine member of the United Nations and the Council of Europe .
The freedom of speech and freedom of the press are the cornerstones of a democratic State .
The peoples of Europe , including the citizens of Russia , paid for these rights with their blood .
It is therefore a disgrace that Putin 's Government , which lays claim to be a world power and offers its services as a mediator in all international conflicts while strutting like a peacock , is acting against its own people in such a cowardly and violent manner .
Such a government cannot negotiate with us at eye level or as a partner having equal rights .
Freedom is always the freedom to dissent . This should be impressed on the Russian Government .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , I would like to begin by expressing my admiration for the great Russian leader , Boris Yeltsin .
He is one of the people we have to thank for the triumph of democracy over dictatorship in the second half of the twentieth century .
Yeltsin represented the real Russia , a Russia that fosters civil society , a democratic Russia , a Russia which upholds the rule of law .
This week , in Strasbourg , there was a special meeting of the Subcommittee on Human Rights in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , during which we carefully interviewed witnesses regarding what is happening in Russia at the moment .
All agreed that Russia is heading in a dangerous direction .
The careful monitoring of the upcoming elections to the Duma in December of this year and the presidential elections next year are currently most important to the European Parliament .
On our part , we have to do everything we can to bring civil society in Russia closer to democracy , to help these institutions ensure that the elections are truly free , fair and that the results not falsified .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , very sad events are taking place in Russia .
Attempts to bring democracy to Russia are being suppressed , as are demonstrations and freedom of speech .
However , we must be aware of the fact that Russia does not have a tradition of democracy and that those , such as Alexander I , who wanted to bring democracy to Russia in the past , have had to give up or have been widely criticised , as was the case with Boris Yeltsin , as he passed away .
We have to be aware of the fact that , according to surveys , more Russians want order than democracy .
This is why , when we support everything that is positive in Russia and which brings hope , we have to be aware that , in dealing with the Russian Government , we are drawing up agreements with a government which has a different set of values to Europe .
Russia does not have , and has no experience of democracy at home .
Neither does it have any experience of normal , civilised behaviour in terms of external relations .
This should serve as a warning to all those who want to build a future for Europe on the hope that Russia will show solidarity and be a good partner .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , moves to repress the opposition , crush peaceful demonstrations , limit the freedom of speech and infringe human rights are worrying phenomena that should be denounced in whichever country they may occur .
Unfortunately , these accusations could be levelled at all powers today , both from the East and the West , who usurp the right to dominate the world , who want to be global judges , policemen and moral watchdogs .
Accusing Russia of anti-democratic practices and human rights infringements today could be described as ' the pot calling the kettle black ' .
The harassment of political opponents , ethnic and religious minorities , as well as measures that make it difficult for people to practice their religion - these are all part of everyday political life in many parts of the world , although it is often disguised by lies reported by the media .
Above all , the fundamental right of all people to life , from conception to a natural death , is violated across the whole world , both in Russia and in the European Union .
There are no innocent parties here !
This crime is the root of all evil !
( DE ) Madam President , in 1991 , I not only got to know the most senior Estonian fighting for freedom , Tunne Kelam , but also Boris Yeltsin when he came here to Strasbourg to bear witness to a new Russia .
In the meantime , there has been a massive relapse .
Russia is an authoritarian state with an increasingly aggressive foreign policy .
I believe we should emphasise with the utmost clarity that fish always start to stink from the head .
The use of OMON militia against demonstrators and foreign journalists such as the German television correspondents would not have been possible without explicit instructions from the Kremlin .
We must be clear on the fact that President Putin should bear overall responsibility for repressing the first tentative shoots of democracy and freedom in Russia .
We need clear language here and should not simply talk about slip-ups .
Putin is responsible ; the Russian leadership is responsible .
This is about our credibility because Russia has signed up to European principles in the Council of Europe 's Declaration of human rights , the observance of which we must insist on together , and with clarity .
( LT ) In recent years Russia has become economically stronger , and opinion surveys show a result favourable to the present régime .
Therefore , it is particularly difficult to understand the Russian Government 's actions aimed at the opposition in the middle of April .
Being unable to make themselves heard in the mass media , opposition parties and non-governmental organisations have attempted to draw attention to breaches of democracy in Russia .
The inappropriate reaction to demonstrations of just a few thousand people , as well as the actions of the militia and OMON , reduce the already faltering authority of Russia in the West and complicate the forthcoming negotiations for a new treaty between the EU and Russia .
Only a few officials in Moscow dare to admit that the actions of the power structures have exceeded permissible limits .
Human rights breaches and growing tension between the government and the opposition in Russia , as the election campaign is only just beginning , reduce hope that the campaign will be transparent and democratic .
Madam President , honourable Members , first of all , I would like to express my thanks for having the opportunity to participate in the debate for the second time and take the floor as the German spokesperson on human rights .
We all watched the events of 14 and 15 April in Moscow and St. Petersburg with a great deal of anxiety .
Quite a few of us wonder whether , in view of these developments , the freedom of assembly in Russia is in jeopardy .
The Russian Constitution guarantees Russian citizens the right to assemble peacefully , without bearing arms , in order to hold rallies and demonstrations , parades and pickets .
This is obviously contrary to the manner in which the Russian authorities acted recently against demonstrators in Moscow , St. Petersburg and Nizhny Novgorod .
Gary Kasparov reported these actions to me in a personal telephone call .
It also needs to be borne in mind that the demonstrations of 14 and 15 April differed from previous marches in that the militia acted in a more hard-line manner and that , on this occasion , accredited journalists were detained temporarily as well as attacked .
The reporting carried out by several newspapers after the incidents was thoroughly critical .
Kommersant talked about ' Making mincemeat of those who disagreed ' and Moskovskiy Komsomolets about ' All power to OMON ' , while Novaya Izvestiya talked about ' A besieged fortress and unprecedented toughness ' .
However , there were also reports in which events were played down .
A similar picture could be seen in the reaction of the Russian Government .
While some government offices defended the action , the spokesperson on human rights , for example , Mr Lukin , conceded that the police had substantially exceeded their authority .
The Governor of St. Petersburg , Mr Matvienko , ordered all complaints regarding attacks by Russian police units to be investigated .
Sergei Yastrzhembsky , adviser to the Russian President on EU issues , made the same demand , while Ella Pamfilova , Chair of the commission , pointed out that the actions of the militia had damaged Russia 's standing worldwide .
The Federal German Government also reacted to these events and , on 16 April , publicly expressed its anxiety in a statement given by the EU Council Presidency .
In addition , Germany 's Deputy Government spokesperson , Mr Thomas Steg , declared in Berlin on 16 April that the excessive use of force at the weekend was cause for concern .
The action taken against journalists was also unacceptable .
The Federal German Government is awaiting a full account of events from the Russian authorities .
Following the incidents in Moscow and St. Petersburg , the German embassy in Moscow immediately lodged a complaint at a high level and requested an immediate and full explanation .
We will naturally also speak to the Russian authorities with a certain degree of vigour concerning the situation regarding the freedom of speech and the freedom of assembly at the forthcoming human rights consultations between the EU and Russia which are scheduled for 3 May .
The development of the human rights situation in Russia must continue to be followed very attentively .
This especially applies to the freedom of speech and assembly and free and fair access to the media .
As a member of the United Nations , including its role as a member of the new Human Rights Council , the Council of Europe and the OSCE , Russia is obligated to respect fundamental rights .
Respect for these fundamental rights is also of the utmost importance in view of the forthcoming elections in Russia .
We will make it clear to Russia that it is in the country 's own interests to do everything possible to ensure that the freedom of speech and the freedom of assembly are strengthened and not weakened further .
I believe that a substantial part of the values and human rights on which Europe is founded have been established by Russian intellectuals and artists .
We should remind ourselves of this fact and ensure that we continue to tread along this path and not a different one .
( Applause )
Madam President , the Commission is also concerned at the disproportionate use of force by Russian law enforcement agencies against peaceful demonstrators and journalists , notably in Moscow and St Petersburg on 14 and 15 April .
We are also concerned at a number of arbitrary detentions made at the same opposition protests .
Freedom of expression and freedom of assembly - including the holding of demonstrations - are fundamental human rights .
They are the cornerstones of pluralistic democracy .
Russia has committed itself to respecting those freedoms through its membership of the UN , the OSCE and the Council of Europe .
In the period leading up to the Russian parliamentary and presidential elections , that respect is all the more crucial .
The EU raised the above-mentioned concerns in a Presidency statement on 16 April .
We note that the Deputy Presidential Spokesman publicly stated that some over-reaction by riot police had taken place .
The Commission will continue to follow developments in the pre-election period in Russia closely .
We will also continue to raise these issues in our bilateral talks with the Russian authorities , for example in the forthcoming regular EU-Russia Human Rights Consultations on 2 and 3 May .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place shortly .
2 .
Kidnapping in Gaza of the journalist Alan Johnston
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions on the kidnapping in Gaza of the journalist Alan Johnston .
author . - Madam President , with your agreement I should like to begin by saying that last week over one thousand BBC staff , friends and colleagues of Alan Johnston gathered at vigils for him at BBC buildings across the world .
I should like to welcome the BBC staff working here in Strasbourg who , in tribute to their missing colleague , are in the public gallery today to listen to our debate .
( Applause )
When a kidnapping takes place anywhere in the world , the victim 's friends and family always look to the media to keep the fate of their loved one in the eye of the public and of us as politicians .
When the kidnapped person is himself a journalist , it is our responsibility to cherish their fate as they cherish others ' .
Such is the case with BBC journalist Alan Johnston , abducted in Gaza 46 days ago .
Alan 's career personally symbolises the outstanding reputation of the BBC for integrity and objectivity .
Having previously worked in Uzbekistan and Afghanistan , Alan is passionate about his reporting on the Palestinian people , with whom he has a close connection and for whom he has deep respect .
This has resonated among his audience , 50 000 of whom have this week signed the online petition asking for his release .
Our first thoughts are , of course , with Graham and Margaret Johnston and with the other members of his family , to whom we send our sympathy and support .
I would like to pay tribute to the efforts of all the BBC management and staff and to journalists , trade unions in Britain and worldwide who have led the campaign for Alan 's release .
One of the colleagues here today told me that Alan is known quite simply as someone who brings stories to life .
Today his life is our story .
Alan Johnston 's courageous presence , as the only permanently-based Western journalist in Gaza , has precisely enabled him to report the suffering of the Palestinian people , and now he has become the ultimate case of a journalist caught up in his own story - a victim of the suffering itself .
We are told that Alan remains alive and secure , but not who is holding him .
We can speculate whether his abduction was for reasons of politics , money or recognition , but we do not know which , if any .
We can recognise that to prevent what has happened to Alan from happening to others requires a political understanding and solution .
However , today our response is not political - it is humanitarian , to say to whoever is listening : release Alan Johnston without harm and without hindrance .
The European Parliament should welcome the assurances of help made by Europe 's Foreign Ministers this week and of ' permanent contact ' promised by our own High Representative .
We are sure you will act on these promises .
I understand too that Commissioner Almunia , responding to today 's debate , will pledge that his colleague Mr Michel will this weekend press Alan Johnston 's case with President Abbas and representatives of the Palestinian Authority .
We thank you .
The European Parliament acknowledges the support and cooperation of the Palestinian Authority and we are proud of Europe 's support to sustain your staff and the vital services they provide , but it is your intelligence services who have been able to make contact with those who have abducted Alan , and it is in you that we place our hopes for a breakthrough .
In radio circles , they say that the biggest crime is to say nothing into the microphone .
Alan Johnston 's kidnapping is the radio silence that now must come to an end .
( Applause )
author . - ( PL ) Madam President , there are reporters who carry out their duties to a more or less satisfactory extent , just as there are better and worse media .
Alan Johnston was a good journalist , working for a well-known , popular and respected medium , namely the BBC .
Alan Johnston was kidnapped , in spite or because of the fact that he specifically wanted to work for and among the people of the Middle East , an area currently facing crisis .
He worked for these people as he informed the world of their situation and , by providing us with information , allowed us politicians to also attempt to resolve the crisis , a crisis over which we sadly have very little influence .
Madam President , kidnappings , terrorism and murder are sadly all phenomena that are part of today 's world , a world where there are no principles left , not even - if one may describe it thus - the principles of warfare .
These wars are being fought in the most base manner .
Alan Johnston fell victim to this phenomenon .
To a certain extent , we are all victims .
I hope that the relevant authorities will do everything possible to free Alan Johnston .
author . - Madam President , there is no doubt that Palestinians in Gaza are suffering greatly through the gross violation of their human rights by the dreadful siege situation imposed on them by the aggressive Israeli Government actions and the tolerance shown for such actions by Western governments .
At the same time , there is no doubt that the daily plight of the Palestinian people is brought to public attention worldwide through the work of journalists .
These journalists risk their lives in order to serve the cause of freedom of information and consequently assist in promoting the Palestinian people 's fight for justice .
The kidnapping of journalists such as Alan Johnston is , therefore , against the interests of the Palestinian people and is severely damaging their just demands .
We call upon the Palestinian people to redouble their efforts to secure the release of Alan Johnston .
We believe that in so doing they will be helping themselves most of all .
author . - ( NL ) Madam President , Gaza is a small , but very urbanised area , virtually cut off from the outside world .
Opposition from the neighbouring Israel has meant that the port and airport that had been planned with EU funds have not come into being , any more than has the open link with the much larger part of the future Palestinian state along the river Jordan .
Israel was , for a long time , a place that offered employment , but it has largely taken this option away for fear of attacks , and admits far fewer people into the country via the border post of Erez .
Israel also controls the border crossing with Egypt .
In this isolated area , a large section of the Palestinian population live like sardines , with no job , with no income and with no adequate housing .
The wise decision to remove the Israeli colonist villages from this coastal strip may have done something for those who had lived in them and who were hated by those around them , but hardly anything for anyone else there .
Gaza is a disaster area full of people without any future to look forward to , and that makes it a sort of prison or breeding ground for acts of despair .
For a long time , these acts of despair mainly consisted of suicide attacks against Israeli targets , but they also include kidnappings .
Alan Johnston is the fifteenth journalist to be kidnapped in Gaza and in the month following his kidnap , nothing was heard about him for a long time .
All Palestinian leaders , President Mahmoud Abbas , Prime Minister Ismail Haniya and the PLO 's imprisoned party leader , Marwan Barghouti , unanimously condemn heinous acts of this kind .
A lack of convincing success stories on the path to a state of their own and to provisions and income for their people has meant that they are losing control over events .
Without any prospects for the future , unknown criminals are taking over power .
This does not do anything to make the situation in Palestine or Israel any better .
Journalists in Iraq and Afghanistan , for example , are less and less able to follow events on the ground .
This is why we must be vigilant , and this is why the kidnapped journalists must be freed .
author of the motion for a resolution . - ( SV ) Madam President , last year , journalists throughout the world suffered a record number of kidnappings and deaths .
We now have a duty to ensure that that record is not beaten in 2007 , and we have an obligation to help bring about the release of Alan Johnston .
My thoughts go out to his immediate and extended family and to his colleagues , and I have to say that I have high hopes of his being released .
We know that Palestinian leaders condemn the kidnapping and that the kidnappers do not have the support of the Palestinian people .
We know that they understand that Alan Johnston has done more than anyone to report on their suffering over a period of 16 years .
Armed with these factors , we too can help bring about his release .
I have been in Gaza myself and know how difficult the situation is there .
However , it is by ensuring the presence of as many journalists as possible there and making sure that as many journalists as possible write about what is happening that those in Gaza have the best chance of getting us all to help improve the situation of the people .
Because the Palestinian people know that the kidnapping in question is contrary to their interests , I am certain that the kidnappers will not receive any support and that they will , in the end , have to release Alan Johnston .
author . - ( EL ) Madam President , allow me too to express my regret about this incident .
Yet another journalist who had the courage to work in difficult and dangerous conditions has fallen victim to kidnappers , thereby also depriving us of the information which we politicians and international public opinion can get about the tragic conditions that prevail in the area .
I trust that the fact that this has galvanised public opinion and the political leadership in the Palestinian territories and the efficacy of the National Unity Government , which is becoming more visible day by day , will help to bring about the release of the journalist Alan Johnston , identify those responsible and apportion responsibility .
A mission of members , including me and some of my honourable friends present in the House , shall be going to the Palestinian territories next week .
Within the framework of international conventions and our bilateral relations with the Palestinian Authority , we shall convey our concern and exert all possible pressure - if the matter has not already been resolved - to get Alan Johnston released and to secure as many guarantees for the safety of local citizens and visitors to the area as possible .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , I hope this debate and resolution will add , in some small way , to the international pressure to successfully achieve the release of Alan Johnston following his abduction two weeks ago .
We in this Parliament must speak out strongly to send a clear message of condemnation of the acts of violence that have taken place and the kidnapping of a man who has gained a reputation as one of the world 's leading media broadcasters .
He has built up a reputation over many years - but in particular during the last three years in Gaza - as a broadcaster who is objective and balanced in his reporting of a very difficult situation .
We call on everybody who has any influence or power over his captors to do all they can to secure his release .
For the Palestinian people themselves , this crisis is adding to an already tragic situation .
It is sending out a message to the rest of the world that not even experienced journalists are welcome or safe in Gaza .
This is a man who has been informing the rest of the world of the suffering , injustice and tragedy that continues there .
Targeting him by kidnapping him is not only an appalling crime in itself , but it is self-defeating in terms of the Palestinian people 's cause .
Gaza is isolated enough without cutting off accurate media reporting .
We are calling on the Palestinian Authority in particular to work for his release as an absolute priority and on the Council and Commission to maximise their efforts to that end .
Finally , to Alan Johnston 's family and friends , I express my sincere support on behalf of the PPE-DE Group in this Parliament .
I hope that their ordeal will soon have a relieving and positive conclusion .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - I too would like to offer my support and that of the ALDE Group to Alan Johnston and his family .
I do not think any of us can imagine why he is being held .
He is a man who has consistently spoken up for the Palestinian people .
To kidnap someone like him is unbelievable .
What do they hope to achieve ?
It certainly does nothing for the Palestinian cause , as many Palestinians themselves have pointed out .
His only offence is his belief that the story of Gaza and its people should be told in a fair and balanced way , and he has being doing that in an exceptional manner for the last three years .
He was the only foreign correspondent living permanently in the Gaza Strip .
We all hoped that he would have been released by now , as the 14 others kidnapped since 2005 were released , and we are today adding our voices to those calling for the Palestinian Authority to redouble its efforts to secure Alan Johnston 's speedy release .
We are also calling for all attacks on journalists to cease .
What more can any of us say ?
I am sure that people across the EU are hoping and praying for his release .
All we are doing today is trying to add our voices to those of his parents and his colleagues , and to say to his kidnappers : realise that if anything happens to him , you will have lost a strong voice telling your story to the world .
All you will achieve is to isolate yourself and the Palestinian people further .
That cannot be what you want .
You want your voice to be heard , not to be further marginalised .
These acts make it more difficult for those of us who have always supported the Palestinian cause to persuade people of the validity of the argument , and that is why it is completely self-defeating and betrays the Palestinian people , who continue to suffer .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , I have signed the MEPs ' letter calling on the Palestinian authorities and other organisations immediately to channel all their efforts into securing the unconditional release of the BBC journalist .
We now urgently call on the Commission and the Council to do likewise and to impose sanctions if diplomatic negotiations fail .
The kidnappers who have been holding the journalist for 46 days and President Abbas must know that they are holding back the whole of Palestine on its path to development and are consigning it to isolation .
I wish to emphasise that Alan Johnston 's release is vital to the safety of all journalists working in the Middle East .
I should like to express here in Parliament the esteem in which I hold Johnston 's work over the past three years in Gaza and to applaud the heroism of the work of all his fellow journalists and their families in upholding journalistic freedom in areas of conflict around the world .
They are an important source of hope for local populations facing appalling violence that could not be brought to justice without journalistic freedom .
Europe must do all it can to ensure the safety of journalists in this area .

Madam President , Alan Johnston has been a BBC journalist for 16 years and has worked in a variety of countries , including Afghanistan and Uzbekistan , so he has not exactly chosen a comfortable life !
During his three years in Gaza he has taken a strong interest in social and political developments there and he has told the story of the people of Gaza .
Therefore , as others have said , it very much harms the Palestinian cause for him not to be doing the job that he loves and does so well .
In 2005 and 2006 alone , 181 journalists and assistants were killed , 1678 arrested , 56 kidnapped and 2780 physically attacked or threatened .
The year 2006 saw the highest death toll since 1994 when 103 died , in particular in Rwanda , Algeria and the former Yugoslavia .
Censorship and media bans are , of course , widespread and persistent .
In this joint motion for a resolution we are calling on all EU bodies - Member State diplomats , the High Representative for CFSP and the Commission - to strengthen and coordinate their efforts to secure Mr Johnston 's release .
We are also calling on the Palestinian Authority to increase its efforts and it , no doubt , will give the matter all the greater priority if it is pressed by the Palestinian people .
I thank all those in Gaza - journalists and citizens of all kinds - for their vocal demands for Alan Johnston 's release .
They know that they need a journalist of integrity and commitment to give them a window on the world .
Free democracies cannot flourish without press freedom .
As we insist on Alan Johnston 's safe return , we salute the courage of all journalists who put their safety on the line in order to bring the truth to the world and to allow us all to enjoy democracy .
Madam President , honourable Members , allow me , at this point , to make a brief comment on behalf of the Council and express how very depressing this topic is for all of us .
The BBC correspondent , Alan Johnston , was abducted in Gaza on 12 March .
A large amount of anxiety was prevalent at last Monday 's Council of Foreign Ministers surrounding Mr Johnston , who has already been missing for six weeks .
We call for his immediate and unconditional release .
Mr Johnston is an internationally respected journalist with many friends in Gaza . It has always been a matter of concern for him that the world should see with its own eyes how things stand there .
His abduction is a criminal act which I can only condemn in the strongest possible terms .
At this point , I would also like to extend my sympathy to his family , which is fighting on his behalf , and which has already been living in fear and uneasy uncertainty for more than one and a half months now .
( Applause )
Madam President , it has been more than six weeks since Alan Johnston was kidnapped , and the Commission has expressed its solidarity with his family , friends and colleagues at this very difficult time .
Margot Wallström , as Vice-President of the Commission , has made a public statement on the kidnapping of Mr Johnston on behalf of the whole College , expressing its deep concern over his plight and calling for his immediate release .
This week , the kidnapping was condemned by the Council , which has called for Mr Johnston 's unconditional release .
Furthermore , yesterday , my colleague Louis Michel also raised the issue of the abduction of the BBC journalist during a meeting with the Palestinian Deputy Prime Minister , Mr al-Ahmad .
He asked him to use all his influence and contacts and to do everything in his power to locate Mr Johnston .
The Deputy Prime Minister assured Mr Michel that he would do all he could to secure a rapid release .
Commissioner Michel also repeated those requests in his meetings with other Palestinian interlocutors during his trip to the region .
Intensive coordinated diplomatic efforts are under way for an immediate release of Mr Johnston .
Our staff in Jerusalem are following developments closely and inform us that the Palestinian authorities , in cooperation with the security forces , are discussing all possible options with the UK Government , with a view to a successful outcome .
This remains a high priority for President Abbas , and we note the public statements that have also been made by Prime Minister Haniyeh , as well as by Mr Barghouti , on behalf of Palestinian prisoners , and by Palestinians around the world , condemning this kidnapping .
Clearly , the kidnapping of a prominent journalist like Alan Johnston , who has done so much to bring the situation of Palestinians to the world 's attention , is particularly distressing .
Those responsible for this abduction are doing a disservice to the cause of the Palestinian people and to the peace process in the Middle East .
( Applause )
Thank you for those statements .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place shortly .
3 .
Human rights situation in the Philippines
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions on the Philippines .
author . - ( DE ) Madam President , by means of this resolution today , we are giving expression to our significant anxiety regarding the increasing number of political assassinations which have been committed over recent years in the Philippines .
The human rights organisation , Karapatan , has recorded 839 cases of summary executions since 2001 .
All the victims were individuals who had given their support to matters of concern facing the Filipino people : farmers fighting for their land , workers and trade union leaders who are standing up for fair wages and better working conditions , and committed members of the clergy .
Arbitrary executions , omnipresent political repression , growing militarisation and the fact that perpetrators from paramilitary and military units are exempt from punishment and protected have , unfortunately , become a government trademark .
For a long time , foreign countries have looked away .
As far as the International Court of Justice in The Hague is concerned , ignorance and a misjudgment of the situation are just as responsible for the fact that foreign countries have turned a blind eye for a long time as the approval given by the USA which the government in Manila could , and can continue , to rely on .
We condemn the rough and systematic violations of citizens ' rights , the abductions , the disappearances and political assassinations .
We firmly call on the State authorities in the Philippines to carry out the necessary inquiries and to bring those responsible to justice .
We call on the State authorities to ratify the UN Convention on abduction by force and to enact the implementing provisions .
All these steps are required as the first step in de-escalation so that , in a few weeks , halfway democratic elections can be guaranteed .
author . - Madam President , the human rights situation in the Philippines is bad and it is getting worse .
Reports of extrajudicial killings , illegal detentions , torture , threats and harassment of politicians , trade unionists , students , religious and human rights workers are received with increasing frequency by international human rights organisations .
The Government of the Philippines appears unable , and at many times unwilling , to proceed with the necessary determination , both in investigating these human rights violations and in prosecuting the perpetrators vigorously and effectively .
In this motion for a resolution we wish to express our grave concern to the Philippines Government at the sorry and worrisome state of affairs in their country .
At the same time , we want to send a strong signal that the EU will not stand idle and watch the human rights situation continuing to deteriorate in the Philippines .
We will take the necessary measures if matters do not follow a remedial course as soon as possible .
author . - ( DE ) Madam President , in his report dated 22 March to the UN Human Rights Council , the UN 's special rapporteur , Mr Philip Alston , explained in unequivocal terms what these summary executions in the Philippines are all about .
As has been formulated in the joint resolution , victims of these summary executions include members of opposition parties , the clergy , trade union leaders , farmers , journalists , lawyers , human rights activists and so on , as well as witnesses of other summary murders who were accused by government representatives of being a front for illegally armed groups .
The Arroyo Government bears a high degree of responsibility for over 800 political assassinations since he came to power in 2001 .
Within the framework of so-called counterinsurgency , the Filipino army and police also resort to ways of committing political assassinations .
In a chapter of the report entitled Orders of Battle , in the light of documents held by the Armed Forces of the Philippines , it is clearly shown that summary executions are an army and police strategy .
This report , on which basis the Armed Forces of the Philippines act , and which is also frequently implemented by the Filipino National Police , makes provision for a military fight against political opponents .
Now , the Conservative group obviously wishes to strike any reference ' to the role played by the armed forces in these murders ' from the joint resolution .
This is nothing short of scandalous .
This would not only amount to a slap in the face for the United Nations and its special rapporteur , but also a slap in the face for the victims and their friends and family .
In the UN special rapporteur 's report , the following must also be emphasised : ' Newspapers carry almost daily reports of senior military officials urging that such groups be neutralised and calling upon the populace to recognise that to support their candidates in the upcoming elections would be to support the enemy . '
That leaves nothing to be desired in terms of clarity and I ask that the passage mentioned not be deleted from the resolution so that this House sends out a clear signal .

author . - ( ES ) Madam President , on the eve of important elections - the local and legislative elections in the Philippines - it is appropriate and timely that we should be discussing some of that country 's main problems , in particular the worrying escalation of extrajudicial crimes and assassinations - now more than 800 since President Arroyo took power in the archipelago in 2001 - the huge majority of which have so far gone unpunished .
The current situation shows a clear pattern of political assassinations in the Philippines , and we must therefore call upon the government in Manila to take the appropriate measures with a view to putting an end to the threats and harassment against members of the opposition , journalists , farm workers calling for their rights to be respected within the context of the agrarian reform under way , human rights activists and even witnesses in trials of their victimisers .
Various human rights organisations - such as Food First Information and Action Network ( FIAN ) - have for a long time been warning , for example , of the non-implementation of national agrarian reform programmes , which means that many landowners are refusing to hand land over to the farmers .
The climate of violence linked to this situation has now led to the assassination of at least 38 campesino leaders .
We should welcome the fact that the President has committed herself to the principle of ' zero tolerance ' in the face of human rights violations , but their scale demands much more ambitious actions , particularly in view of the fact that various national and international reports directly implicate parts of the army and the police in those violations .
Notable amongst these reports are the statements by the UN Human Rights Council 's Special Rapporteur on Extrajudicial , Summary or Arbitrary Executions , Philip Alston , and by the Melo Commission .
The situation is particularly alarming in the Bontoc peninsula , where hundreds of farmers are facing many cases of harassment and physical violence perpetrated by private armed groups .
Finally , I believe that it is important to take note of the work carried out by the negotiation panel of the peace process as well as the government 's announcement that complete self-determination for the people of Mindanao would be guaranteed .
Furthermore , I must once again express the reservations of many of us about the inclusion of certain groups - such as the Ejercito del Nuevo Pueblo - on the European Union 's list of terrorist groups , since that does not contribute to future peace negotiations but rather hinders them .
As requested by various international organisations and institutions defending and promoting human rights , we hope that this urgent resolution will help to persuade the Philippines Government to take a much firmer position in the fight against political murders and to guarantee the safety of the people under threat , in particular farmers and political and human rights activists .
author . - ( DE ) Madam President , in two weeks , elections will be held in the Philippines .
The risk is rising that internal political conflicts will escalate .
Since 2006 , as has been mentioned by my fellow Members , journalists , human rights activists , lawyers , farmers and priests have been murdered .
What is unclear is who the perpetrators are .
It is clear , however , that the murders always follow the same pattern .
The authorities are incapable of conducting investigations with sufficient thoroughness .
The judicial system is overloaded , under funded and inefficient .
The number of convictions is so low that one can almost already talk about a climate of impunity .
President Arroyo and his government are aware of the seriousness of the situation .
A special police task force and the independent Melo Commission were set up . Their recommendations resulted in the State President ordering the strengthening of the investigation and prosecution processes , the establishment of special courts and , finally , the creation of witness protection programmes as well .
In February , the UN 's special rapporteur , Mr Philip Alston , was able to question those responsible and affected extensively .
I side with his demand that accusations regarding the involvement of elements of the military or individuals in the army should be examined .
The European Union should offer both technical support and support in terms of personnel to enable these murders to be cleared up and the justice system to be improved in a sustainable manner .
author . - ( PL ) Madam President , the situation in the Philippines is a cause for great concern .
In two weeks , elections will be held there . This will , in part , involve the election of new senators .
Unfortunately , the situation in the Philippines is once again such that , while in other countries elections celebrate democracy to some extent and are refreshing even if they create tensions , the Philippine press are only writing about how many people will die and how violent the forthcoming elections will be .
This has been happening for over half a year , and is something that I have been following closely .
It is a bad omen for that country .
I visited the Philippines this year and tried to become acquainted with the situation .
I would like to say that in the Philippines the voice of the European Union is listened to very carefully and it is a good thing that our Parliament is very critical of any violence which may accompany the political process .
We should clearly ask the government of the Philippines to intensify efforts to ensure that political killings cease to be a constant part of the election campaign in that country .
Unfortunately , it is a very extreme example of the political landscape in that beautiful country , which deserves to live in democracy , as we do .
I am pleased that there are so many Members in the European Parliament who share this view and support our joint declaration .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , Gloria Arroyo 's succession to the Philippines Presidency after former President Estrada 's impeachment trial on corruption charges , and her eventual election in May 2004 , have brought some improvements to the country , particularly in terms of security .
The Government of the Philippines has degraded the military effectiveness of Islamist terrorists in the south-east , and negotiated a peace accord with one group and an ongoing ceasefire with another .
However , for some time , sadly there has been a series of murky extrajudicial killings , allegedly carried out by the security forces .
The government rightly recognised this as a very serious matter and ordered appropriate investigations .
This resulted in a series of recommendations this February from Justice Melo 's independent commission , set up specifically to address this issue , followed by a six-point government-endorsed plan to stop further human rights abuses and end the existing climate of impunity .
I warmly welcome this approach , and in particular the setting-up of a dedicated police task force , Usig , to bring those in authority who have ordered human rights violations to eventual justice .
Madam President , the Philippines have ratified the key , international human rights covenants and conventions .
The government of the Philippines respects its citizens ' human rights in principle .
A further positive note is the abolition of the death penalty in June 2006 .
The EU has worked towards this time and again .
Nevertheless , there is cause for alarm .
In 2006 , the killings and abductions of journalists , left-wing political activists , civil rights activists and Church representatives increased significantly throughout the entire country .
The opposition has provided reports of executions without court proceedings and holds the government and its security apparatus responsible .
At the very least , the government is accused of failing to resolve crimes with the necessary vigour .
For its part , the government rejects these accusations and suspects , at least in part , purges within the militant left-wing camp .
The most prominent recent victim was Bishop Alberto Ramento , who was extremely critical of the government .
His murder was already described as having been cleared up the very day it had been committed .
It was alleged to have been a robbery with murder committed by a youth .
Grave doubts were expressed by Mr Ramento 's cohorts and criticism made of the inadequate and unprofessional preservation of evidence .
Shortly before starting out on his European trip in the summer of 2006 , President Arroyo appointed a Commission chaired by the former Supreme Court judge , José Melo , to investigate the murders of politically active government critics .
The Melo Commission report was published in February 2007 in the face of massive public pressure .
This report confirmed the accusation surrounding a lack of readiness to produce clarifying evidence and apportioned primary responsibility to the armed forces .
An investigation by UN special rapporteur Alston has reached the same conclusion .
The EU has repeatedly addressed the Philippines on this problem in an unequivocal manner through its embassies in the country and political meetings within the framework of the human rights dialogue .
On the strength of this , and under public pressure from active Filipino civil society , the government gave a public presentation of the measures taken hitherto , acknowledged its shortcomings and asked the EU for support in establishing special courts and special public prosecutors ' offices , in consolidating witness protection , strengthening the technical and forensic capabilities of the security forces and in consolidating consciousness on the part of the security forces in observing human rights .
At the invitation of the Filipino Government , an EU mission is currently in the country examining the conditions for this request .
Furthermore , the national Human Rights Commission and civil society should be strengthened with a view to observing the situation .
In addition to the killings and abductions of critics of the regime and government , serious accusations are being levelled in the Philippines concerning torture , the disappearance of individuals , unlawful detention , human trafficking and the abuse of women and children .
Above all in the military conflict with various Communist and separatist rebel groups , and in the fight against terrorism , human rights violations are regularly committed by the police and the military and acts of violence also committed by members of extremist groups .
Madam President , the European Commission follows developments in the Philippines very closely .
In recent high-level contact