Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session adjourned on Thursday 25 October 2007 .
Statements by the President
Ladies and gentlemen , it was with deep sadness that we heard of the tragic event in Finland , in which eight people - pupils and teachers - were killed .
On behalf of the House , I should like to express our deepest sympathy to their families and the Finnish nation .
The groups have requested me to make a statement regarding the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use , Stockpiling , Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on their Destruction ( Ottawa Convention ) .
The 10th anniversary of the signing of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use , Stockpiling , Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on their Destruction is coming up in just a few weeks .
On 3 and 4 December 1997 , 122 states signed this historic treaty in Ottawa .
Anti-personnel mines make no distinction between civilian and military victims .
They are directed against people , with the aim of killing or maiming them .
Effecting their prohibition by means of the Ottawa Convention is a victory for humanity .
The Convention is also a success for internationally linked civil society .
In a process that had never been seen before , a coalition of non-governmental organisations , together with committed governments and parliaments outside the usual diplomatic forums , managed to get an international treaty signed .
The International Campaign to Ban Landmines was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1997 to acknowledge this achievement .
The European Parliament supported the campaign to outlaw landmines from the very beginning .
After the signing of the Convention in Ottawa , the European Parliament campaigned using resolutions , hearings and opinions to ensure that it would be implemented effectively .
Today it is clear that the international campaign has been extremely successful .
More than three quarters of all states have ratified the Ottawa Convention .
The use of anti-personnel mines has decreased drastically , as has the number of countries that produce landmines .
Despite these successes , there are more than 69 countries that have not yet abolished landmines .
It has become apparent that this goal cannot be reached everywhere unless additional financial assistance is provided .
Europe has made an important contribution to implementation of the Ottawa Convention over recent years .
From 1997 to 2004 , the European Union invested more than a billion euros in the battle against landmines .
The European Commission 's anti-mines strategy is numbered among the most successful elements in the development of European external relations .
This is not only an expression of our humanitarian obligations , but also a worthwhile investment in sustainable development and human safety .
The Council of the European Union is about to adopt a new joint action on landmines within the framework of the Common Foreign and Security Policy .
We welcome the intention of working towards universal ratification of the Ottawa Convention and an effective Review Conference in 2009 .
We look forward to close cooperation with the Council and the Commission in implementing this joint action .
I hope that we shall soon have an opportunity to discuss with the Council and the Commission their respective initiatives on the topic of landmines and how they are coordinating with each other .
The final goal that we all have in common is a world without landmines ; to achieve this , the European Union must have a coherent common policy .
( Applause )
Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Membership of Parliament : see Minutes
Membership of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Calendar of part-sessions : see Minutes
Signature of acts adopted under codecision : see Minutes
Corrigendum to a text adopted ( Rule 204a ) : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Oral questions and written declarations ( tabling ) : see Minutes
Lapsed written declarations : see Minutes
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Action taken on Parliament 's resolutions : see Minutes
Petitions : see Minutes
Order of business
The final draft of the agenda for this part-session , as laid down by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday 8 November pursuant to Rules 130 and 131 of the Rules of Procedure , has been distributed to you .
The following amendments have been requested to this draft agenda :
Tuesday :
The Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe has requested that a statement by the Council and the Commission on the shipping accidents in the Black Sea be placed on the agenda for Tuesday afternoon , after Mr Leinen 's report , with a corresponding extension of the afternoon sitting until 6.30 p.m.

This would mean that questions to the Commission would not commence until 6.30 p.m. and would thus be half an hour shorter .
Who would like to justify the motion ?
If there is nobody to speak for or against this motion , that is the end of the matter .
( The motion lapsed )
Wednesday :
The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance requests that a statement by the Council and the Commission on the situation in Georgia be included and dealt with in a joint debate with the report by Mr Obiols i Germà and Mr Tannock , and that the afternoon sitting therefore be extended to 6.30 p.m. and questions to the Council shortened by half an hour .
They also request that the debate on Georgia be concluded with the tabling of motions for resolutions and that voting on the matter be carried out during the November part-session in Brussels .
Who would like to justify the motion ?

( DE ) Mr President , there is not much for me to justify : it is obvious to all what is happening in Georgia , and it is clear that we should include Georgia when we are discussing neighbourhood policy .
This should be laid down , so that the Council knows what is what .
Then we should quietly proceed with preparing a resolution , for I believe it is important that the European Parliament formulate a clear resolution on the events in Georgia .
This should then be adopted in Brussels .
That is the correct formal procedure and I hope that all Members will agree to it , so that we can proceed in this way .
That was the justification .
Who is speaking in favour of the motion ?
( DE ) Mr President , we wish to support this for a very important reason .
The Rose Revolution in Georgia brought many positive elements with it , especially after the Shevardnadze regime .
Now there is a great danger that the undoubted successes will be destroyed if the opposition 's criticisms are not addressed .
An initiative by the European Parliament could help President Saakashvili to get back on the right track ; that is , to begin dialogue with the opposition .
I should also like to ask you , Mr President , to maintain contact with the Speaker of Parliament , who is also very active there , and to try to convince her , too , to follow the path of dialogue .
That is the point of this debate and also of the resolution , and I therefore support it wholeheartedly .
( Parliament adopted the motion )
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I must apologise .
I asked to speak earlier and , despite the fact that I stood up and signalled several times , I was not given the opportunity to speak .
I would just like to understand something .
I intended , on behalf of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , to request a statement from the Council and Commission on the Black Sea disaster .
Without hearing who was in favour and who was against , I am not sure what was decided .
As I said , this was my intention , and I signalled this request .
It was my intention to direct this request to the President : that there should be a statement by the Council and the Commission on the Black Sea disaster .
I am simply asking for clarification on what Parliament has decided to do .
Mr Andria , please bear with me .
I called very clearly for Members who wanted to justify the motion . There was no response .
Nor were those responsible for managing the procedure in the room at that point .
I looked around very carefully , and there was no contribution to be heard at all , either to justify or to support the motion , and so the House agreed that it was not necessary for anyone to speak against it if it was not justified .
Those of us up here agreed , as did the plenary , that this motion thus lapsed and is no longer on the agenda .
Therefore I ask that we now proceed as has just been decided .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , please allow me to explain .
I stood up and signalled , even verbally , but the President indicated that I should stop .
I stood up several times .
I would ask you to include this initiative on the agenda and to ensure that the Council and Commission issue a statement .
In any case , at the start of the session , the President said that there was a request from the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe .
I do not see why we cannot have a debate simply because a request was accidentally missed .
I asked to speak , no one noticed , I even stood up .
Nobody here in plenary noticed , and that is why I told you that .
However , if you feel it is necessary , we shall be happy to vote on it .
The Chair of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe wishes to speak .
One-minute speeches on matters of political importance
( HU ) Last week , for the third time , the Hungarian Academy of Sciences organised the World Science Forum in cooperation with the EU , UNESCO and the International Council for Science .
Scientists and decision-makers from more than 60 countries participated in the World Science Forum , including four Heads of State , the Director-General of UNESCO and the Commission 's Environment [ ... ] ( interjection : I am sorry , Mr President , but I cannot carry on like this ! ) .
As László Sólyom , President of the Republic of Hungary , recommended the creation of a world environment organisation in his address , the leaders of the United Nations Environment Programme announced the formation of a new international organisation .
It was recommended at the World Forum that the parliaments of as many countries as possible should establish the institution of a commissioner responsible for future generations .
The main message of the World Forum is that science and politics must act together to halt climate change and the destruction of the environment .
According to the participants , a ' scientific Davos ' has been created in Budapest , in other words , Budapest is now for science what Davos is for economic issues .
The next event in the series will be in 2009 , when it is intended to host the world 's science , education and finance ministers in Budapest , as the main event of the Year of Creativity .
I would like to ask the Commission and you to support the event and the concept behind it , that is to say , we must defend ourselves and future generations as well as the environment and sustainability .
Thank you for the floor , Mr President .
Mr President , one of the greatest problems in relation to EU policy is implementation .
This is particularly true in relation to directives relating to Lisbon and climate change .
On 4 January 2006 the energy performance of the Buildings Directive should have been implemented in all Member States .
This would have led to massive energy savings .
The problem is that only eight countries communicated full transposition on time .
That means that all of the following countries have failed to implement the laws that they themselves signed up to : France , Italy , Belgium , Luxembourg , the UK , Spain , Austria , Finland , Sweden , Estonia , Latvia , Poland , the Czech Republic , Slovenia , Hungary , Romania , Greece , Cyprus and Malta .
The EU will lose credibility and its attempts to reduce carbon emissions will not be taken seriously unless its laws are respected on time .
I urge you to write to the Member States I have just mentioned , to speed up implementation of this important directive .
( RO ) The safety of Italian citizens on the territory of Italy comes within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Italian Government .
The Government of Romania cannot intervene in any way .
The thing that the Government of Romania can do , and it has done it , is to cooperate and provide all necessary information in order to prevent possible crimes committed by Romanian citizens .
Up to now , the Italian Government has had no strategy to improve the situation of Roma on its territory .
The best proof is the fact that the Italian Government has made no request to receive European funds for the integration of Roma , although it was obvious that the Roma had started to represent a problem that required an approach for several years .
The European Union Member States have the right to expel citizens who commit crimes , but no country of the European Union can have the right to expel European citizens who might be criminals , without having committed a blamable act .
Directive 38 of 2004 clearly explains these situations and the Italian Government Decree exceeds the spirit of the European Directive .
The European Parliament and the European officials should take a stand regarding Decree 181 of 1 November 2007 and ask the Italian Parliament for the final form of the law to comply with the letter and spirit of the European Directive .

- ( PL ) Mr President , recently Valéry Giscard d 'Estaing , former President of France and the main architect of the Constitutional Treaty that was rejected in the French and Dutch referendums , stated that the EU Reform Treaty adopted in Lisbon was no more than a revised version of the Constitutional Treaty , from which references to the Constitution had deliberately been removed .
Let me quote his words : ' above all to head off any threat of referenda by avoiding any form of constitutional vocabulary ' - end of quote .
That is how EU citizens learned that a referendum on the Reform Treaty is a threat to Europe , and the authors of this Treaty concede that manipulations are deliberately being practised to deceive the peoples of Europe .
This outrageous utterance shows that referendums on the Treaty are needed , but before they are held an honest debate is required , not least in the forum of the European Parliament .
Our electorate must be made aware of what this document really is .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , during a recent meeting with Czech citizens I was informed that there are still people there who are experiencing difficulties with the still pending harmonisation of EU legislation on concessions for disabled people travelling outside their home country .
I have already spoken this year in Parliament about the fact that harmonisation of EU legislation , which would enable people with different degrees of mental and physical disability to obtain a single document entitling them to concessions throughout the EU , would allow them to exercise their right to free movement , and as such it would enable them to participate more fully in our society .
Another issue voiced by the citizens that merits our attention concerns the deadline for calls for submissions of projects for financing under the European Social Fund .
I appreciate that the funds are directed to the citizens in need .
However , drawing up and submitting projects in the period between the launch of the call and the deadline for submission is , according to disability organisations , at times a superhuman achievement even for a completely healthy person .
I know that the Reform Treaty gives greater consideration to people with disabilities but it will not resolve everything .
We must therefore look at whether we need to pay more attention to people with disabilities .
Where are the boundaries between the able-bodied and the disabled ?
As far as assistance goes , who is the giver and who is on the receiving end ?
Any one of us might one day find ourselves on the other side of this equation .
- ( PL ) Mr President , the Polish press has reported that the names of two Polish women have been left off the memorial in Madrid commemorating the victims of the terrorist attack on 11 March 2004 .
The missing names are those of Danuta Teresa Szpila and Alina Maria Bryk .
Their families are offended .
The memorial was unveiled eight months ago .
The names of immigrants from Morocco and Romania have also been omitted .
I am therefore asking my fellow Members from Spain : has this error been put right yet ?
Why were these names not included on the memorial ?
I would also ask , Mr President , that you show an interest and intervene in this matter .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , the final decision on the entry of nine EU Member States into the Schengen area was welcomed with enthusiasm by the citizens of the Czech Republic .
It will imply formal changes to the security system and protection of national borders and facilitate the free movement of goods and people , but it will also have some surprising complications .
At the recent meeting of local authorities from South Bohemia , Bavaria and Upper Austria , some experts mentioned that the new obstacle along the former national borders could be the so-called ' non-interference zone ' of the Šumava National Park .
Some tourist routes from Bavaria border the non-interference zone and the strict environmental laws do not allow these routes to cross Czech territory .
Not so long ago there was an Iron Curtain along the Czech-Austrian and Czech-German borders , which cut off the former East Germany and Czechoslovakia , ruled by a totalitarian communist regime , from the democratic world .
We might live to experience a situation whereby the people in these regions are divided not by an iron but by a green curtain .

( DE ) Mr President , I beg your pardon , but in the second-to-last intervention the German translation by our otherwise extremely capable interpreter stated that Mr Söder was Bulgaria 's Minister for Europe .
I think it is important to point out , however , that he is in fact Bavaria 's Minister for Europe , and this shows how important it is that we receive written minutes again , and not only audiovisual recordings .
We shall note that .
Mr Dîncu now has the floor .
Is he absent ?
Mr President , this is a ' catch-the-eye ' debate .
How did that Member manage to catch your eye without being here ?
I understand that you have an interest in promoting ' catch-the-eye ' , so you have succeeded !
Mr President , I would like to draw your attention to the increasing activity of far-right extremist forces , which sometimes we tend to forget and even to forgive .
In less than a month we have faced a number of worrying events .
In October a group of young Italians outraged the memory of the Holocaust , shouting in favour of Hitler in the Dachau concentration camp .
Spain has witnessed racist attacks against immigrants in Barcelona and Madrid .
The paramilitary Hungarian Guard has shown its violent face in Budapest .
In recent days we have seen far-right ideas which are contrary to the very basic values of our European project infecting political life in Belgium and Italy and influencing political decisions and actions .
Special attention should be given to last week 's far-right rally in Prague , which attempted to celebrate the 1938 anti-Jewish purge known as the Kristallnacht on 9 November .
All these events are becoming part of our daily life .
It is time to wake up .
We , the European parliamentarians , should lead the battle for the principles which brought us into this House : peace , democracy , tolerance , justice and solidarity .
Let me underline that the existence of a far-right political group in this Parliament is encouraging extremists across Europe .
My only hope is that this abuse of democracy will soon be brought to an end .
Mr President , it is almost certain that the foot-and-mouth disease virus that caused enormous damage to the British economy last summer escaped from the Pirbright Laboratory in Surrey .
This establishment is an EU reference laboratory which is supposed to protect our animals from contagious diseases and not to cause epidemics through incompetence .
In the last two weeks the same laboratory has been the protagonist in what appears to be another fiasco .
It has been issuing scores of confusing and sometimes contradictory results , with respect to foot-and-mouth disease , on animal samples sent from Cyprus .
This apparent irresponsible behaviour has had severe effects on hundreds of farmers on the island .
The Cyprus authorities blame all the confusion on the European Commission , and the citizens are understandably rather upset .
Before Pirbright causes another dangerous blunder , could you please ask the Commission to take this laboratory off the list of animal testing reference laboratories and replace it with a more trustworthy facility , for agriculture 's sake ?
- ( PL ) Mr President , I would like to raise an issue that was bothering us all not so long ago ; namely the change from summer to winter time ( and back again in March ) .
It is said that this brings considerable savings in electricity consumption .
It seems to me that this is not so , as the amount of daylight does not change in any way .
Nor does electricity consumption for street lighting , as this is regulated automatically , depending on the amount of natural light available .
Electricity consumption at industrial plants does not change .
The only minor savings are in household electricity consumption , but new timetables are printed , trains are stopped , there is disruption for the elderly and also for children , and there is disruption to information systems .
I would be glad , Mr President , if Parliament were to hear authoritative information from the Commission concerning the gains and losses brought about by the time change .
Mr President , I would like to bring to the attention of the House a proposal by FIFA , the governing body of football , allowing players born in Northern Ireland to represent the Republic of Ireland .
The Northern Ireland football team has a very proud history going back many decades and has produced many great football teams over the years , defeating many of the large nations in Europe .
Over those years , Northern Ireland has had many difficulties , as it has over the past 30 years , but during all that time , soccer was able to bring the people together .
So I say clearly to FIFA : you are wrong to go down this road , and it would certainly not help Northern Ireland 's chances of developing totally in the future , especially at a time when we believed we were returning to normality .

Mr President , I would like to raise the issue of Cadbury Schweppes , which has just announced in my own constituency that it is going to close its factory in Keynsham with the loss of 500 jobs and move production to Poland .
This has been opposed by the British and Polish trade unions as they believe that this is an attempt by Cadbury Schweppes to race to the bottom , with people prepared to take the lowest wages being taken on board .
Chocolate has been produced in Keynsham for 250 years , and for nearly 100 years by Cadbury Schweppes .
It is going to create 500 job losses there and the total , with the knock-on effects for subcontractors , will be something like 1 500 .
It is hoping to get European money to help pay for moving this production .
I am fully in favour of European job-creation projects , and I hope that the Commission will continue them - whether in the United Kingdom , Poland or elsewhere - but money from the European Union is for job creation and not job relocation .
I hope the point will be made very clearly to the Commission that we do not expect it to pay for these job losses .
- ( PL ) Mr President , EU integration is passing through a series of phases .
As a result of implementation of the Schengen Agreement , another group of states will enter the area which border restrictions and controls have been lifted .
We welcome this , as a considerable proportion of Poland 's eastern border is also an EU border .
The entry into force of the Schengen provisions has obliged on Poland to carry out extra controls on this border .
I am thinking particularly of the border with Ukraine , a state that is becoming an important EU partner since its democratic and economic transition .
Poland and Ukraine are linked by centuries of history as neighbours .
Today we need especially close contacts and cooperation between our citizens and our peoples .
We must therefore create good conditions and make it convenient for people crossing the Ukrainian-Polish , border - that is , the Ukrainian-EU border - while keeping unnecessary administrative requirements and costs to a minimum .
This should not be a border of division , but one of neighbourly cooperation - a border that in future will persist only formally , on paper , when Ukraine becomes integrated into the EU - and let us hope that it will .
( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to speak about the situation that has developed in connection with that of the Romanian Roma in Italy .
I feel it is regrettable that such a tragedy had to occur in order for the Italian decision , which everyone has interpreted differently , to shed light on the real problem , which I have represented at every forum for as long as I can remember .
In this very Chamber I always mentioned the lack of a Roma integration policy during the accession discussions for Romania and Bulgaria .
If minority groups leave their homeland in the hope of a better life , that is also a problem .
But it is also an enormous problem that there are discriminatory situations within the borders of the European Union and certain minority groups are forced to leave the land of their birth .
The time has come to create the comprehensive strategy that we voted for in our decision of April 2005 - this Parliament voted for it - in which we asked the Commission to urge the Member States to create the strategy .
Romania , Bulgaria , Hungary and Slovakia have already created the strategy and are participating in the Decade of Roma Inclusion programme .
If the 2005 guidelines and Parliamentary decision were not satisfactory for the Commission or for the other Member States , the matter must be taken up again .
We not only need to create a comprehensive Roma strategy but , with regard to urging the creation of the strategy and to its seriousness , we also need to create a so-called EU fund as soon as possible in the interests of fully integrating the Roma , especially in order to stop educational segregation .
- ( PL ) Mr President , I was really supposed to be speaking today about the situation in Burma , but information I have received obliges me to draw your attention once again to Russia .
While preparations for the European Union summit were taking place in Mafra , in the Russian city of Kazan , 720 kilometres from Moscow , another round in the long-running battle between the authorities and the media was being played out .
This time the part of victim was played by Natalia Petrova , a maker of documentary films about , among other subjects , Chechnya .
The role of the torturers was played by plain-clothes officers from the local police .
They arrested Ms Petrova at her home in front of her parents and two small children .
During her arrest she lost consciousness , was struck several times and was burned with cigarettes .
She came round at police headquarters , from where she was released after a few hours .
One of the journalist 's daughters also suffered injuries , as did her mother .
Are these the standards of police behaviour in a democratic state that is a member of the Council of Europe ?
Are these events to be robustly exposed in this forum in order to make Europe aware of what is really happening in Russia ?
( PT ) I should like to use the opening of the plenary session of the European Parliament to express our solidarity with the Gestnave and Erecta workers who are doggedly and courageously continuing to fight for integration into Lisnave .
That integration , if they achieve it , is merely the implementation of what is stipulated in the agreement signed 10 years ago between the Portuguese State and the Mello Group within the framework of the restructuring of the Setúbal peninsula shipbuilding industry , but also of what is enshrined in the Portuguese Labour Code .
Finally , I should like to express our full support for the innumerable initiatives which the Gestnave , Erecta and Lisnave workers have taken over the years to enforce the law and bring justice for the workers and the future of the shipbuilding and repair industry in Portugal .
Mr President , a recent poll in Ireland showed support for the Reform Treaty to be at alarmingly low levels of just under 25 % saying yes and over 62 % undecided .
Yet this week the Commission 's draft legislative work programme for 2008 states that ' work will also be continued in order to allow companies to choose an EU-wide tax base ' .
Dr Sean Barrett , a senior lecturer in economics at Trinity College Dublin , has today described the reduction of the corporation tax rate in Ireland from 50 % in the 1980s to 12 ½ % a decade later as ' the most important policy measure that achieved the transformation of Ireland ' .
The concept of an EU-wide tax base with the dangerous option to collect corporation tax on sales based on the rate in each country undermines trust , contributes to rising Euro-scepticism in Ireland and is extremely misplaced in the context of the ratification of the Reform Treaty .
I therefore ask that this matter be raised urgently with the Commission .
Our focus should be on the important elements of the proposed Treaty and the real obstacles in the internal market , not jeopardising emerging markets , inward investment and the future ratification of the Treaty by working on an unwise , distrusted and thus unacceptable common tax-base proposal .
Commissioner Figeľ is here , so I am sure that he has taken careful note of that .
( SK ) This coming 17 November is for the Czech and Slovak people as symbolically important as the fall of the Berlin Wall was for the Germans .
Eighteen years ago a barbarian totalitarian regime came to an end in these countries .
Subsequently , the Czech and Slovak people once more became part of Europe .
Because of this event , 17 November is an anniversary that is alive , a symbol of something important to be remembered .
The united Europe is founded on the defeat not just of Nazism but also of Communism .
Just as not dealing with the Nazi crimes and criminals has been a threat to Europe , the same applies to the crimes of the Communist regime .
I would like to recall here the legacy of Pope John Paul II , whose famous words ' do not be afraid ' were an important display of solidarity for Slovak dissent .
I would also like to mention President Reagan , whose words about the ' Evil Empire ' turned him into our President , even though we did not vote for him .
Communism was defeated by the courage of men and women ; injustice made way for justice .
Freedom is a great gift , and I am pleased to be able that today as a Member of the European Parliament .
( HU ) A decisive majority of the European Parliament has rightly been disgusted with events in Italy , but there is extraordinarily great hypocrisy in this , ladies and gentlemen .
As if we didn 't know that there are 3-4 million Roma living in difficult circumstances in Romania ; as if we didn 't know that there are 12 million Roma living in Europe .
This also demonstrates that the European Union does not have a minorities policy , not for indigenous minorities , not for the Roma , nor for migrant minorities .
I am pleased and proud that the European Socialists have condemned the principle of collective guilt in Italy , and I would also have been pleased if my own group had done the same with regard to the collective branding of the Hungarian minority living in Slovakia .
Mr President , I would very much like to ask that during this parliamentary session there should at last be a person responsible for minority matters in the European Parliament , the Subcommittee on Human Rights should finally be a proper committee , and there should finally be some monitoring , since our President is a truly ' minority-friendly ' President .
Thank you .
( DE ) Mr President , we saw only recently the fourth anniversary of the imprisonment of Mikhail Khodorkovsky and Platon Lebedev , who has heart problems and is suffering from hepatitis .
It is unacceptable that these two men remain in prison in the Siberian city of Chita , in violation of Russian law .
For spurious reasons , their applications for early release , which is possible under Russian law , were overruled , despite good behaviour .
This was clearly a step designed to keep opposition to a minimum before next year 's election .
When our group visited Moscow two weeks ago , I met with Mr Khodorkovsky 's lawyer , Mr Yuri Schmidt .
We also met with various other representatives of Memorial , with Garry Kasparov and Grigory Yavlinsky , all of whom confirmed that the Yukos problem is very much a political one .
I therefore call upon the EU to address human rights violations more intensively and clearly in its dialogue with Russia .
What matters here is not retribution , but humanity and justice .
- ( EL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to talk about the tragic political situation in Lebanon and the role that the EU is urgently called upon to play .
Today is all too typical of this crisis , because once again the election of the President of the Republic has been postponed .
Regional power squabbles affecting Lebanon have deepened the rift between political groups .
As a result , the people are being held hostage , there is a risk of civil war and the whole area is unstable .
The EU , which is in partnership with Lebanon , is following an action plan determined by its Neighbourhood Policy .
The EU and its Member States contribute 40 % of international development aid .
The Union has met its responsibilities in the strengthened peacekeeping force .
Yet all this is useless unless a national agreement is reached to avert the crisis .
The way ahead is difficult , if not impossible , owing to the failure of the presidential election .
The Union must play its part as an effective negotiator and initiate real dialogue .
We have no time to dither ; we cannot just wait and see .
Mr President , the European Court of Human Rights recently made a ruling with far-reaching implications .
The case in question was that of the Amalgamated Society of Locomotive Engineers and Firemen versus the UK .
It concerned Mr Jay Lee , who had been a member of ASLEF and the British National Party .
Mr Lee was expelled by ASLEF because of his BNP membership .
The Court upheld this action .
The BNP is a political party with its roots in neo-Nazism .
Nevertheless , under UK law , membership is perfectly legal .
The British Government has conceded that trade union law must now be amended so that unions can expel members whose political views they do not like .
The role of trade unions is to collectively represent the material interests of their members in the workplace , not to decide what political views are acceptable or unacceptable .
The Court 's decision is yet another European nail in the coffin of British liberties .
Mr President , we were shocked at last week 's violent clashes between protestors and police in Tbilisi , Georgia .
The fact that President Mikhail Saakashvili declared a state of emergency to overcome the riots and conducted a violent crackdown is highly alarming .
According to statements from the participants , the riots had nothing to do with external influences , but were the expression of severe displeasure with the Government .
President Saakashvili overreacted , since violence is not an appropriate solution when addressing the justified concerns of the opposition .
Furthermore , President Saakashvili declared that there would be presidential elections in Georgia in January 2008 .
We should not overlook the disturbances .
The EU has provided Georgia , as a European Neighbourhood Policy country of destination , with advice on carrying out its regime transition .
We should ask ourselves whether we have done our best to avoid such a crisis from occurring and , moreover , whether we can be sure that this will not reoccur in some other destination country .
Mr President , at the recent Mafra summit , the Russian side proposed founding an institute to monitor the human rights situation in the EU countries .
The Russian representatives commend this initiative as a political measure to counterbalance continued EU criticism of the worsening human rights situation in Russia .
The institute in question will be financed by Russia .
In my opinion , the EU leaders should in principle avoid such attempts to politicise human rights issues .
It is true that there exist adequate human rights dialogue mechanisms between the EU and Russia .
These mechanisms unfortunately have not been adequately used , due mainly to the lack of Russian response to the problems raised by the EU .
Following this idea , one could imagine that , next , President Ahmadinejad will insist on establishing on EU territory an Iranian-financed institute on human rights and Holocaust studies .
I am convinced that initiatives like this can only discredit the noble cause of defending human rights .
The role of sport in education ( debate )
The next item is the report by Pál Schmitt , on behalf of the Committee on Culture and Education , on the role of sport in education .
rapporteur . - ( HU ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , allow me first of all to express my thanks for the numerous remarks and recommended improvements that have been sent for my report .
My objective was to talk about strengthening the role of school PE and sport in education .
Nearly a quarter of the children living in the European Union are overweight , and 50 % of them only participate in sports activities during school PE classes , whilst the number of PE classes is continuously falling .
As a result of this dangerous process , diabetes , high blood pressure , diseases of the heart and nervous system , spinal and vascular ailments are spreading throughout Europe and will significantly increase the health care expenditure of individual Member States in the future .
We cannot allow ourselves to compensate for the inactive lifestyle and sedentary everyday life typical of European adolescents by neglecting such a simple yet effective tool as the PE class .
As a one-time Olympian , a practising sports director and naturally as an MEP , it is my obligation and my responsibility to find a way for the Union to do its share in the fight against obesity in pupils , in supporting a healthy , active lifestyle , in establishing the health of European adolescents and in the process of education through sport .
Allow me to congratulate the heads of the Member States on their wise decision not to forget sport at the latest Lisbon summit and to give the Union the right of initiative in sport after approving the Reform Treaty .
The Commission has prepared numerous programmes for promoting a healthy lifestyle , and in the field of healthy nutrition , but there is not enough coordination among these programmes .
Sports experts , PE teachers and trainers must be given a greater role and respect in their implementation .
It must be said that the White Paper on Sport published by the Commission in July , and the Action Plan relating to it , are a step in the right direction .
We are also counting on the cooperation of the Commission in promoting research that is important for sports experts , and in gathering statistical data to measure the sporting activities of pupils and their physical condition .
I feel it is important that , using lifelong learning and the framework of the Bologna process , we can promote mobility and continued training for trainers and PE teachers , we can mutually recognise the degrees that attest to their qualifications , and we can assist with more effective cooperation among organisations of sports experts .
In addition to physical exercise , PE in schools develops such important qualities as persistence , team spirit , willpower and fair play , which the young people entrusted to us will be able to benefit from throughout their lives .
School sports facilities and gymnasia in the Member States are often extraordinarily neglected , and they are poorly maintained and shabby .
Another great problem is the lack of qualified PE teachers , that is , the disorganised state of further professional training and the fact that the content of the PE curriculum is out of date .
Unfortunately , PE in schools has lost its importance , although it is the basis for both physical and mental development .
Delicate and rough movements , which can be well developed through sport and popular games or any activity involving movement , are also essential in the study of reading and writing .
It is no accident that dyslexic and dysgraphic children are also treated using movement therapy .
PE is the only subject in the curriculum that focuses not only on mental development but also on physical development , the development of an active culture and hygiene .
It is a joint task for PE teachers and parents to teach and encourage children to have a healthy lifestyle and to take regular exercise , and to draw their attention to the harmful physical and mental effects of prohibited performance-enhancing drugs , alcohol and other drugs .
In order to improve the state of health and physical condition of children of school age , we recommend that PE in schools be made compulsory in primary and secondary schools , and that there be an opportunity for children to exercise at least three times a week as part of the curriculum .
Sport has a prominent role in promoting social integration and reinforcing social cohesion , in so far as sport is an important tool for socialisation and intercultural dialogue .
The issue of gender equality has been given a big role in the report .
I also feel it is important that those who live with a disability should also participate in regular PE at school that corresponds to their needs and is increasingly integrated .
In my report , I also mention that PE and organised sports at school play a prominent role , not only physically but also mentally , in the healthy development of children and , at the same time , a level of socialisation .
I recommend in my report that the regions that have been left behind in this field should be able to compete for funding for sports investment from the Structural Funds .
Finally , I would like to thank the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , and the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs for their valuable contributions to the report .
Ladies and gentlemen , I respectfully ask you to support my report .
Thank you for your attention .
( DE ) Madam President , I asked for the floor before the report was announced .
The President in the chair before you called upon a large number of Members - as part of the catch-the-eye procedure - who were not even present in the House .
For that , he was reprimanded by the Rules of Procedure incarnate , Mr Corbett .
I tried to speak dozens of times , and also handed in my request , but was ignored .
I believe that what the President in the chair before you has just done is contrary to the rules of this House and unworthy of this Parliament .
Mr Martin , there were far too many one-minute speeches .
Normally it lasts half an hour .
It has overrun that by quite a lot , so I am sorry .

Member of the Commission . - Madam President , first of all my congratulations to Mr Schmitt and the committee on the own-initiative report .
This report is timely and very inspirational .
We used this report in drafting our White Paper as one of the contributions that I think important in a common strategy towards sport in Europe and I am happy that there is a lot of concrete convergence between the White Paper adopted in July and this report .
In general this report and our White Paper agree that the general orientation of physical education does not necessarily correspond to today 's societal needs .
The subject is increasingly marginalised within school curricula programmes , so that is why we need to improve .
I would like to mention some of the issues or areas in the report and in the White Paper .
Both documents recommend enhanced cooperation between the health , education and sport sectors to define and implement strategies to reduce health risks such as being overweight .
Regarding the time devoted to physical education , we will build this into a set of physical activity guidelines .
We should develop this with Member States by the end of next year , 2008 .
We are also considering introducing the award of a European label to schools which are actively involved in supporting and promoting physical activities in a school environment .
Concerning research , the White Paper proposes mobilising the seventh Research Framework Programme to support multidisciplinary research in this area , mainly on lifestyle aspects of health .
We also recommend considering the role of sport in the field of social inclusion , social integration and equal opportunities in the programming of Structural Funds .
Concerning investment , as far as top class sport is concerned , we have launched a study on the training of young top-level sportsmen and sportswomen in Europe .
This should enable us to identify the right instruments to develop sports training and education for young persons , and also ensure higher quality and quality more generally .
In the mean time , we are supporting sport and physical activity through the Lifelong Learning programme , the Youth in Action programme and the Europe for Citizens programme .
Let me underline at this moment that the general call for proposals for 2008 , 2009 and 2010 in the framework of the Lifelong Learning Programme has included physical education and sport among its priorities , and this will open new funding opportunities for this education area .
To conclude , we are looking forward , as Mr Schmitt mentioned , to the ratification and entry into force of the Reform Treaty because this will open up new possibilities .
Our experience with the Pierre de Coubertin Action Plan and your own report will help us to shape those possibilities better to support Member States ' efforts to promote the role of sport in education in the coming years .
I thank you again for your contribution .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , in sport - and we are talking about fairness here - no distinctions can be made between the sexes ; women must be treated equally .
This begins during the school years , during PE classes , and extends right through to high-performance training in top-class sport , for here far too little consideration is given to female traits and female biological requirements .
More attention needs to be directed to this .
In top-class sport , the same applies to the public and to attention from the media , which has an effect on funding .
Women are greatly disadvantaged in top-class sport , and it is high time that we made sure that fair play applies to everyone in this regard , too .
We also need to ensure that the integration of girls from different cultural groups into school sporting activities works better , and must try to involve everybody , despite religious and cultural differences .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , allow me to congratulate our fellow Member Mr Schmitt , who has brought his experience to bear in his report .
I stress that sport and children 's participation in sports activities are very necessary today in view of the changes that have taken place in our everyday lives .
Children these days spend much of their time in front of the television , video games and computers .
Their diet is anything but healthy .
Child obesity has become an increasingly serious problem inevitably entailing serious health hazards .
For children sport is not only a way of exercising and developing new group skills ; it is also recreational and teaches teamwork .
The physical exercise involved in doing sport has a beneficial effect on young people 's physical health .
Commissioner , children are not eating more , but they are less active and get less exercise .
A sedentary life and obesity often cause high blood pressure and diabetes , which affect a steadily increasing proportion of the EU 's population .
Member States today must promote physical exercise as a school subject in order to prepare children for a healthy lifestyle .
Member States and the competent authorities must ensure that greater emphasis is placed on the promotion of health in the curriculum , and that physical education is given equal status with other subjects on the timetable .
Member States must also lay down a minimum requirement for the number of physical education lessons in schools .
Lastly , the Member States must actively support all forms of physical education and promote dialogue between parents , PE teachers and sports associations outside school .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DA ) Madam President , I should like to thank Mr Schmitt for his good report and for his constructive collaboration during the preparation of this .
The role of sport generally and specifically within education is an incredibly important issue .
Commissioner Kyprianou said less than a month ago that he believed that the greatest threat to the health of EU citizens was obesity .
Unfortunately , I think that he is right , and therefore it is crucial that we focus on the problem and on what we can do to solve it .
We have an important obligation to our children , particularly those who do not form good eating and sports habits at home for social or family-related reasons .
Therefore , the focus on the role of sport in education is important .
School can and should play a major role in providing children with good habits , as children spend a large proportion of their day there .
As pointed out in the report , it is therefore not necessary to discuss whether sport is essential within education . However , it is important that we discuss how we can ensure that there is more sport in school .
It is also important that children develop good exercise habits as early on as possible .
This is obvious for health reasons but , at the same time , as Mr Schmitt has also said , we know that exercise and sport can develop social relationships among children and young people and create social integration irrespective of ethnicity and social class .
This is why sport is such an important tool .
What can we do , therefore ?
We must ensure that children have the opportunity to do more exercise than is the case today .
Sport should not just be something for affluent children .
Sport should be a natural part of every child 's life .
At this juncture , it is also necessary to ensure that sport does not only mean competitive sport , but something that everyone can participate in , and that is why it is important that sport be integrated within education .
There is therefore a general need for individual Member States to prioritise sport as a part of education much more than is the case today , and as part of this to ensure that the correct facilities are available and also qualified teachers , for example .
It is therefore clearly a key responsibility for the Member States , but with this report we want to help focus on the problem and the possible solutions , and naturally also highlight what the EU can do in connection with this .
In addition , there are three things that are required . We need teachers to have a greater insight into the reasons for the barriers to children participating in sport .
A better relationship between sport at school and sport in leisure time also needs to be created .
In addition , as has been mentioned previously , we need to prioritise resources , time and sports facilities .
I am very pleased with the report ; it is a good report and sets out the conditions that are required in order for sport to help improve the health of children .
Therefore , the Socialist Group in the European Parliament wholeheartedly supports the report , but we feel that it is important that it be only the first step towards a major initiative to deal with the problem of obesity .
We believe that it is necessary for us to both use more resources and take more time in this area .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FI ) Madam President , first of all I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Schmitt , for this report .
It has to be said that this is an excellent and timely topic .
It raises the issue of physical education and the role of sport in schools .
If we look back these 20 to 30 years , as Europeans we know that this is one area of school education that we have neglected .
This is conspicuous everywhere in Europe in the shape of a decline in general fitness .
It is also conspicuous as a range of side-effects .
Fort example , there has been a noticeable increase in obesity .
Diabetes has also become a commoner phenomenon , as has cardiovascular disease .
Mental health problems have also become commoner .
We might also suggest , as has already been said here , and as said earlier on by Mr Mavrommatis , who is from the land we know as Ancient Greece , that in olden times it was said that a healthy soul in a healthy body is the very best situation , and this is what we should be aiming for once again in Europe .
We should also understand that exercise is vitally important for a person 's general wellbeing .
We live in what we call the information society in Europe , but I hope the information society might become something more .
It could be an education society , which also extends to body education and exercise .
In Finland our Olympic winner Tapio Korjus is now heading a body education project , which is an attempt to promote the view that healthy physical education has an effect on a person 's general wellbeing .
We are inclined to think that good results are expected to appear on the horizon .
The core issue , however , is teacher training and schools , with physical exercise actually becoming a priority in teacher training .
This should also be required of teachers because there are special problems with many children in remote areas .
I really hope that improvements will be made to physical education , that schools and fitness organisations will find one another more easily , and that all children and young people can experience the delights of physical education in their own lives and build their future upon it .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , physical activity is indisputably an important factor in the life of every person .
It could be said to improve the state of our health and of our souls .
According to numerous studies and statistics , the state of health of EU citizens is deteriorating year on year as a result of a lifestyle that is getting faster and faster and is causing us to devote less and less time to sporting pursuits and recreation .
If we add poor diet to this , for example the inclusion of fast foods in the daily menu , we could say that a healthy lifestyle has been abandoned .
What is worse , we are responsible for the health of children and young people who are suffering increasingly from obesity and coronary diseases .
The lifestyle we impose on children is one of travelling to school by car , inadequate physical education at school , returning home by car and , once home , computers and television , which is not the best of lifestyles .
This is why now is the time to take stock and to support all useful initiatives aimed at creating an active lifestyle .
It is time to pass resolutions on the role of sport in education along with the comments and proposals announced by Mr Schmitt .
It is time we took the subject seriously .

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( ES ) Madam President , on behalf of my group , I would like to first of all congratulate Mr Schmitt on this report , and also stress the importance of increasing the number of hours of teaching of physical education in schools .
Adequate time spent doing the right physical activity is the best possible way to complement all-round personal development , from both a mental and a physical point of view .
Balancing time dedicated to study with the time needed for sport is a challenge that we need to meet for our children as soon as possible , as it will enable us to ensure that they have a good quality of life in the future .
It should also be taken into account that this is a key time for acquiring habits , which means that physical education is vital .
I would also like to highlight the need to introduce campaigns aimed at children , and this is a request to the Commission .
These campaigns and programmes need to be aimed at children and their parents so that they adopt healthy lifestyles that include physical activity and exclude habits such as smoking , which continues to be one of the blots on health in Europe .
To conclude , I think that all the speakers so far have mentioned improving training for physical education teachers , as , at the end of the day , this programme cannot go ahead without them .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( SV ) Madam President , this report on the role of sport in education deals in detail with the question of how Member States shall organise the subject of physical education in school .
It is another example of how the EU 's politicians and officials go into any area and at any level of detail they choose in their zeal to centralise political power here .
Subsidiarity is embraced in speeches , but is never respected in political practice .
This sets a new record for absurdly detailed regulation .
Let me give some examples .
Paragraph 10 says that the Member States shall be called on to make PE compulsory in primary and secondary schools and that at least three PE lessons per week should be guaranteed .
Paragraph 24 talks about the importance of offering sports coeducation for children at nursery and primary schools .
This is the kind of thing people are getting up to .
It is a brazen and ridiculous attempt to promote the position of the EU in an area which should be decided upon by the peoples of Europe themselves .
on behalf of the ITS Group - ( BG ) Mme Chairperson , Colleagues , It is gratifying to note that such a famous and prominent name in world sports as Pál Schmitt has contriubuted his authority to raise a very important issue for the future of Europeans before the European Parliament .
For the attitude to sports is , in fact , attitude to the health of people in united Europe .
I feel honoured and proud to speak on his report as an athlete , as a representative of an ancient people with immense sport spirit , and also as a person concerned with the future of children in united Europe , the future of our children .
In my opinion , things are crystal clear : more sports at school , less drugs at school ; more spending for sports at school , less spending for healthcare because it is perfectly obvious that it is ten times better for our children to be happy than to be better cured ; more sports competition at the earliest age , less aggression in the other spheres of life ; more international sporets races involving school children , less inter-ethnic and inter-state tensions in the European Union and in the world at large .
Therefore , bacause of the time constraint , I would like to highlight those aspects that need further development on the basis of the report by the champion and highly respected athlete and politician Pál Schmitt .
I would like to see a recommendation of the European Parliament to all Member States to increase the number of sports classes at school to five hours a week .
I suggest that the European Parliament think seriously and include in its future budget a proposal to organise international competitions under its auspices for schoolchildren in some sports that are most useful to adolescents .
The report points out that sports at school is unattractive .
Have you ever thought why football is attractive ?
Because football players are stars .
Let us have Europe single out its school sport stars in various areas !
Thus will shall give much more publicity to sports at school that a directive or a recommendation could possibly give .
They will be European school champions in athletics , football and basketball , martial arts or swimming .
In this way , we might not be able to restore the Spartan ideal of a healthy spirit in a healthy body , mens sana in corporare sano , in its authentic meaning , but we shall contribute much more than a report could contribute .
The decision to hold youth Olympics in 2010 follows these lines but the Olympic spirit cannot prevail in school sports if we rely only on the four-year Olympic cycle .
We should use time in between more intensively by offering a meaningful sports calendar for school children .
The European Parliament should make special efforts to prevent the spread of drugs through sports at school .
In closing , I believe that the uderstanding of this Parliament about sports at the earliest age bodes well for the future ...
( The Chairperson iterrupts the speaker )
( SL ) The importance of physical exercise to the development and health of young people is well known .
However , we also know that present-day lifestyles mean that many children spend a great deal of time indoors and in front of computers .
Therefore , Mr Schmitt 's report , which aims to encourage the Member States and all of us to rethink the role of sport in education , is very important .
I would like to point out two aspects which are also referred to fleetingly in the report .
Firstly , the importance of sports education to children with special needs .
There is a tendency for as many of such children as possible to be integrated into mainstream schools .
However , because of the different needs of these children and young people it is not always possible to provide appropriate equipment and treatment in a mainstream school .
On the other hand , precisely these children require special attention and physical activity since movement-impaired children , for example , spend a great deal of time in a sedentary position and therefore need even greater opportunities for exercise .
Consequently , where they are included in mainstream schools , appropriate conditions for physical activity adapted to them should be provided .
The second aspect I would like to point out is the role of sports clubs and the impact of sports coaches on the development of young people .
It is not only sporting achievements that are important but also health and educational work with young people , to which coaches in clubs should also devote a great deal of attention .
Parents want to entrust their children to someone who will not only strive for the best possible sporting achievement but also look after their health and act as an educator and a role model in all respects .
Only in these terms can we speak of the positive role of sport in the lives of young people .
( DE ) Madam President , there was of course the European Year of Education through Sport , and I think that we can and should go back to many of the conclusions that Year brought us in the way of insights .
We have already adopted some resolutions on various matters .
There is still much on the agenda , including the report by Mr Schmitt , and I think we have a great deal of material to hand in order to illustrate and confirm everything that is now being discussed ; that is , how important sport is and what we should learn and take from it .
But not enough is happening in sport - I mean , not enough is happening for sport .
People are more aware of health , but obesity and diabetes are on the increase , especially amongst children .
We have spoken a great deal about teacher training , and I think that we have to begin with primary school .
There are no specialist PE teachers in primary schools - at least I know that is true of my country - instead , teachers with general training are used to teach PE as well .
Specially trained teachers are needed here as well , so as to begin as early as possible .
I believe that cooperation between associations , schools and public authorities is very important .
Associations do a lot in the way of education and training work with children , and receive far too little support .
They all struggle financially with too little money , while in fact their services are invaluable .
I am proud of the project currently operating in Austria in which sporting administrators have managed to get into schools and increase the physical education offered , in cooperation with teachers and each state 's school organisations . There is a particular focus on the children 's aptitudes and abilities .
I believe it is very important to involve the parents .
We cannot and must not leave everything to public bodies ; instead we must also make people aware that nutrition and physical activity are important for children .
It is important to start with the parents here , too .
( DE ) Madam President , congratulations to Mr Schmitt on his own-initiative report .
I hold the opposing view to Mr Lundgren .
Unfortunately , in school matters , the European Union is being restrained by the Member States , for any objective analysis of the problem quickly reveals how vital it is that the approach to different aspects of schooling be harmonised .
PE is part of this , in the same way as training in creative thinking or social involvement .
Mr Schmitt 's report concentrates on PE .
While in the USA only very sporty students who also have excellent grades get a place at a good university , in Europe it is exactly the other way around .
The higher the level of schooling , the less time there is for young people to be involved in sport .
PE has a lowly status in the world of school .
Sport is regarded as being only a leisure activity , and that is a mistake .
Sport enables people to overcome mental limits , and that is exactly what we need in Europe .
These days , people often manage to have a career in sport despite school , and not because of school .
That is an error in our system , one that the present report brings to our notice .
Finally , I should like to speak up for a community that cannot do so here for itself .
Due to the political situation in their country , young sportspeople in the Turkish part of Cyprus cannot take part in international competitions .
They hope that the European Union will bring an end to their isolation .
By now , more than three years since Cyprus joined the European Union , if a solution is not already in place , at least a proposal for one should be under consideration .
- ( PL ) Madam President , we take care of the balanced development of our economy , but often we neglect the need for balanced development of our children - not only their intellectual development , but also their physical development .
The school years are a period of dynamic growth in children and young people and of rapid biological development and maturation .
Physical movement and the exercise of various muscle groups is particularly important for health during this period .
Young people spend a lot of time in front of television screens or computer monitors .
This may help intellectual development , but it has a negative impact on physical development . It causes curvature of the spine .
This may be avoided through regular involvement in sport .
Meanwhile , school sports facilities are often not accessible after lessons , and young people are unable to make use of them .
I support the report .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission 's White Paper and Mr Schmitt 's excellent report feature both the educative function of PE in schools and the role of sport in social integration and fostering good health .
Awareness of all aspects of this in society should now be increased .
Alongside what we have learned from the European Year of Education through Sport and from the Lifelong Learning , Youth and Europe for Citizens programmes , it is now time to devise initiatives to make the most , in our times , of the various forms of physical activity comprising sport , both in schools , clubs and associations , and as spontaneous , informal physical activity .
In an era when we do very little physical activity , sport has much greater significance for us than it did for our parents and grandparents .
In a time when children prefer to play computer games , there is a growing need to promote active , healthy lifestyles for children and young people .
Unfortunately , there are many signs that , in many schools , even the time available for PE often fails to correspond to the reality on the ground - that is , implementation sometimes fails to meet with legal obligations .
It seems that a reality check is necessary in many schools in this regard .
I also support the rapporteur when he calls on the Commission to draw up guidelines on the application of the State aid rules to public sports facilities - naturally , fully respecting the principle of subsidiarity - together with the national and European umbrella organisations for sports .
We need clarity on what type of state support is regarded as acceptable and lawful and which aspects can be integrated with one another , possibly including the strengthening of investment in physical education , and with regard to the financing , if necessary with assistance from European funds within the framework of the Structural Funds , of the modernisation and provision of schools .
- ( PL ) Madam President , I fully support the draft resolution , and I thank the rapporteur for the very good drafting of this text .
For me there is no doubt : in my youth - and the same will be true of most of you - school and youth sport affected a much larger percentage of young people .
Now the number of hours of PE at school has fallen .
Of course this has an impact on young people 's health , as Mrs Tomaszewska has said .
Involvement in sport must be given due prestige .
One way of doing this may be to include sport in the scope of application of the European transfer of credit points in schooling and vocational training .
Mutual recognition of diplomas and licences conferring a right to provide services in the sports sector throughout the European Union will certainly help to guarantee the free flow of students , sports people and employees in Europe and will improve the opportunities for people in this industry to find good jobs .
Emphasis should also be placed on the social and cultural aspect of the existence of clubs and sports associations for local people and national communities .

( RO ) Madam President , Mr. Commissioner , dear colleagues , I welcome and support Mr. Pál Schmitt 's report on the role of sport in education because it offers us , one more time , the possibility to get actively involved in improving the life of our fellow citizens .
Supporting physical education and sport , the European Parliament gives a signal not only for a healthier life , but also for the promotion of the common European values that we all inherited from Greece and Ancient Rome .
We have to give more substance to the dictum mens sana in corpore sano via concrete actions which are often conditioned by financial aspects .
For this reason , we ask the Commission , the Council and the Member States to find the adequate instruments to increase investments in the field of school infrastructure and equipment .
One extremely efficient way to achieve this consists in the European funds for disadvantaged regions , especially in the new Member States , which need to be supported in order to increase their capacity of absorption .
Moreover , I believe that the European Union should initiate a sustained media campaign , especially in the TV children and youth programmes , in order to encourage them to practice sport so as to reduce obesity , smoking and drug consumption , as well as to promote correctness , team spirit , discipline , solidarity , tolerance and to combat discrimination .
As regards us , many Members of the European Parliament have practiced sport .
I believe we should establish a way to annually reward the best initiatives for promoting physical education and sport , by offering a prize , for instance .

( NL ) Madam President , congratulations to Mr Schmitt on this excellent report , and also once more to Commissioner Figeľ on the White Paper on Sport .
I should like to reiterate that clearly , as this represents a very important step forward , particularly in view of the section on sport contained in the EU Reform Treaty .
Ladies and gentlemen , the European Union 's involvement with sport is not evident to everyone ; however , whether we like it or not , a number of aspects of sport must be examined from a European angle .
I shall select one such aspect : the plea in Mr Schmitt 's report for extra financial support for sports clubs that actively collaborate with schools .
This can be fitted perfectly into the ' open sports ground policy ' , including in the case of professional sports clubs .
Besides , ladies and gentlemen , sport is an excellent instrument to restore enthusiasm for school and education among socially disadvantaged groups of young people .
I think that this aspect of sport , too , deserves maximum support .
Then there is of course the obesity problem .
This needs to be addressed urgently .
As we read in the Schmitt report , ever more young people are having to deal with this .
In the EU-27 , one in four children is now overweight , not because they eat too much , or have a poor diet , but chiefly owing to insufficient physical activity .
Hence the report 's appeal to the Member States and the regions to allocate a minimum of three hours a week to sport and include this in the timetable of primary and secondary schools .
This appeal comes not a minute too soon .
We cannot impose this at European level - nor do we want to , of course - but we can mark defaulting Member States and regions as being bottom of the class .
Indeed , this is also an economic necessity , for - as we know - childhood obesity is one of the causes of cardiovascular disease , including in later life .
Thus , we have every interest in investing more time and energy in school sports facilities .
Member of the Commission . ?
( SK ) I welcome the very encouraging atmosphere during this debate , which confirms that sport and physical education certainly have an effect on health , but also on certain values held by young people and our entire society .
I think we are all in agreement on the very practical arguments that have been put forward about the preventive role of physical education .
It is appropriate and timely to invest more resources in this direction .
Sport also encourages values such as fair play , team spirit , discipline , an understanding of rules , acceptance of others and solidarity .
That is why sport is a great instrument for integration , whether it be social integration , at a local level or a European level , which does not mean assimilating or absorbing other groups , but encouraging participation within agreed rules .
Therefore , the more education and the more sport in education , the better our coexistence .
As many of you stated , there is consensus on this .
However , what do we need to do now to accomplish more : it is one thing to agree but we must act , too .
I think that there are some elements that show a certain amount of maturity and readiness , and I mentioned one at the beginning .
In the Lifelong Learning Programme 2008-2010 sport and physical education have been prioritised in calls for individual projects for mobility , curricular collaboration and school partnership .
It is an invitation , an offer of space .
The same can be said for the Structural Funds and the modernisation of our schools .
The White Paper is a very comprehensive document .
In 50 years these issues had never been formulated like this because we evolved from steel and coal to issues that are today more inclined towards the knowledge society .
In this context , sport is a very popular and important activity , which is why this contribution today is very important and has come at the right time .
It includes 53 activities for the years ahead , many of which have the aspect of education through sport as a common feature .
I will conclude by saying that Article 149 , which refers to education and youth , for the first time also includes a section on sport .
I believe that in the ratification process , which will start after the signing of the Treaty , support for sport will be demonstrated in this dimension , too , and that in a few years , with the gradual developments , the EU might even be able to establish a sports programme , based , of course , on the principle of subsidiarity , as stipulated in the Treaty .
That is part and parcel of this debate , but also of decisions that might be made as part of similar discussions .
I would like once again to thank Mr Schmitt and all those who contributed to this inspiring report , and I look forward to further collaboration .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 13 November 2007 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( HU ) Sport is now far more than a leisure activity : it interweaves all of the economy and society .
Sport is the perfect tool for education : it teaches us about social coexistence and that if an individual is integrated into any group , he can become a useful member .
Through sport , we attain respect for companions , opponents and rules , and we attain solidarity , an enterprising spirit and collective discipline .
Its key role in the world enjoys general recognition everywhere , and sport has become an important player in disseminating positive values and messages and in building socially and environmentally sustainable economies .
The surge in sedentary occupations , the increase in cars , the reduction in exercise and the increasing consumption of food and drink with high energy content are causing significant health problems for our citizens .
Therefore , people must now be persuaded from an early age to live a healthier life - in which exercise is one of the main components - and obviously the proper infrastructure and sports opportunities must be ensured for them .
This concerns a wide , distinct range of branches and activities that are based on institutions , social factors , widespread communication , the expansion of services and political responsibility .
In order for European citizens to change their exercise and healthy lifestyle habits , joint efforts by the public and private sectors will be necessary to change ways of thinking , increase awareness , create specific , practical initiatives and develop infrastructure , and local governments will have a special role to play in this .
in writing . - Mr President , as a former javelin thrower and current President of the Estonian Ski Association , I am sincerely glad that Pál Schmitt has come up with a report on the role of sport in education .
In Europe there is a great variability in popular sports in different Member States - from skiing in Finland to soccer in the UK , from hockey in the Czech Republic to cycling in the Netherlands .
Altogether we have got many talented trainers who could be more involved in professional exchange to promote diverse sports across Europe and to provide students of all ages with more versatile possibilities .
I fully support Article 50 of the report , which calls on the Commission to promote the European mobility of physical education teachers and trainers .
The European Union stands united in diversity and we should take stock of our extensive expertise in the field of sports .
Another article that I consider immensely significant is Article 10 , which calls on the Member States to make physical education compulsory in primary and secondary schools and guarantee at least three lessons of physical education a week , even better one lesson a day , which promotes a healthy lifestyle among European youth .
Statutes for the Euratom Supply Agency ( debate )
The next item is the report by Romana Jordan Cizelj , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on the proposal for a Council decision establishing Statutes for the Euratom Supply Agency - C6-0131 / 2007 - .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , I wish to begin by congratulating the rapporteur on her report .
Nuclear energy is an important component of a European energy policy mix , and today we are witnessing a renewed interest in nuclear energy , both at European and international level .
The Euratom Supply Agency has , during its more than 45 years of existence , helped to ensure the supply of nuclear fuels for the benefit of Community users .
The Supply Agency is a body which was established by the Euratom Treaty , meaning it stems directly from a primary law instrument .
It aims at the long-term security of supply through reasonable diversification of supply sources for nuclear fuels .
Equal access to sources of supply is an important element of the Euratom Treaty , and this is ensured by the Supply Agency .
Today , the Supply Agency operates on statutes from 1958 , when the Community consisted of six Member States .
The enlargement of the European Union calls for the modernisation of these statutes .
This is the purpose of our proposal ; this is also why the Supply Agency cannot be considered a new agency within the meaning of the Interinstitutional Agreement between the European Parliament and the European Commission .
The European Parliament has long called for the role of the Agency to be revived and for the powers contained in the Euratom Treaty to be used in full .
I would , in particular , mention the Maldeikis report on the 50th anniversary of the Euratom Treaty , which this House adopted earlier this year .
I am pleased to say that the Commission welcomes most of the amendments proposed .
I share your view that the role of the advisory committee needs to be strengthened .
I also agree that it should contribute more to the preparation of the market surveys of the Agency .
In conclusion , I welcome the support that the European Parliament is giving in order to reinforce the role of the Euratom Supply Agency .
I look forward to the discussion .
rapporteur . - ( SL ) The role of nuclear energy is becoming increasingly evident , not only in Europe but also globally .
Reliability of supply , energy market competitiveness , and minimisation of the environmental impact of the production and use of energy form the bases of European Union energy policy .
At the same time , sustainable energy development is also having a positive effect on the development of technology , economic growth and employment .
All this points to achievement of the Lisbon strategy objectives .
A balanced energy mix is one of the conditions necessary for sustainable development , combating global warming and climate change , reducing reliance on imports , and ensuring secure energy supplies .
In the European Union , nuclear energy also forms a component part of that mix .
We must therefore ensure that we have a secure and reliable supply of nuclear material and competitive , properly functioning energy markets on which we can rely .
The Euratom Supply Agency was set up for this reason .
Its role needs to be strengthened further in the light of the changing conditions on the world energy markets .
Naturally , I also agree with the Commission that the enlargement of the European Union to 27 Member States and the financial regulation adopted for the Agency demand new , modernised and improved statutes for the Euratom Supply Agency .
I have also emphasised the Agency 's increased role in my report .
We need a strong body which will , in addition to its basic role of monitoring supply and demand for nuclear material and services , provide and regularly carry out studies of the risk on the market and of long-term price movement on the market in nuclear materials .
It must have control over the conclusion of long-term nuclear fuel contracts and provide a framework for investment , etc .
In order for all these tasks to be performed successfully , I have proposed a greater role for the Advisory Committee , which I see primarily as an expert body .
On account of its diverse expertise it is able to lend the Agency unique support for the tasks entrusted to it by the Euratom Treaty .
I therefore believe that the number of members of the Advisory Committee should be increased , primarily in terms of experts .
I believe that the Member States which have nuclear fuel cycle activities and also contribute the most funds are entitled to an additional member on the Advisory Committee .
In order to ensure consistency in the work of the Committee and enable it to develop high-level expertise , I propose setting up a Bureau or body of executive officers and that that body be composed of a Chair , two Vice-chairs and two advisors .
Consistency can be provided only by means of a simple structure and a clearly defined role for the executive officers of the Advisory Committee , who form a link between the Advisory Committee and the Agency 's Director General .
They must coordinate the activities of the Advisory Committee , in particular those which relate to the drawing up , assessment and review of its reports and the expansion of expertise .
Without investment in knowledge and human resources the set objectives for a competitive and technologically advanced Europe will hardly be met .
I would like to emphasise further the need for transparency , which is largely a matter for the Agency 's annual report .
I believe that the European Parliament should also be informed of every major Agency project .
Its role in the Agency 's budget procedure must be defined more clearly .
The Agency 's annual report , the results of studies and other relevant texts should be received not only by the European Parliament but also by the Council , the Court of Auditors and the Member States .
Only with a good flow of information and the establishment of good practice can we improve the Agency 's performance .
The method of financing the Agency , which until now has been rather complicated and unclear on account of the Agency 's specific nature , can also help provide transparency .
I would like to simplify this method and therefore support the Agency operating in the same way as other European agencies .
Nuclear energy forms part of the energy mix and I would like it to operate under the same conditions as those which apply to other sources of energy .
In order to make the situation simpler , more transparent and consistent with the provisions of the Euratom Treaty , I propose that the Supply Agency have its own budget line which will be separate from the budget of the Commission departments and in which administrative expenditure will be clearly separated from the Agency 's operational expenditure .
This would allow the European Parliament , as a branch of budgetary authority , to acquire control of the Agency 's budget , thereby also contributing to a more transparent and democratic Europe .
Whether we agree with the increasing role of nuclear energy or not , its existence is a present-day reality .
We certainly want secure supplies and functioning markets , but this can be provided only by a long-term vision and a powerful body with sufficient powers and democratic control .
The new Statutes for the Euratom Supply Agency seek to attain these objectives .
Finally , I would like to thank the Commission for its cooperation and for answering rather difficult questions on the Statutes .
I would also like to thank the members of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy for their constructive cooperation in drawing up and adopting the report .
I would also ask you to support it in the vote at the plenary session and would be pleased to hear the comments of fellow members .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , first of all may I join in congratulating Mrs Jordan Cizelj on her report .
She has put a lot of work into making many serious and sensible improvements to this proposal .
I have to say that I hope very much that the Council will take them on board .
I am aware that we are only in consultation on this .
I welcome the emphasis in the report on openness - openness as to the functioning of the Agency - and the emphasis on the role that this Parliament should play in the work of the Agency .
In that vein I support the amendments from the Committee on Budgets , which exercises our authority as part of the budgetary authority .
I also welcome the proposals that Mrs Jordan Cizelj has put in for clarification of the role of the Agency , in particular the role of its committee .
Although I might not personally be quite so enthusiastic about an increase in numbers , nevertheless , I think it is extremely helpful to be more open and specific about the role of the committee .
By way of contrast , I have to express my regret at one or two wrecking amendments , particularly Amendment 39 , which I think , rather mischievously - but perhaps deliberately - goes in exactly the opposite direction from the intention and role of the Agency and the whole Euratom Treaty .
But there we are .
Perhaps it is not such a surprise , coming from the Verts / ALE Group .
But , finally , I would like to welcome the renaissance of nuclear energy - as the Commissioner has said , at both European and international level - because of the vital role it will have to play in dealing with climate change .
on behalf of the PSE Group - ( BG ) Dear colleagues , on behalf of the Socialists , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur Mme Cizelj for the thorough work and the good cooperation within the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy in the preparation of the report .
I believe that the adoption of new Statutes for the Euratom Supply Agency should reflect not only the new number of Member States but also the modern financial rules .
First and foremost , the Statutues should provide the groundwork for strengthening the role of the Agency and ensuring regular supplies under the most favourable terms and conditions for the supply of raw materials and nuclear materielle .
In this connection , I support the proposal for the Agency to reinforce its analytical functions with regard to the development of the market for nuclear materials , and to conduct regular reviews , including market risk analysis .
The prestige of the Agency and the expertise in its work will be enhanced by the proposals to specify and foster the role of the Advisory Board at the Agewncy .
Special attention should also be paid to the proposals to promote transparency in the activities of the Agency .
From the perspective of the role of the European Parliament , it would be appropriate to make changes along two lines : clearer definition of the role of the European Parliament in the budgetary procedure and submission to the European Parliament of the work programme , the annual reports and the studies of the Agency with a view to providing regular and detailed information on its activities .
I am confident that the adoption of the European Parliament 's proposals by the Council could provide the foundations to promote the authority of the Agency so that to become a leading initiator of the implementation of the European Parliament 's address to the international community in point 9 of its resolution of 14 March 2007 concerning non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament , appealing for support to initiatives for multilateral international uranium enrichmnet centres under the control of the International Atomic Energy Agency .
As Javier Solana pointed out in Lisbon on 6 November at the Euromed meeting , this issue has become particularly topical now , when countries like Morocco , Egypt and Jordan have announced ambitious programmes for the development of nuclear energy .
In closing , I would like to express my confidence that the adoption of the new Statutes for the Euroatom Supply Agency will contribute to the fostering of the role of the European Union in the application of stringent rules for non-proliferation and nuclear safety .
( The speaker continues his speech in English )

I would like especially to thank the Vice-President of the Commission , Mr Frattini , for his support for the proposals made by the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy and for his statement that the Agency should become a viable body of the European Union in the light of the revival of the role of nuclear energy and a new , more balanced attitude to it .
ALDE Group . - ( LT ) Ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I would like to thank our rapporteur for the excellent result , a well-balanced report .
The main role of Euratom Supply Agency is to ensure equal access to and security of nuclear energy supply for all users within the European Union .
Today , the Supply Agency operates on the basis of statutes adopted nearly 50 years ago .
The challenges of life alongside the enlargement of the European Union , as well as the necessity for the Agency to adopt a modern financial attitude , have called for new statutes .
The financial attitude of the new statutes is in compliance with the European Community 's general financial framework and is also in line with the enlargement of the European Union .
The discussions on the new statutes have not been easy in view of the composite nature of the Agency .
It is obvious that the agency has actually acted as a Commission body , although , according to the Euratom Agreement , it was established as an agency with legal status and considerable financial independence .
Otherwise it would not have needed statutes , which Commission bodies do not usually have .
It is of great importance to certain Member States because of the type of activities it was expected to carry out .
That is why it does not constitute a typical decentralised agency in an EU sense .
I would like to express my joy at the fact that a consensus has been reached within the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy on the number of members of the Agency 's Advisory Committee .
With due respect for the Commission , I would like to point out that the suggestion on limiting the Committee 's influence and cutting the number of Committee members down to 42 was not very good , especially in view of the Commission 's recommendations to establish such instruments , structures , as the Office of the Energy Observatory , with a view to creating efficient European Energy policy .
The Committee shall assist the Agency in carrying out its tasks by giving opinions and providing information .
It shall act as a link between the Agency and both producers and users in the nuclear industry .
Because of its varied expertise the Committee could provide the Agency with unique support in the tasks assigned to it by the Treaty .
I am in favour of not limiting the terms of office of members of the Advisory Committee .
That way we will be able to achieve stability in the Committee and consistency in its competence .
This amendment is of great importance to small countries , and here I am thinking of my country , Lithuania , and certain others , so I am in favour of it and welcome it .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - Mr President , I fully recognise that energy choices are matters to be decided by individual governments in Europe .
However , I believe that the time has now come for the European Union , possibly via the Euratom Treaty , to set up an independent nuclear inspectorate in Europe , which would have the power to fully investigate safety standards at nuclear plants in Europe .
That said , the British Government should map out a timetable for the orderly closure of the Sellafield nuclear plant , because of the history of serious safety deficiencies and system failures at this facility .
The notorious B30 pond has been home to vast quantities of untreated radioactive materials since 1959 , at the Sellafield nuclear plant .
Even the British decommissioning authority is not aware as to the exact levels of untreated radioactive materials at this B30 plant .
The British Government must spell out a detailed plan as to how it is going to decommission this radioactive dump , known as the B30 pond .
Eighty-three thousand litres of radioactive materials which leaked from the THORP nuclear reprocessing facility in April 2005 has ensured that this plant has remained closed since that date .
The British Government should now state that , due to the well-documented safety problems at the THORP plant , this facility should never be reopened .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , may thanks go to the rapporteur for a serious survey of this issue , although my Group disagrees with many aspects of the matter .
For the Greens the entire Euratom Treaty is the bane of our lives , because it favours nuclear power over safer forms of energy .
We could nevertheless accept the Statutes for the Euratom Supply Agency if they met three conditions : transparency , self-funding and independence of monitoring .
Unfortunately , that is not the case .
First of all the Supply Agency is financed by the taxpayer .
This means hidden subsidies for nuclear power .
Article 54 of the Euratom Treaty allows the Agency to collect funds when nuclear material is being sold by means of a charge .
The Greens believe that self-funding should be made compulsory under the law .
Secondly , independence of monitoring should be guaranteed .
This proposal would result in a situation where the Directorate-General for Energy and Transport is both promoting the use of nuclear energy and monitoring it , which is not right , especially as at international level the International Atomic Energy Agency also has an inconsistent role as a monitoring body for nuclear safety and one that promotes nuclear power .
Thirdly , the structure of the Supply Agency 's Advisory Committee is distorted , having a disproportionately large share of countries producing nuclear power on it , something which will be made worse by the amendment adopted by the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy .
Because of these drawbacks we unfortunately cannot support this proposal .
( SK ) I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Cizelj , for her excellent and inspiring report .
The adverse energy situation in the world , the EU 's high dependence on energy imports and the rise in greenhouse gas emissions all mean that nuclear energy , despite its many ideological opponents , is receiving more attention at EU level and has already become an integral part of the energy mix of some European countries .
In this context the Euratom Supply Agency has to face these challenges with a view to offering its customers comprehensive and effective services with a high degree of flexibility and access to supply sources .
Allow me to touch briefly on three aspects that are fundamental to the fulfilment of this Agency 's mandate .
First of all , I would like to mention the Agency 's tasks .
I fully agree with the rapporteur that its tasks should be more clearly defined , in accordance with the provisions of the Treaty and the objectives of a common policy on security of supply of nuclear materials in a renewed energy context .
My second point relates to the Agency itself .
The new Agency Statutes proposed by the Commission seem at first glance to be sufficiently effective with regard to both the organisational structure , for example the reduction in the number of members of the Advisory Committee , and the budget .
Taking into account , however , the Agency 's overall role , it should maintain a high level of competences in order to perform its mission in monitoring evaluations , proposing recommendations and conducting specific market studies .
The Agency should have staff with a high level of expertise from the industry at its disposal , with broad experience of the market and fuel cycle operations .
In the area of inter-institutional relationships the European Parliament should receive on a regular basis any important reports from the Agency , which would also increase the transparency of its activities and budget .
The third point concerns the transparency surrounding the financing of the Agency .
Despite the fact that the Agency was established on the basis of the Euratom Treaty , as a legal entity with a high degree of financial autonomy , its relationship to the Commission creates a complex and opaque financial mechanism , allowing only limited access to financial information .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , once again I would like to thank the rapporteur for the useful work done .
I also thank you all for the debate , which shows and confirms that there is a need for the modernisation of the Statues of the Euratom Supply Agency .
We adopted the proposal on the Statutes of the Agency in the spring of this year .
Your report will enrich the initial proposal of the Commission .
For this reason , I can assure you that , during the final discussion in the Council , the Commission will support most of the amendments tabled by Parliament .
Once again , I thank you for your support and your attention .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Application of Directive 2004 / 38 / EC on the right of citizens of the Union and their families to move and reside freely within the territory of the Member States ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on the Application of Directive 2004 / 38 / EC on the right of citizens of the Union and their families to move and reside freely within the territory of the Member States .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , we followed very closely the evolution of the situation in Italy .
We are worried about the growing street crime and wish to express , first of all , our sympathy to the families of individuals who have been victims of criminal activities .
We welcome the bilateral cooperation measures announced last week by the prime ministers of Italy and Romania .
We will ensure that the rights of Romanians are respected , as all citizens ' rights should be .
Under the transitional arrangements to the complete opening of labour markets , Romanian nationals must apply for job permits in certain Member States .
We will make sure that Member States observe the principle of non-discrimination in their national legislation and administrative practice .
The Free Movement Directive , Directive 2004 / 38 / EC , allows for the expulsion of European citizens when an individual represents a genuine , present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of society .
This is a decision to be made on a case-by-case basis and in the full respect of the guarantees of substance and procedure .
In cases of immediate expulsion , the urgency must be duly justified .
Under the Directive , the host Member State may expel European citizens also if they no longer fulfil the conditions attached to their right of residence .
Inactive Union citizens may be expelled if they become an unreasonable burden on its social assistance system ; in other words , if they do not have legal financial means to guarantee proper daily living conditions .
In this case , expulsion shall be based on objective elements and a ban on re-entry cannot be imposed .
Expelling European citizens is an extreme measure .
It is a limitation of one of the basic freedoms of the Treaty .
Measures should be taken to strike the right balance between the right to free movement and the duty of each Member State to react in the interests of honest citizens when the legal conditions to stay are not fulfilled .
The Italian authorities officially notified the Commission of the text of the decree on 7 November 2007 .
The decree must be adopted by the Italian Parliament within 60 days .
As you know , the Italian Parliament has the power to change the text of the decree .
The position of the Commission on the Italian legislation transposing Directive 2004 / 38 / EC will , of course , depend on the final version of the law as it emerges from the Italian Parliament .
The decree entered into force immediately , but the Directive is sufficiently precise in its terms to be directly applicable by national courts .
This means that if a Union citizen considers that the individual expulsion measure taken against him or her does not respect the guarantees laid down in the Directive , he or she can appeal before the national courts .
In case of doubt on the application of European law , as you know perfectly well , national courts are obliged to refer the issue to the European Court of Justice .
We will continue to monitor the situation , pending the examination of the decree by the Italian Parliament .
We are also worried about some racist and xenophobic demonstrations that have accompanied the introduction of the decree in Italy .
Roma groups are the largest minority in Europe .
Roma communities throughout Europe face difficult conditions .
There is a long past of persecution .
This situation leads to human suffering and social tension .
Inclusion requires efforts by everyone concerned , including the Roma themselves .
Specific protection must be given to individuals , children and women especially .
Criminals of whatever nationality very often exploit particularly vulnerable people such as children .
Roma children face double discrimination .
Firstly , they are victims of stereotypes and prejudice .
But also they may face violations of their fundamental rights , even from within their communities .
We see , too often , neglected Roma children on our streets or living in poor , often tolerated conditions in modern European favelas .
Children may be brought into a life of crime or forced to beg .
Roma schoolchildren tend to leave school early without qualifications for the future or skills to care for themselves and their families .
If we only look at a group when we consider how to protect fundamental rights , then we risk missing the protection of individuals within that group and we miss the opportunity to break the circle of wrongdoing and fear .
We are ready to assist Italy and Romania in making the best possible use of all possibilities already existing under European law and under European funds .
It should be also stressed that Roma communities live in many other Member States such as France , Ireland , Spain , Slovakia , the Czech Republic or Hungary .
The social inclusion of Roma communities can also be further improved in these Member States , notably through the structural funds , which can be quite helpful .
European funding , specifically targeted at the needs of Roma communities , is already available in areas such as social inclusion , the fight against discrimination , regional development and education .
In the previous programming period , the structural funds made available more than EUR 275 million for Roma-related projects .
An additional EUR 60 million was made available to Romania and Bulgaria between 2004 and 2006 , under the pre-accession instruments .
The funding of Roma-related projects will continue in the structural fund programming period 2007-2013 .
The European Racial Equality Directive ( 2000 / 43 / EC ) , which covers Roma people , provides for protection against discrimination in employment , education , social security , health care , goods and services , and housing .
We are actively ensuring that this legislation is applied across the EU .
Finally , as much as the Commission is not prepared to tolerate any form of discrimination or intolerance of its citizens , we equally will support Member States who lawfully protect their citizens from criminality , whether they are nationals or citizens of the Union in general .
After all , freedom , justice and security go hand in hand .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to congratulate Mr Frattini on his comprehensive report and on the proposals , ideas , content and values defended in his speech .
Certainly the reunification of Europe has led to the growing movement of citizens within the Union , which in some cases has transformed into a real migratory phenomenon .
This is the case in Italy , where today there are around half a million Romanian citizens .
The EU has tried , with Directive 2004 / 38 / EC , to guarantee respect for both the rights of Community citizens who emigrate from one country to another , and the right of the Member States to expel EU citizens who do not obey certain rules : I am referring to the ability to support themselves and to the risks to public policy and safety .
Unfortunately , in Italy the way the EU directive has been applied is too little , too late .
The result ? A failure to expel many citizens who , if deported , perhaps would not have committed crimes in Italy .
Unfortunately , crimes have been committed which have shaken public opinion , committed by people with a European passport .
The reaction has been one of unacceptable xenophobic violence .
The violence and murders committed in Italy must be strongly condemned and solidarity shown for the victims ' families .
The violent and xenophobic reaction must also be condemned , although unfortunately , when the rules are not applied , when the laws are not enforced , citizens risk dispensing justice themselves , and this is quite frankly unacceptable .
Member States have very clear responsibilities , as do local authorities .
In Rome , despite numerous reports , unfortunately no action has been taken in response to certain social situations , such as the slums inhabited by Roma citizens .
These are situations where quick action should have been taken .
Sometimes belated measures do nothing to solve problems that have blown up .
We are not in favour of mass expulsions .
Every citizen who commits a crime is personally accountable .
It is not a question of nationality or of belonging to a particular ethnic group .
Further collaboration between Romania and Italy would of course be useful .
It is no accident that the PPE text was signed by me and by my colleague Mr Marinescu .
This is a question that specifically concerns the Roma people .
It does not concern Romanian citizens and this is why we are asking for a specific agency be set up for the social integration of the Roma communities , a European agency to show that Europe is doing its part to solve a problem that otherwise risks instigating even greater social panic .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are in a very difficult situation .
It is difficult because the events that have transpired in Rome merely bring to the surface something that we have not seen until now , or did not wish to see .
The murder that occurred there was a profoundly condemnable , abhorrent act .
The reactions unleashed by this murder are alarming .
However , the fact that a single offender who commits a criminal act is embedded in his judgment as part of a large group of people who , so to speak , are held collectively responsible for the acts of one individual , is nothing new in the history of humanity - it has always occurred - but it is always equally condemnable .
Therefore , the first thing we must do is to differentiate .
We must look very carefully .
It is all true : integration of the Roma into our society has not been working for a very long time .
This is also linked to the fact that there is very little commitment to integrating the Roma into our society .
They are a difficult people , with their own autonomous culture , and it requires a great deal of effort to integrate them , but it can be done .
It can be done if we respect them and their culture .
Nevertheless , it must be made clear that a state under the rule of law must be able to ensure its survival by all constitutional means .
A state under the rule of law must use every means at its disposal to maintain public safety and preserve order .
What is the best way to do this ?
The best way is not to generalise but to assess each individual case , and that is exactly what must happen in Europe .
When it comes to freedom of movement , we have to check , in each individual case , what right a citizen of the Union has gained and , when he moves from one country to another , what rights form the basis of the way he should be treated .
In the European Union , we guarantee freedom of movement .
All citizens of European states - at least , those which are part of the Schengen area - enjoy this integral freedom of movement .
This does not mean that they can do what they like when they move from one state to another .
They must respect the rights and laws there ; but , conversely , the state that belongs to the Schengen area must also respect the rights of the citizen of the Union on its territory .
It is not possible to say in a general way ' ' it is this group 's fault , and this group has to go , because none of its members have work permits , or because they do not fit in with our idea of our culture , or because they are all unemployed , or because they are begging ' .
Instead , in each and every case , we must ascertain what rights a citizen has , just as in each and every case it is ascertained what rights he has violated .
This is precisely the task that the Italian and Romanian Governments are now undertaking , and that the Commission must also undertake .
Here I must say , Commissioner Frattini , that you are not doing justice to your role .
I was extremely surprised to read your remarks in Il Messaggero .
Until then , I had the impression that you were a very moderate Commissioner .
You won the respect of my group because you had hitherto worked very sensitively in what is a sensitive area of politics .
However , the remarks that you made in Il Messaggero regarding work permits and people 's income structure - suggesting that it was possible simply to go into a camp , ask someone how they earned a living and , if they could not explain on the spot what they lived off , deport them - are reminiscent of a totally arbitrary state .
We do not live in such a state , however .
It is your task , Commissioner Frattini - especially as the Commissioner responsible for human rights - to defend the principles of the European Union and not to promote yourself again as a minister in a future Italian Government when required .
( Applause from the centre and left )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , most of us recognise the benefits of migration .
The Member States which have opened their borders to migrants from other Member States have not seen a rise in unemployment ; rather , they have seen a growth in productivity , a rise in economic growth and the creation of new jobs .
It is the old , old story .
The incomers do jobs that the natives do not want to do , they work hard , they cost little and they bring new ideas .
But it is important to recognise that some people cross borders not wishing to work - or at least not wishing to work legally .
European Union law recognises this , as you have laid out , Commissioner .
While giving the right to reside in other Member States , it allows the host state to limit the right of residence to three months if there is no means of subsistence and to terminate that right if there is a threat to public order .
One of the great successes of our Union has been this right to move freely , now enjoyed by millions of citizens in their studies , in their working lives , in retirement .
It is not without its challenges and , just as the Jews , a people lacking a homeland , were often unwelcome in ages past , so today the Roma , some nine million people , are discriminated against in many host countries .
Yet to equate the Roma people with the country of Romania , even if many of them are Romanian citizens , is to misunderstand the nature of both .
You might as well equate them with the city of Roma .
European Union funds have been made available for the integration of the Roma .
We are working with George Soros and his Decade of Roma Inclusion .
But we need all Member States to sign up to that and a common Community framework strategy for Roma inclusion if this is to work .
It is a pity that Italy did not draw down any of these funds .
Spain drew down some EUR 52 million and Poland some EUR 8 million .
But it is not only a lack of foresight on the part of the Italian Government ; it is also matched by a lack of foresight on the part of the Commission .
I think Mr Barroso was wrong when he said in his interview in La Repubblica yesterday that it is inconceivable that European Union authorities should promote integration on the ground .
It should not be inconceivable .
I share , Mr Frattini , the views of Mr Schulz .
You should not be playing party politics in this matter .
This House demands that you concentrate on your current responsibilities , not on your possible future career .
Italians know as well as others the vulnerability of migrant communities .
In 1893 , at Aigues-Mortes in France , Italian salt workers in the Peccais were lynched in xenophobic attacks about the protection of local jobs .
But one of the great achievements of the Union is that such pogroms are a piece of the past .
Too often , nonetheless , democracies are run by crisis management .
It is , perhaps , more evident in Italy than elsewhere .
But if there are problems in Italy , there will be problems in other countries too .
If the right of residence abroad is an EU right , we cannot allow Member States to rewrite the exceptional provisions , as the Italian Government has done in its decree .
There is nothing to stop a country giving powers to prefects to deal with it as long as there is a right of appeal .
An appeal to a justice of the peace who is not a legal expert is insufficient , just as is the use only of Italian or English in legal documents .
But I trust the Italian Parliament will correct these provisions and ensure consistency of the national legislation with EU provisions .
For us , this is the first real case of the European Parliament overseeing the application of justice and home affairs legislation , together with national parliaments .
We need to look not only at what does not work , but at what does work , and we need your active commitment , Commissioner , in that task .
( Applause from the centre and left )
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would also like to thank Commissioner Frattini for his detailed report this afternoon .
In my opinion , Directive 2004 / 38 / EC is a valid point of reference , guaranteeing full affirmation of the right of movement of EU citizens , avoiding any form of discrimination and establishing the principle of full integration .
This directive is essentially concerned with protecting the rights of someone residing in a Member State , as well as the rights of citizens of that Member State , in keeping with the principle of reciprocity .
It offers maximum protection for people working , studying and wanting to become integrated , but comes down hard on those people who break the rules .
It is on this latter point that Parliament must have a real discussion .
Not only are there rights , there are also duties and rules which must be respected .
We cannot continue to ignore the fact that there is a percentage - no doubt an absolute minority , but this percentage does exist - of people who travel to other Member States and who have no intention of reporting their presence to the host Member States , simply because they do not want to be officially recognised , because they have no intention of abiding by the laws and working legally .
We need to address properly the problem of who moves to and who enters a Member State , intent on remaining on the fringes of society .
No doubt the tools can be improved , but some of them are already available to the Member States under Directive 2004 / 38 / EC .
This is why first we must call for the prompt , full , thorough and concrete application of the Directive in each Member State .
Perhaps it might also be worth refining the Directive , not only imposing an obligation on visitors to declare their presence in the territory of the host Member State on certain terms , but an obligation on the Member State to impose sanctions on anyone who does not abide by the rules .
In Italy for example , the decree implementing the directive sets forth certain terms and conditions , but it does not provide any sanctions , so the law is in fact completely ineffectual .
Above all , we need to make sure that immigrants are escorted back to their own country , obviously in cases where there are genuine reasons for doing so .
However , I should point out that anyone who commits a crime , anyone who violates human rights , because this is also important , who exploits children , who exploits women or who represents a threat to public safety , must be removed and returned in no uncertain terms to the authorities in his or her country of origin .
We also need laws for people who do not work , for people who have a hand-to-mouth existence and who can thus represent an excessive burden for the community of the host Member State .
I would like to finish by mentioning the Roma children and making the case for Italy .
There are around 50,000 children , or rather at least 50,000 exploited children in Italy .
They are of Roma origin , they are forced to beg , they are not vaccinated , they do not go to school and they live in absolutely deplorable sanitary conditions .
I would like to remind everyone that around a week before Mrs Reggiani was killed in Rome , in the same shanty town as the one in which Mrs Reggiani 's killer lived , a two-month-old Roma child died of cold .
This was in Rome , one of Europe 's foremost capital cities .
Therefore , I will finish by asking , is this truly integration ?
Is this respect for human rights ?
We have a duty to ask serious questions without hypocrisy and we have a duty to say that everyone is equal before the law .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , on 2 November Mr Frattini said that ' What has to be done is simple : go into a travellers ' camp in Rome for example , and ask them : ' Can you tell me where you live ? '
If they say they do not know , take them and send them home to Romania ' .
That is how the European directive works , plain and simple , and we need to pull down the travellers ' camps immediately .
You also said that the UK , France and Germany habitually expel citizens who are out of work , that Italy does not do this and that therefore it has failed to implement Directive 2004 / 38 / EC properly .
I am speaking to you as Co-president of a European political group and I am addressing you as a European Commissioner , therefore we must absolutely leave aside the fact that in Italy , we probably campaign in different coalitions , but here we are acting and should act as Europeans .
I think that the statements you made to Il Messaggero are unacceptable and furthermore are in complete contradiction with what you said here to us last night .
Which of the two Frattinis is the real one ?
The one who said that we needed to pull down Roma camps or the one who said , as the directive quite rightly says , that citizens can be expelled based on precise rules and even more precise guarantees ?
I would really appreciate an answer to this question .
With regard to the question of other European Member States , I would be grateful if you could explain the situation to me .
We have made a few inquiries and have discovered that none of the countries mentioned - the UK , France or Germany - has ever deported European citizens for economic reasons , which in any case is prohibited by the directive , and that no citizen has ever been found to be an excessive burden for the economy of the countries of residence .
Therefore , I would like to know whether you knew about this , because it seems to be crucial information .
I fully support the fact that this directive provides a precise framework .
However , I think that it could have been even more precise and better done , and I am even of the opinion that the case or cases that we are discussing today are symbolic of the way in which the directive must be applied and how the Member States perceive and see enlargement and freedom of movement , which is an absolute priority for us .
May I just say , Mr President , Mr Tajani and Mrs Angelilli , that a country where the mafia has a business of around EUR 90 billion and where events take place such as those of recent days can teach us very little on the subject of immigration .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , our discussion here is not about Italy or Romania , it is about Europe and the life of its citizens : a woman was killed , and our thoughts and sympathies must go to her family ; Roma and Romanian citizens are disgracefully attacked ; our identity , our values , our laws and our history , including tragedies such as the persecution of the Roma people , let this all be called into question today and let us not forget and make sure that there is no room for racism of any sort .
These tragedies have taught us the importance of laws that sanction rights : there is no safety without the law .
This is how important our laws are , our treaties are , even our economic regulations , which sanction the value and right of mobility and residence , which are the legitimate rights of European citizens , and not concessions , which can be regulated but not denied .
European laws are clear : everyone has the right to mobility and residence , with removal only in extreme cases where national security is at stake .
Expulsion is strictly individual and never collective , and is accompanied by the guaranteed right to a defence .
These are proportional measures that always allow for the continued right of mobility , a right that will never be denied for economic reasons , because poverty cannot be a stigma or a reason to discriminate against citizens .
This is what Article 27 of the directive says , it is the law .
It is all the more sacred because it concerns rights .
The law applies to everyone , not least of all to Commissioners - and I must say Mr Frattini that in your numerous statements here in Parliament , I have had great trouble in finding the spirit and the letter of the law , in fact I cannot seem to find either of these - and to the Member States , who must transpose their membership of Europe and its directives for all of us .
There are still too many people dying in Europe today .
In Italy , a woman died from a violent attack by a Romanian man .
This is extremely distressing to me .
Anyone guilty of murder has to pay the price , but that has nothing to do with Roma or Romanian citizens , who have seen some of their own people unfairly attacked .
Blame is individual , never collective .
So many migrants die trying to get to Europe .
These people are overwhelmed and are calling on us to act .
This suffering is why we must make Europe a land of the law and of rights , of sacred laws , particularly when we talk about reception .
These laws form the basis of security .
We want this to be solemnly reaffirmed in Parliament with a vote so that there can be no more misinterpretation of our European laws .
In accordance with our rules of procedure , I would like to ask Members who are speaking not to quote other Members , for the simple reason that under the rules they could ask to speak later .
Therefore , to allow the debate to run smoothly , I would ask everyone to address Parliament in general , citing the facts ; clearly this does not apply to the Commissioner , who will be fully entitled to explain his reasons at the end of the debate .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , my friends in the new NIP Party in Romania were furious when they learned about the expulsion of thousands of Romanians from Italy .
I understand them fully .
I phoned Commissioner Frattini , who assured me that no Romanian would be expelled without having met a judge .
There was a derogation , however : when people , after staying for three months , have no money to live on , they can be expelled without a decision from a judge .
I agree with this procedure if it is administered in good faith .
Free movement does not include a right to receive financial support from the state you visit .
You should be able to live on your own budget or have a job .
Criminals may also be expelled if it is decided by a judge , but it is not up to the police to decide who are criminals .
For such decisions , we must have independent judges .
I hope my friends in the Italian Government agree with this fundamental principle of the European Union .

on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by thanking Mr Frattini for being here again , for his commitment and for making himself available to us .
You are an asset to your country .
It is a shame that I cannot say the same of other Italian representatives and I do not like this .
We have discussed - and are still discussing - the Schengen Agreement .
Despite all the social unrest that the free movement of citizens within the EU is undoubtedly causing in Italy , Mr Amato has decided that it would be a good idea to focus on other issues .
Something needs to be done to prevent this social unrest from reaching the levels witnessed in our country .
However , it does not appear that anything is being done , given the rising crime rate at all levels in Italy , ranging from anti-social behaviour to organised crime , not to mention the steady inflow of illegal immigrants into our country , and above all the fact that some people who come to Italy with study , work or tourist visas are not returning to their own countries when these expire .
This last point has not been widely covered by the media .
Furthermore , the current Italian administration and the Minister of the Interior seem to be unaware of the crime committed in Italy largely by foreigners , some of whom are European citizens , travellers or people who call themselves this .
This was highlighted a few months ago in the report by the Italian Prefect Mr Serra to the Italian Parliament .
The Italian government is becoming an embarrassment to an increasingly tired nation , and they are not alone .
This government , which is as incapable of understanding social unrest as it is of preventing it , cannot conceive of addressing the problem .
It does not occur to it - and one wonders how it could - to admit the failings of current migration policies or the lack of application of European directives , in this case Directive 2004 / 38 / EC .
On this subject , the Italian government complains of having difficulty in identifying the exact date of entry .
It is clear that under the Schengen Agreement , these difficulties are growing out of all proportion . It is also obvious that my party and I would like to revoke the Schengen Agreement .
Even the repeated acts of political hooliganism in Italy in recent months , suffered in many cases by my party , perpetrated by the followers of anarchic and boorish communism protected by representatives of the institutional left , are still being ignored by Mr Amato .
Unfortunately , Mr Amato and President Prodi , like so many mayors , not least of all Rome 's , do not live in working-class areas , they have no contact with travellers ' camps - legal or otherwise - and they do not use public transport or experience the bullying , violence and prevarication that even EU visitors face in Italy on a regular basis .
These irresponsible politicians talk about solidarity , in whose name an entire population is made to suffer their foolish decisions .
The European Union , rather than lament the fact that Italy has not asked for funding , should take note of what President Barroso said , in other words that if a Member State allows slums to develop on its territory , what can it expect the Commission to do ?
Mr Amato chooses to be absent from meetings on the subject .
Meanwhile , Italians would like to do the only right thing : start voting and tell the government to go to hell .
( RO ) The European Union is a community of values in which respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms prevails and its policies include the security of citizens and the fight against criminality , as well as the protection of children and the fight against instigation to violence .
I firmly condemn violence and offences and I deeply regret what happened in Italy !
But I believe that the abuses and injustice committed in the name of the law are unacceptable , induce fear and humiliation and may instigate hatred within human communities .
I have discovered a tendency to escalate this situation unjustifiably , also fueled by political and xenophobic statements uttered by certain politicians .
I am worried by the fact that , according to the information published so far , only Romanian citizens have been expelled from Italy .
All the Member States have the right and obligation to draw up legislative acts that would ensure and consolidate public order and safety .
All the European citizens , whatever their nationality , have the obligation to comply with the law and its provisions , wherever they are on the territory of the European Union .
Yet , at the same time , we have to condemn intolerance and xenophobia and , especially , the unjustified expansion of hard feelings and stigmatization from a few individuals , who are on bad terms with the law , to an entire ethnic group or , more seriously , to an entire nation .
I believe the Italian State , just like all the other Member States of the European Union , has the duty to protect the rights and liberties of the European citizens residing on its territory , who integrate into the community and obey the laws .
A common European approach of the policies of immigration and integration of minorities is required .
The issue of minorities and , especially , of the Roma minority , is a European issue and it should be approached in a coherent and unitary manner , not only in moments of crisis .
All the relevant bodies should cooperate , first of all the European Commission and the Agency for Fundamental Rights , as well as the relevant institutions in the Member States .
I call upon the European Commission to review the priorities and mechanisms of the European Social Fund in order to extend the financing of common actions , which would contribute to the social inclusion of the Roma minority .
At the same time , I ask the European Commission to urgently examine compliance of the decree law , issued by the Italian authorities , with the European legislation and to give assurance that the implementation of any provisions of this type shall not lead to abuses against honest people , irrespective of their nationality .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe it is right that our Parliament should send the family of Mrs Reggiani a message of condolence .
I would also like to censure the recent statements by Mr Frattini , who in interviews referred to earlier confused his role as representative of the Commission with that of a member of the opposition , denying Mr Tajani this pleasure , when he would have been better to use his prestigious role to brighten the national political climate .
It pains me to say it , because we have often supported Mr Frattini 's proposals and initiatives .
Mr Frattini knows only too well that , as pointed out by some of my fellow Members , there is no European text that makes provision for the automatic expulsion of citizens from other Member States on economic grounds .
The recent provisions of the Italian government are in line with the European directive , respecting its spirit and strengthening certain aspects considered important in light of the situation in Italy .
All Italian institutions - and I say this to Mr Tajani , to Mrs Angelilli and to other members of the opposition - from the City of Rome to regional authorities , right down to the smallest local council , are committed to this .
It is undignified to sling mud at the degree of civilisation and integration that our country has achieved over the years .
I hope that the European Parliament will reaffirm its refusal of the principle of collective responsibility , which is used to incite hatred and violence in the heart of Europe .
What we need to affirm instead is the need to combat any form of racism and xenophobia , and any discrimination based on nationality and ethnic background .
We have a road map for this : the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
It is important that we do our best , as the Italian and Romanian Prime Ministers have asked , to ensure better social integration of disadvantaged peoples and cooperation between Member States , both in terms of managing the movements of our own migratory flows and through social development and welfare programmes financed by the Structural Funds .
What we need to do in future is simple : none of us must forget that immigration is a resource , it is part of our future , but it must be governed .
I therefore propose that the Member States act now to establish closer European coordination to regulate migratory movements in the European Union .
Mr President , I should like to thank the Commissioner for addressing Parliament on this very important issue .
There has been a lot of emotion in Italy following the murder of an Italian woman by a Romanian citizen .
There has equally been a lot of emotion in Romania following reprisals against Romanian citizens by Italian gangs .
However , when we put away emotions , we get back to our basic values and principles : freedom of movement for all citizens , the rule of law and its conformity with European law .
Let me remind you , should it be necessary , that freedom of movement for European citizens is a fundamental right enshrined in the founding Treaties .
Unfortunately , these recent events have shown us that we need to make more effort to consolidate these rights and ensure they are enforced adequately throughout Europe .
In today 's Europe we cannot accept irresponsible authorities pointing fingers at specific nationalities or ethnic groups .
Neither can we accept the claim that the free movement of workers might be a route to increasing criminality , because crime has neither nationality nor ethnicity .
This attitude can only lead to dangerous developments and more xenophobia .
On the contrary , I believe we must continue to encourage mobility of people and give workers the same opportunities all over Europe , to reinforce a strong European identity .
This was the founding fathers ' genuine wish for the creation of the European Union .
While I reiterate that the European Union must ensure all its citizens live in an area of freedom , security and justice , I believe we should also pay more attention to integration and freedom of movement .
The answer to crime is not closing borders .
The answer to crime is not encouraging xenophobia , discrimination and stigmatisation of nationalities or ethnic origins .
The answer , in a modern Europe , is more police and judicial cooperation , more integration policies , more resources for those called to serve and protect all our citizens , whatever their nationality .
I would like to see a Europe where all citizens can live , work and circulate freely .
The European Commission , as the guardian of the Treaties , must now ensure that these basic rights are correctly implemented and enforced .
I call on the Commission to stand firm on these principles .
Mr President , the situation of the Roma in Europe is getting worse .
The developments in Italy prove that to us .
We have all seen that unchallenged xenophobic and racist hysteria can overcome common sense .
The crime of one single person has fuelled an unprecedented media lynching .
This moved us towards restrictions on the fundamental rights of European citizens based on popular racist and xenophobic hysteria .
We must not let that happen .
Criminal issues are for the judges to deal with , not for politicians or civilians .
However horrible and condemnable the crime that took place in Rome is , it should not lead us to collective responsibility of a whole nation .
The events in Italy did uncover the reality of the campo nomadi , in which so many Roma live .
The fact that tensions and instability arise from such situations is not questionable .
That is why we must act .
My first assistant is a Roma .
Integration can proceed quickly .
In 2005 we adopted a resolution that asked for concerted EU and national action for speeding up the inclusion of Roma .
Therefore , I propose that we , as MEPs , show that we care , and urge decision-makers to join us .
I propose that the EP establish a permanent European Parliament rapporteur on Roma issues , who would monitor the situation of the Roma in Europe and come annually with recommendations to the Commission and governments .
In addition , we should call upon the Commission to establish an EU Roma inclusion fund , together with an EU strategy for Roma inclusion and a Roma unit within the European Commission .
This will ensure proper management of the EU Roma inclusion policies .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in the wake of the brutal murder by a Romanian citizen of Giovanna Reggiani , whose family is offered our heartfelt condolences , many political groups in Italy have pointed the finger at Europe .
However , what happened is not due to enlargement , Schengen or other European directives on free movement within the European Union .
These are age-old problems that deserve a less superficial approach and which cannot be addressed with a decree rushed through Parliament to satisfy public opinion .
For this very reason , we need to be more attentive and re-examine the entire matter within a framework of legality , unfettered by emotions or urgent demands .
The rule of law requires that criminal responsibility should be individual and not collective .
To deviate from this principle would set a dangerous precedent that could lead to the criminalisation of certain migrant nationalities .
The potential effects that this might have are worrying .
In Italy , we have seen a witch-hunt culture emerge towards Romanian and Roma citizens , with many punitive expeditions : even children in schools have been the subject of scorn and mistreatment .
The issue of security is clearly legitimate , but we cannot fall into the trap of polemics and exploitation deliberately designed to fuel hatred and xenophobia merely for partisan reasons .
If objectivity could be restored to Italian politics , the public would learn that Italy was not overcrowded with delinquent migrants .
Immigration is certainly a subject that requires European coordination , but we cannot use Europe simply to limit the freedom of movement of migrants .
Mr Frattini 's actions should be condemned .
He has used this opportunity to join the national polemic expressing opinions contrary to European directives .
It would have been better if the Commissioner had proposed a series of integration policies , for example based on the increased resources from the Integration Funds and the need to free national reception policies from the constraints of the Stability Pact , as has already been done for security policy .
It is also important that we insist on coordination and reinforcement of judicial instruments and police powers to tackle organised crime and trafficking , an odious crime which has now reached the transnational level .
The discussion of the application of Directive 2004 / 38 / EC is the right sphere in which to have a debate on the expulsion of Romanian citizens in its proper legislative setting ; it is an opportunity to confirm how the free movement of Romanian citizens is an inalienable right of European citizenship .
The directive is clear : people cannot be removed as a preventive measure , but personal accountability must be assessed , and this information should be used as a starting point so that government decrees can remain in line with the pro-European tradition of our country .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank you for the courage and consistency that brooks no hypocrisy , which unfortunately often prevails in our institutions and which to a certain extent we have also heard here today .
Mr Guidoni , the decree you are attacking is a decree of your own government , so we need some clarification here .
The distressing events in Italy , and in Rome in particular , are only the latest in a series of incidents that have often gone unheeded or have been ignored .
Europe is founded on the principles of freedom and respect for fundamental rights and freedoms .
The Italian people have always shown that they support inalienable values such as non-discrimination , equality between peoples and democracy .
However , I believe it is only right to add , using the information from the official Caritas report produced in cooperation with the Italian Ministry of the Interior and which paints a fairly serious picture , that this has been happening since 1 January 2007 , following the migration of Romanian citizens to Italy on an unprecedented scale in the EU .
I hate to say it , but we only need to run through a few of the figures to see the absurdity of the situation .
In 2006 alone , 17,900 Romanians were arrested in Italy .
This is not the fault of an entire people , it is the fault of individuals .
However , we need to reflect and the question automatically arises : why did the Italian government not ratify the decree transposing Directive 2004 / 38 / EC sooner ?
Furthermore , why does the decree not implement the provisions of the directive relating to residence after a period of three months ?
Why did the Ministry of the Interior fail to provide adequate measures for application in relation to the conditions and requirements to be satisfied and the checks and controls and possible repatriation of EU citizens guilty of not respecting the imperative conditions provided by the directive ?
This laxity has caused a culture of permissiveness which is beyond understanding .
It has resulted in the indiscriminate arrival of indigent people , fuelling each day the sense of despair that exists and leading people to the inevitable short cut of breaking the law .
For example , the Mayor of Rome tolerated the establishment of around a hundred Roma camps and shanty towns , where the most elementary human rights were compromised and where hygiene and personal dignity were completely ignored , before then deciding to dismantle them .
It was an act of thoughtlessness for which we are still paying today .
We are in favour of solidarity and reception , but this has to be in accordance with the law , guided by the certainty of the law and public policy .
Mr President , today I will try to forget that I am a Romanian .
I will try to forget , even if people are deported , attacked and killed within the borders of the European Union , simply because they are guilty of being Romanian either ethnically or by citizenship .
Today , I shall try to think as an Italian and as a European .
If I were Italian , I would think that I should have the right to feel secure in the country of my ancestors .
I would have been outraged by the miserable camps of miserable people around my country 's wonderful towns .
I would have been disgusted to see an increasing number of criminals threatening the peaceful life of my compatriots .
But , while looking for my security , I would realise that this is consolidated daily by the creative work of more than one million immigrants who are producing Italian goods , offering services in areas left by Italian labour , buying Italian merchandise and paying taxes to the Italian authorities .
On the contrary , I would feel that my security would be weakened if those non-Italian residents left my country , if their human rights were violated and if they became the subject of xenophobic practices .
If the basic rights of a single human being are violated by my country 's authorities , who try to hide their weaknesses by intensifying the law behind racist concepts , xenophobic excuses and discriminatory measures , my own rights - and , moreover , everybody 's rights - are in jeopardy .
It is not the first time that security has been set against democratic and humanitarian values , when some believe that fewer human and civil rights mean more security , when insecure people look for refuge within their national community , wrongly thinking that ethnic similarity brings better protection .
This is false .
An ordinary crime has one or several victims .
Racism is also a crime , but it is an extraordinary crime and everybody , including the criminal , is a victim of racism and xenophobia .
Racism and racial rule are therefore sources of insecurity .
As a European democrat , I cannot possibly accept that diversity means more insecurity or that some criminals should be socially integrated while others should be excluded .
Some have the right to defence and others do not .
Some are given the benefit of the doubt and others are not , depending on their national or ethnic origin .
As a European , I would not allow one of the Member States - say , Romania - to become a ghetto for the Roma or a European Union Siberia where undesirable European citizens are deported .
I can understand that the extreme right is xenophobic , but I cannot understand when the democrats resort to xenophobic and racist speech .
I cannot understand the weaknesses and demagogical racist speech of the democrats , and I condemn them more than the extreme right for xenophobia .
For all those reasons , we should now take alarm and mobilise .
I hope that the European Parliament motion for a resolution to be adopted on this issue will bring us together in defending European values and the future of Europe .
( Applause )
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the government of each Member State has the right and duty to clamp down on crime to ensure the safety of its citizens and of anyone living and working in the country .
The debate that we are engaged in today must avoid the twofold temptation of emotiveness and instrumental political reaction .
The preparation of a bill under the name of a ' security package ' had been in the pipeline for some time in Italy .
The dramatic events of last October persuaded the government to convert it into a decree-law , which immediately began to have an effect .
There was nothing hasty or improvised about it , and in any case amendments will be tabled before Parliament , as we know .
Let us look at the substance of the question and we will understand that the content of the decree is absolutely fair : it is a case of targeting those who threaten law and order with their conduct , comprising public safety and harming all those who come to Italy to improve their lives by working .
This decree does not target everybody , but is in favour of people who come to Italy to be integrated in complete accordance with our laws and who in any case represent the vast majority .
The presence in Italy , as in any other country , of people who do not abide by the rules , makes integration more difficult for others .
What I mean is that a rejection mentality emerges which makes the integration process harder .
Hence the prompt response of the Italian government , which has also been quick to avoid any instrumental political positions and dangerous signals , such as punitive expeditions or patrols that would send out a misleading or even perverse message to the public .
Mr President , according to the Directive , and in compliance with the principle of non-discrimination , all Union citizens and their family members residing in a Member State should enjoy equal treatment .
Alongside the right of freedom of movement , they are entitled to take up employment in the country of residence - regarded as related rights in Article 23 of the Directive .
In this sense , the freedom of movement of workers is a fundamental right , complying with the idea of a united Europe , whose citizens can be freely employed everywhere .
Unfortunately , this is not the case with the citizens of most of the new Member States , including Bulgaria and Romania , who are facing restrictions .
After a public debate on whether Bulgaria will or will not apply the Community law in this field , and whether to undertake a reciprocal approach , it was decided not to do so and to abide by the common Community goals , so that the European Union could respond adequately to the contemporary global challenges .
While saluting those Member States that have taken the same position so far , I call upon the other Member States to join in and take into consideration the fact that the transitional periods are obstacles to the development of a single European labour market and hamper its competitiveness .
The analyses point out that the old Member States that have opened up their markets have received much more benefits than problems with the workers received .
On the other hand , the new Member States already face serious shortages of qualified workers .
The recent Eurostat survey published today indicates that there has not been large-scale migration of Bulgarians and Romanians after accession .
The survey also shows that 80 % of Bulgarians abroad are working , which is undoubtedly an employment quota a number of EU countries can only dream about .
Despite the progress achieved so far , the freedom to move still lags far behind other European freedoms .
The idea of EU citizenship is also distorted by creating first- , second- or third-class citizens , as we are witnessing in our debate today .
A real transition from EU common market citizens to EU citizens with full rights and responsibilities should effectively take place as soon as possible , for the benefit of all of us .
( HU ) Thank you very much .
Commissioner , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as you know , there are officially 560 thousand Romanian citizens living on the territory of Italy , but according to some estimates the number exceeds 1 million .
A large part of them live in settlements on the outskirts of Rome , Turin , Milan and Naples .
There are no excuses for the murder in Rome : if someone has committed a crime , he should answer to the court for his actions .
However , as a liberal , I do not and cannot accept that a criminal of any nationality , belonging to any ethnic group , should serve as the basis for passing judgment on the whole of the given group , making room for violent acts of extreme force , the targets and victims of which are innocent people , as is demonstrated by the regrettable events that followed the murder .
I would like to remind you that I spoke to Mr Rehn , the Commissioner for Enlargement , many times about the fact that the post-accession migration of people living in poor social conditions and in abject poverty in settlements in the two countries that acceded on 1 January 2007 might emerge as a serious problem in the Member States of the EU , precisely because of the lack of integration .
The warning was not followed by serious measures during the accession negotiations .
I would not even dare to estimate the number of Roma in Europe who are escaping from the new Member States to the Member States of Western and Northern Europe in the hope of a better life , expressing their dissatisfaction with the integration policy of the country they left .
Similarly , in the period before the accession of these two countries , I raised the importance of preparing for migration problems related to this , and many of my fellow members rejected it , viewing it as a restriction of the freedom of movement .
Our response to this might be : are we creating a government decree at an extraordinary session that forms a legal basis for expulsion ?
Some serious concerns have emerged in connection with the constitutionality of the government decree and its relationship with international and EU law .
I am also thinking of infringements of the Free Movement Directive and the Racial Equality Directive .
Is this really how to face up to real problems ?
The 27 countries of the EU cannot fall into a situation where we transfer the problems from one country to another within its borders .
Allow me to read out just a few pieces of data that I read in a report by the European Commission and the European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights .
In 2002-2003 , more than half the pupils in special schools in Slovakia were Roma .
In Germany , only half of Roma children went to school , and 80 % of those went to special institutions .
In Hungary , Slovakia , Poland , Bulgaria and Slovenia , Roma children are the majority of those attending special schools .
In 2003 , 80 % of Roma in Slovakia did not have a registered place of work , 80 % of them in Romania and Bulgaria have incomes below the national poverty threshold , and I could list ... ( the President cut off the speaker ) I could list more of these cases . Thank you .
( NL ) Mr President , I believe we readily agree that an effective approach to crime deserves our support , and of course there is never any excuse for murder , but I believe we also agree that the right to reside in the Schengen area is a great asset and is tangible proof of European citizenship .
Anyone seeking to curtail it must be able to present very good arguments .
In particular , we must also beware of collective arrangements in this context , as when one talks about collective arrangements , one soon finds oneself talking about one group , and at this time we happen to be talking about the Roma . I think this very unfortunate .
I am pleased with Commissioner Frattini 's remarks about the Roma and about the fact that the European Union could do more for this group , but I remain unhappy , of course , with his earlier remark about the Roma in connection with events in Italy .
There is a good deal of talk today about the consequences of the migration that has been taking place since the enlargement of the European Union and that also took place previously within the enlarged Union , and of course there are consequences to contend with . I believe we must also look to some degree at the causes , however , and at ways in which we , the European Union , can do more for people travelling into the EU , as they are simply seeking better living conditions , employment , and better conditions for their families and children .
I am very much in favour of making better use of European funds in order to do more for the Roma , particularly in the new Member States , but I should like to reiterate that in the past this Parliament has already called for recognition of the Roma as a European minority - that is , a very special group , not comparable with other minorities .
Making the Roma a European minority would directly open up many more opportunities for the Union to do something about the problems .
I would reiterate our appeal to give a single Member of the Commission responsibility for Roma policy , rather than the current situation , where various Commissioners deal with this area , with one coordinating .
Competence must rest in one pair of hands .
Finally , as far as discrimination and social exclusion are concerned , these have been priorities of this Parliament , including during negotiations with the new Member States .
I am pointing the finger at the new Member States , but we know that there are also problems in the older ones .
At that time , all kinds of agreements were made with the governments of the new Member States , but these are being implemented unsatisfactorily or not at all .
I think that the European Union , the European Commission , must also play its part by revisiting the agreements made at the time of accession , particularly those concerning improving the situation of the Roma .
The issues concerned here are discrimination and social exclusion .
Hence our group 's appeal to discuss this once more with these new Member States .
We shall certainly be doing this ourselves , but this is also an appeal to the Council and particularly to the Commission : not only Commissioner Frattini , but also his colleagues .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is clear that even on this occasion , I must use the customary sincerity and frankness in addressing this Parliament , towards which I harbour the utmost respect , although this does not preclude me from replying to statements and considerations which I do not share .
I did not just start taking action and speaking out on this issue a few days ago .
Many of you have recalled one or two lines from an interview I gave - one of many - on 2 November .
I started taking a real interest in this question months and months ago .
This was at the request of Italian mayors , who as we know belong to different political parties , most of them in the centre-left .
At the conference of Italian mayors on 19 May , an important meeting which took place months ago - and considering how often I am quoted , I too keep a record - Italian mayors raised the issue of security in their cities with the Italian Minister of the Interior , blaming it on Europe .
At the end of that meeting , Mr Amato said that it was a grave mistake to think that the issue of security was exclusively the problem of the wealthy who had something to protect , and that it was a phenomenon which , unless addressed , would turn neighbours into enemies .
This led to the appeal to the European Commission issued that same day .
On 23 June , at the General Assembly of the ANCI - which as Italian MEPs will know , is the Italian local authority association , presided over by the Mayor of Florence - the Roma reception plan was unveiled following a meeting which had taken place a few days before between local authority representatives and myself .
At that meeting , which took place in Bari , the reception plan for the Roma people was unveiled and a request issued for European funding - which until then had not been requested by Italy - to cover the costs of the plan .
Italian mayors agreed that the integration system should be based on values of reciprocity , arguing that we had a duty to welcome and integrate immigrants provided that they accepted the rules of our country .
This was the position I adopted for months and months , ever since the start of the summer in fact , until an event promoted by the Mayors of Bologna and Florence led to a national campaign against people who clean car windscreens .
The Mayor of Florence - who clearly you know , he is not someone who can be suspected of having racist sympathies - even proposed criminalising homeless people who clean car windscreens .
I met with the mayors again , and then on 25 October , a few weeks ago , a memo from an Italian agency , after yet another meeting , said that ' the mayors do not agree , they want new laws immediately and are claiming that people do not understand the divisions that are forming within the majority .
These statements included an appeal from Italian mayors and from the Italian Minister of the Interior to me , because at that time no one thought that Europe had any tools like those subsequently adopted with the decree-law to tackle situations where there was a clear violation of Directive 2004 / 38 / EC .
This is why I started taking an interest in this subject , and to all those who took the floor to criticise me , I say this : I do not think that you will find a single time when I did not make a positive and honest contribution and cooperate with Mr Amato , who is responsible for this matter in Italy .
I challenge you to prove otherwise , that I refused to collaborate when asked to do so by Mr Amato and that I did not respond to requests that the Italian government legitimately made to Europe , as happened a few days ago .
A few weeks after these events , the first figures were released - I remember it well because , as a member of the European Commission , I received protests from Bucharest - by the Mayor of Rome , claiming that Romanians were responsible for 75 % of crimes committed in Italy , when in actual fact it was 75 % of crimes committed by foreigners , and so a much lower percentage .
Many of you will remember that people took to the streets in Bucharest to protest against these statements , yet despite this , I was still holding talks with the Mayor of Rome , offering him the resources of the European Social Fund .
He sent me a letter , which is clearly on the record , asking for help and support from Europe in the form of integration measures .
I considered that this was my duty and I did this .
To conclude , I do not think that anyone in Parliament can be in any doubt over the fact that , apart from what some of you have decided to raise here today , which is just one aspect of a particular interview , I trust that none of you can overlook what I have achieved over the years .
I have worked and I still am working to ensure that the Schengen area is extended before Christmas to include the nine new Member States .
What is this if it does not make freedom of movement more effective ?
If this happens , it will be partly down to my efforts .
I have been working on this for the past two and a half years and have never been afraid to say that the right of free movement is one of the pillars of the European Union .
I cannot believe that anyone can criticise me for being someone who does not want this right to be recognised .
A final word on the subject of Romania : I have listened to the Romanian MPs .
They more than anyone else know what I personally have done to help Romania join the EU , with reports , with advice , with the visits I have made .
Well , I do not think that anyone in Parliament can suspect even for a moment that I do not have , for Romania and for the Romanian people - not Romanian criminals , who I regard in the same way as Italian criminals - the utmost respect and deepest friendship , or I would not have done everything I have done over the last two years .
I do not think that extrapolating a single sentence from an interview can change these facts .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon .
Written statements ( Article 142 )
in writing . - ( IT ) International public opinion has been shaken by the recent tragic events in Rome .
I think it is unfortunate that some political groups are clumsily trying to exploit this situation for political ends , sometimes by evoking a dangerous and counter-productive return to the past .
European legislation establishes certain benchmarks that must be respected in all 27 Member States , bearing in mind that some countries , for geographical and logistical reasons , are easier to get to .
A system is needed that places rights above everything else , but which does not ignore the duties of the individual ; it is the very synthesis of these two aspects that determines the efficiency of policies in this sector .
A fundamental approach must also be adopted which on the one hand obliges Member States to integrate law-abiding European citizens and on the other allows them to expel those who break the rules .
This is a challenge in which Europe has a fundamental role .
in writing . - ( RO ) Criminality has no nationality .
I regret and condemn any criminal act , wherever it happens , and justice should do its duty .
Yet , one cannot stigmatize an entire people or ethnic group for a crime committed by one of its members .
Fighting criminality should not infringe upon the free movement of persons , a fundamental principle of the European construction .
European citizens have the right to live and travel freely , without fear of being persecuted or subject to acts of violence in the Member States .
I ask the European Commission to examine the decree recently approved in Italy , which allows expulsions without granting any legal guarantees to the persons expelled , especially if they are citizens of the European Union .
This decree has allowed abuses that certain Romanian citizens have already suffered .
I ask the Italian State to take actions in order to stop the abuses .
I believe this situation should be urgently solved in order not to allow European Union citizens to be discriminated against , regardless of whether they are Romanian , Italian , German , Spanish or French .
I don 't want this decree to become a dangerous precedent that would question the very respect of the Union 's fundamental principles .
This might affect the internal credibility of the European Union , as well as its credibility as a world player .
Protection of soil - Thematic Strategy for Soil Protection ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on :
the report by Cristina Gutiérrez-Cortines on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a framework for the protection of soil and amending Directive 2004 / 35 / EC - C6-0307 / 2006 - , and
the report by Vittorio Prodi on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety on the Thematic Strategy for Soil Protection .
( DE ) Madam President , I would not have asked for the floor again had not the Commissioner tried to play the victim in his closing remarks .
Commissioner , you must come to terms with the fact that you are in a European forum in which you have a specific obligation to be very careful about what you say , and what you said in the Il Messaggero interview was factually incorrect .
No authority in Europe has the right to go into some camp , ask a person ' How do you make your living ? ' and deport the person if they cannot answer immediately .
That is completely and utterly wrong , but that is what you said in the interview with Il Messaggero , so do not get into a huff when it is pointed out to you .
In any case the debate is closed .
I am sorry , but it is not possible .
I thought that you wanted to put an item on the agenda .
The debate is closed .
Let us proceed . ...
I am opposed to this intervention .
We cannot go any further with this , I thought that Mr Schulz wanted to add an item to the agenda .

Madam President , let me start by thanking the European Parliament and especially the rapporteurs , Mrs Gutiérrez-Cortines and Mr Prodi , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , and the other committees , for their contribution during first reading .
The Commission 's proposal for a thematic strategy for soil protection arises from work begun in 1998 on the initiative of the German Ministry of the Environment .
As a result of lengthy consultations with interested parties and the Member States , soil was recognised as a valuable natural resource and its degradation in Europe is becoming problematic .
The Commission has subsequently collaborated with the parties involved , above all with Parliament and the Council , so that soil protection issues can be better understood and a consensus can be reached in this area .
Τhe Parliament resolution on the 2002 Communication on soil protection made important recommendations to the Commission about the direction it must take to ensure proper soil protection in Europe .
With the conclusions approved in Majorca in 2002 , the European Council asked the Commission to propose a comprehensive , far-reaching strategy on soil protection embracing general principles , appropriate quantitative and qualitative targets , and schedules for gauging and evaluating the planned measures .
Let me turn to some more specific issues .
I find it very satisfying that soil degradation is recognised as a grave problem that must be overcome .
In view of the present Parliament 's keen interest in desertification , for example , it is important that here in Europe we should openly declare our commitment to dealing with the causes of this problem , both in Europe and around the world .
Climate change and certain unsuitable soil management practices are putting our soil at risk .
Determining the extent of degradation and then developing methods to ensure that soil is used sustainably represents a direct application of the knowledge-based approach that Parliament rightly values .
Thus efforts will be guaranteed to be more focused and resources will be used more effectively to serve our purposes .
Businesses are entitled to expect consistent application of Community legislation by Member States .
In the environmental impact analysis prepared by the Commission , it is estimated that there are about 3.5 million sites in the EU likely to have become contaminated .
A proportion of these , perhaps 15 % , have definitely been contaminated .
It is therefore vital that businesses should be confident that similar procedures will be adopted for the designation of contaminated sites , thus allowing for planned investments .
We must also bear in mind that there is a direct relationship between climate change and soil .
For example , according to a recent research article published in the authoritative international scientific journal Nature , over the past 25 years in the United Kingdom alone , the soil has been releasing 13 million tonnes of CO2 into the atmosphere each year - as much as would be given off by an additional 5 million cars each year .
It is also worth noting that the soil 's ability to absorb carbon and convert it into useful humus has not yet been fully exploited .
In the light of this , allow me to summarise the basic aims of the measures proposed by the Commission :
Firstly , a highly flexible , but consistent and comprehensive European soil policy must be developed .
With the creation of a framework for sustainable soil use , and with the adoption of measures at source , this policy will prevent further degradation of the soil , whose vitally important social , environmental and economic functions will be preserved .
Secondly , the necessary information on the condition of soil in Europe must be gathered so that we can make knowledge-based policy decisions and focus our efforts where the most serious degradation has been noted .
Thirdly , degraded soils should where possible be restored on the basis of an analysis of soil condition , to be carried out by the Member States .
The aim of the restoration should be to achieve soil quality consistent at least with the current and intended use of the land .
Fourthly , minimum common rules should be adopted for the EU as a whole to ensure a consistent approach among the Member States on matters of soil protection .
These common rules will help establish transparency and avoid distortion of the internal market .
The aim of the strategy and the directive is to launch a long-term policy on soil protection in Europe , so that in a few years , time all the Member States will have made considerable progress in this area .
I should like to draw your attention to certain key aspects of the framework directive on soil protection :
Firstly , the document produced after the codecision process has to be unambiguous and provide legal clarity for the interested parties affected by this legislative process .
We must avoid introducing amendments with legal loopholes , unnecessarily restricting the scope of the directive .
Secondly , the proposal already contains a high degree of subsidiarity and flexibility .
I understand that certain amendments are being proposed to increase still further the degree of subsidiarity .
However , you must be sure that these amendments will not create difficulties in the application of the directive by all Member States .
This applies especially to the amendments concerning programmes of measures in the priority areas specified in the directive .
Thirdly , in order to achieve a high degree of environmental protection , we must agree on a consistent approach to be followed by all Member States for the identification of contaminated soils .
The proposed deletion of Annex II would prevent us from achieving our aim .
To conclude , let me state that from now on the Commission will follow developments during the discussion of its proposal in the Council and in the European Parliament .
It will then define its position accordingly .
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank you and extend my thanks again to the rapporteur Mrs Gutiérrez-Cortines .
It was a task that we worked on together and I hope that this has helped to improve the text .
The directive under discussion today is aimed at protecting European soil from phenomena such as desertification , erosion and salinisation , increasingly linked with climate change and specific soil pollution .
Paradoxically , despite the numerous regulations on the use and release into the environment of pollutants , there was no directive that made provision for any obligation to identify and certify soil that had been seriously polluted before improving it .
However , this seems to bother some people in Parliament and elsewhere , who are critical of what they call an attack on subsidiarity and the suffocating presence of the European institutions , which are using measures such as the Soil Framework Directive to harass groups of farmers or businesses , with unfair laws , unjust provisions and new administrative and / or financial burdens .
What are we talking about ?
We are talking about the same directive that gives the Member States a period of some 25 years just to identify all areas in the national territory that might be considered seriously polluted , and thus compromised for various uses , both public and private , and all areas at serious risk in fact of desertification , erosion , salinisation and loss of compaction .
We are talking about guidelines for organising a systematic improvement scheme , where necessary , in the collective interest .
We are talking about the protection of human health alongside the protection of the environment .
We are talking about a framework directive that not only respects the autonomy of the Member States , but contains no onerous provisions .
I ask you then why this aversion on the part of certain Member States and Parliament - the usual suspects - to accepting a list of activities and sites that must undergo comprehensive investigation by the national authorities ?
What do they have to hide ?
Why so much aversion , when their representatives on the Council have already accepted the binding nature of the investigation into all sites proposed by the Commission in Annex II , and the principle of transparency which must prevail in soil-related transactions ?
In addition , there is added value in a Europe-wide approach towards soil monitoring , which will improve the ability of the Member States to learn about their soil .
In any case reports to the Commission will be practically automatic , since they will be based on satellite surveys .
It is not common knowledge perhaps that a project of this type has already been carried out by the Commission , resulting in the Soil Atlas of Europe , which is a good example of what can be achieved if we work together .
However , there is another argument for a Community-based approach towards soil protection , which is climate change , a challenge facing all of Europe .
This challenge will consist of extreme climatic events : more rainfall , longer droughts , less snowfall and an increase in sea levels .
This means that we have a duty to manage the soil , precisely to combat these challenges , to increase water retention times across the entire territory to prevent flooding and encourage groundwater absorption , particularly along the coasts , and prevent saltwater infiltration , most likely due to rising sea levels .
Forestry management to control the risk of forest fires , since increased droughts will mean a greater risk of desertification in case of fire .
Incidentally , this type of land management will encourage the use of renewable energy such as hydro-energy and biomass .
Finally , we should not forget the part the soil plays in balancing greenhouse gases .
During the vote on Wednesday , I would ask you to consider that what we need more than anything is a strategy and a directive that can guarantee future generations the use and enjoyment of the soil that we now have in our safekeeping , bearing in mind that each Member State faces the same threats and the same environmental risks .
The soil is a resource , a resource that is scarce in Europe , and we must maximise its availability .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy . - ( ES ) Thank you , Madam President , and thank you also to Commissioner Dimas for his decisive support for this directive .
We would like to welcome the Commission 's proposal , as of course it aims to protect the soil and preserve its capacity to continue to carry out its environmental , economic , social and cultural functions , all of which are of course essential to human activity .
Moreover , as the Commissioner rightly said , it proposes flexible rules , which are ambitious in their objectives and not excessively prescriptive in their content .
Within a common framework , a minimum common denominator , the Member States are going to define their own level of intervention , enabling more efficient use of administrative capacity at national level .
Despite the exaggerated resistance to this directive from some sectors , it is evident that soil is a vital resource that is essentially non-renewable , which is suffering under growing environmental pressure for which human activity has significant responsibility .
According to the reports that have been discussed here , it has been calculated that the cost of soil degradation is approximately EUR 40 000 million per year , a cost that is borne by society in the form of damage to infrastructure , increases in the cost of healthcare and many other factors .
This directive is of course based on the precautionary and preventive action principles , and on the principle that environmental damage must be rectified at its origin and that the polluter pays .
This legislation will mitigate the cross-border effects of soil degradation , which do also exist , and it will help to ensure equal conditions in the internal market .
I would like to highlight this aspect , because the different obligations that economic operators may impose , in line with different national soil protection legislation , could distort competition .
To conclude , the soil protection directive is a step forward that will enable competition with greater transparency and will protect areas of common interest such as water , food safety and human health .
Draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development . - Madam President , I would really much prefer that this directive was not coming before us .
I would be supporting a rejection of it - not because I do not want to see soil protected , because it is in all our interests that it should be .
But is the directive the right way forward ?
Commissioner Dimas , you said yourself that , at the moment , only nine Member States have legislation in place to protect soil .
I would suggest that it is up to the other 18 Member States to put legislation in place to protect the soil and we should not necessarily bring forward another directive .
We already have a Groundwater Directive and a Nitrates Directive .
As far as agriculture is concerned , we have got a lot of cross compliance legislation that deals with the soil and soil compaction .
I know the rapporteur is doing her very best to bring agriculture out of the proposal but I rather fear that what we will see is yet more bureaucracy and yet more difficulties for farmers .
The Commissioner also stated that there are 300 types of soil throughout the European Union .
It is very difficult to have one general directive to cover all these positions .
You only have to consider agriculture in a year like this , where in some Member States there have been droughts and others have had very wet weather , very heavy rainfall .
If you dig potatoes in many of the northern Member States this year , where there has been lots of rain , then of course you will cause compaction .
It is necessary to do that in order to get the crop .
That can be rectified the following year by subsoiling and repairing the damage to the soil .
We need flexibility in all this .
I really do think that the idea of having yet another directive in order to put more regulation upon our farmers and upon our industry is the wrong way to go .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Soil Protection Directive and the Soil Framework Directive , together with the Thematic Strategy for Soil Protection , rank among the key topics in this part-session , as of course they have done in recent weeks and months in the committees .
Normally a strategy - in this case about soil - is dealt with before the relevant directive , for good reason .
The advantage of proceeding in stages is usually that interests are discussed openly early on , so that the newly gained points of view can be taken into account as the directive is formulated .
With regard to the strong criticism that has been directed at the Commission proposal on the Soil Protection Directive , prior discussion about the topic would undoubtedly have been helpful , including to calm tempers all round .
In contrast to the normal nature of a framework directive , the Commission proposal - and I share this opinion - includes very rigid , detailed regulations , and commits the Member States to numerous examinations and reports that would result in a considerable administrative load .
This is unacceptable .
The new Member States already have national soil protection legislation that functions well .
For them , the Commission proposal would in some cases require their systems to be completely restructured : a high level of regulatory duplication and additional bureaucratic burden .
Therefore , numerous Member States are sceptical about this Directive , as has already been stated .
Nevertheless , in the last few months I have been heavily involved in transforming the Commission proposal , rewriting it .
Essentially , it was a matter of allowing the Member States more scope within which to operate , while still pursuing the goal of curbing the growing deterioration of the soil at European level .
I hope that , in the end , together with our friend Mrs Gutiérrez-Cortines , we arrived at a sensible result , including with regard to the significance of the overall topic of soil protection , a result that can be a model worldwide as well as in Europe .
May I therefore express my warm thanks to the rapporteur once again for offering a solution that enabled a compromise to be found .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in European legislation important natural resources ( water , air , species , the habitats of flora and fauna ) have specific Community legislation , while soil as a resource does not have any .
It is time to resolve this imbalance , and I therefore thank the Commission for its proposal , and also thank the rapporteur , Mrs Gutiérrez-Cortines , for the work that she has done .
As many of us have said , soil is a non-renewable and therefore limited natural resource that carries out many important ecological and economic functions , and it is the basis of almost all human activities .
There is no doubt that the involvement of the European institutional legislative system in this area will provide an impetus for the improvement of legislation that is being put in place in many countries , by giving it a coherent framework that is supported by European regulation , and possibly European resources .
With regard to the immovable nature of soil , which appears to be cited as proof by some in order to justify their preferences for national or subsidiary treatment rather than a European policy , the European Commission 's communication gives a sufficient argument as to why there needs to be a strategy at European level , and some colleagues , such as Mr Calabuig Rull , have mentioned this .
There are some Member States that are not very eager for the standardisation of soil protection at European level , and we therefore think that both the strategy and the directive are being given the right focus in terms of being a flexible legal instrument that is ambitious and not excessively prescriptive .
This means that each Member State can adapt it to its needs and to its social and economic situation , as a framework has been set out and long-term goals have been set .
In short , I think that the methodology of the proposal for a directive , based on prevention , raising awareness among citizens , providing information , identifying priority areas of degradation and making inventories of contaminated soil along with programmes of national measures and rehabilitation strategies is a coherent , efficient and flexible approach to dealing with the problem of soil degradation in Europe , while respecting the diversity of national situations and options .
I therefore ask this House , first of all , for a resounding ' no ' to the outright rejection that this proposal has received in some sectors , and to support the compromise amendments , which we arrived at following lengthy negotiations .
Perhaps this is not the directive that everyone would like , but precisely because we are all in some way against this directive , it may be able to serve us for the future .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , first of all , I too should like to convey my very sincere thanks to the rapporteur , Mrs Gutiérrez-Cortines , who has expended a great deal of energy in the last few months acting as a broker between proponents and opponents of a directive and who , in the end , managed to prepare the basis of a workable compromise .
Nevertheless , I am , as I always have been , of the same opinion as the Members of this House who want to reject the Commission proposal .
Let there be no mistake : our soils are the basis of our existence .
Without healthy soil there is no agriculture , no natural cycle of nutrients and , in the long term , no life .
We are responsible for protecting our soils from harmful effects where possible , and keeping them in good condition .
However , this Directive is not the right way to achieve this .
I do not believe that the question here is whether we wish to protect our soils better or not ; instead , at the European level the question as I see it is : is this within our jurisdiction or not ?
I believe that it is not .
Obviously , many Member States have developed their own functioning soil protection legislation , with more concern for and better solutions to local problems than would be possible with centralised regulation from Brussels .
Therefore I would ask the House to support the amendments that retain operational scope for the Member States .
Apart from that , we are about to create vast amounts of new bureaucracy and expense for administrative bodies and businesses .
There are amendments that would use the mere establishment of an industrial business as a reason to require detailed examinations and reports .
Let me quickly give you just one example , that of the building of industrial gas plants .
These separate normal air , which is a mixture of gases , into its components -which does not harm the soil at all .
We should not be worrying about things like that , but only about things where there is justified concern that they may contaminate the soil .
I believe that it is high time we refrained from the preparation and publishing of soil status reports .
That is an encroachment on freedom of contract .
The sale of land is covered by civil law , with good reason , and it should stay this way .
Ladies and gentlemen , I hope that , in the end , we shall achieve a Directive that really does guarantee protection of the soil and does not primarily increase administrative load .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , there is a saying that is well known in many countries : ' better late than never ' .
We are coming late to soil protection , after many decades of devastation , as is most evident in industrial regions , but it is good that we have come to realise that the soil feeds us and we must not destroy it .
We must not treat it like a commercial item and operate a policy under which the biggest business is the purchase of agricultural land and its alienation from agricultural production for other purposes .
This policy is already coming home to roost . It is good that we can finally see this and begin to protect the soil , our provider .
May I remind you of the thought to be found in the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , that one condition for effective soil protection is the maintenance and development of agriculture .
Soil nurtured by farmers retains its fertility , but when it is deprived of this care it turns into a desert .
On behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group , I support the reports by Mrs Gutiérrez-Cortines and Mr Prodi .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , we stand for a definite ' yes ' to EU-wide soil protection .
We have heard that soil is our most important non-renewable resource .
Soil deterioration costs the EU more than EUR 38 billion every year .
In Germany , only 2 % of the soil is still in its natural condition .
Twelve per cent of soils in the EU are affected by erosion .
Soil deterioration does not respect national borders .
Thus we are in the process of pulling the rug out from under our own feet by the way we are currently using our soils .
The EU proposal was good ; it went in the right direction , and we should have liked to improve it .
I know that the rapporteur fought for it , but unfortunately the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety watered down and further spoiled a great many points of the proposal under pressure from the conservatives and the agricultural lobby .
I cannot understand why we in the Committee on the Environment have agreed to maintain secrecy about soil containing inherited contamination .
I hope we shall still be able to correct this tomorrow .
It runs counter to transparency and also to the Aarhus Convention .
We also know that climate change and good-quality soil go hand in hand , that soil is an important carbon dioxide pool and is continually losing this ability to bind CO2 .
Because of the watering down that has happened in the Committee on the Environment , I fear that an ambitious Soil Protection Directive is , unfortunately , impossible .
However , we need effective soil protection with a shared timeframe and common criteria .
In short , we need effective , specific goals to put a stop to the deterioration of soils in the European Union .
We must not give up on creating something that is legally binding because of this so-called compromise .
Only legally binding measures will enable us to set an ambitious soil strategy in motion .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we have before us a very important and positive directive .
I would like to thank the Commissioner , Mr Dimas , who handled this .
I say so myself , as a member of a group that often criticises directives and the Commission : this is not the case here .
This directive will be a huge step forward for Europe , both from the point of view of the quality of its policies and its effectiveness .
With the completion of the framework directives on the natural elements , the soil will be considered as a key part of the biosphere , a fundamental element of the environmental and climatic balance and not just a platform on which to build .
The soil is living , it absorbs CO2 , it produces biomass : it must be safeguarded , it must even be improved , because European soil is particularly polluted .
Europe understands this .
We had a long and difficult discussion in the Committee , and I would like to thank Cristina Gutiérrez-Cortines for being so passionate about the subject .
However , there is the risk that Parliament will interfere with the Commission 's text .
I never like to see this happen , I always prefer it when Parliament is more advanced than the Commission .
Someone has even recommended that the directive should be rejected , but this would be a serious mistake .
Europe must look to the future .
The soil beneath us is soil that we all share , it is part of our planet .
It is the only soil we have and we must look after it .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Madam President , I can see some of the logic in EU-level legislation regulating water and air quality .
We share these in the EU and , indeed , globally .
However , I find the logic fails with the protection of soils .
Soils are much less mobile and , other than the setting of reasonable standards of protection , should be the competence of Member States and , within them , the local authorities .
Before the EU takes too much control of soils maybe we need to do a bit of soul-searching .
In Ireland , some of the problematic policies in terms of soil degradation have come top-down from Europe .
For example , the EU sugar reform removed beet from the wheat rotation .
The insertion of beet conditioned the soil and made it more suitable for cereals .
Also , the EU forest grants over the years have resulted in unsuitable spruce plantations that , in growth , have made the soil more acidic and , in harvesting , have in some cases compacted the soil , rendering it infertile , whilst in others have loosened it from the hills , from which it has been washed into rivers and lakes .
Soil varies enormously but it should be living and renewing .
The EU should ban soil destruction but leave its care and management to the people who understand its composition in each area .
( SK ) Before looking at the actual wording of the proposed framework directive on soil protection , we should consider whether EU legislation in this area is actually needed .
The opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs should be taken into consideration .
It clearly rejected the need for soil protection legislation in the EU on the basis that soil does not have any cross-border implications and is therefore a regional issue .
Despite the fact that other committees , in their respective opinions , were essentially in favour of EU legislation in this matter , certain factions are somewhat hesitant .
For example , the amendment to Article 5 in the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development clearly indicates that the degradation of the soil has local or regional causes and effects and it is therefore essential to adopt national as opposed to European measures .
This appears to be in conflict with the remainder of the text , which is clearly in favour of the framework directive .
Similar wording can be found in the amendment by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety to Article 2 .
On the other hand , it is important to recognise that the degradation of soil , as a non-renewable resource , has significant consequences on other aspects , for which legislation already exists , such as water quality , food safety , climate change , etc .
Even if both sides were partly right with regards to the need for a framework directive , I believe that the decision to adopt or reject the European framework will be a political one .
I would like to comment on the change in the character of the report from negative to positive .
One example is the replacement of the term ' risk area ' with ' priority area ' .
I believe that for areas where soil degradation needs to be stopped urgently we must use urgent terminology ; soil at risk must be indicated with a negative term to underscore the seriousness of the situation .
( CS ) Madam President , Commissioner , first of all I would like to thank the rapporteurs for their work on the proposal in question .
Unfortunately , however , I must endorse the position of the Committee on Legal Affairs , which calls on the committee responsible to propose rejection of the Commission proposal .
The reasons cited by the committee are valid and remain so in spite of the substantial changes made to the proposal in the last few months .
Soil really does not have any cross-border implications and should therefore remain a competence of the Member States .
Therefore , despite the positive changes , this proposal continues to represent a breach of the principle of subsidiarity .
As far as proportionality is concerned , adopting such legislation could be seen as a waste of resources .
Moreover , it is important to remember that within the EU there are many different soil types , which are used in a variety of ways .
It is true that the Directive in question has become what could be described as a flexible framework directive .
In addition , as a result of our new philosophy , the Directive is binding as far as the results are concerned , but leaves the decision on the form and method up to the Member States .
It is very positive that the existing Member State legislation covering these objectives does not need to be revised .
As such , we are genuinely moving towards the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality .
A positive side effect of this legislation would be the pressure that would be brought to bear on Member States with inadequate soil protection legislation at present , but I am not sure if this is the best way to put pressure on them .
After having weighed up all the pros and cons , I believe that it is not necessary to adopt the proposed directive .
The Member States can protect their soil on their own .
To conclude , I would like to reiterate the words of the French philosopher who said that if a law is not essential it must not be written .
( DE ) Madam President , I am another representative who believes that soil protection is very definitely a task for the European Union , and that the European Parliament should therefore adopt this Framework Directive .
Nor , to be honest , do I understand the comments that have been made about how the different soil types in our Member States have not been taken into account .
I am going to read this Directive through again and try to see what the other Members are referring to , for I did not notice these inflexible measures and proposals .
I should also like to mention the role of agriculture , for , in my view , the compromise amendment by the various parties is very important .
It requires the Member States , when using soil for agricultural purposes , to encourage crops and afforestation methods that could have a beneficial effect on soil organic matter and soil fertility and thus prevent landslides and desertification .
Likewise , agricultural methods that prevent the compaction and erosion of soils should also be supported .
We know that very often agriculture causes problems for soil quality , and I believe that this clarification is absolutely vital .
I do not believe that the ' support for agriculture , no matter what ' formula is sufficient to protect soils at regional , national , or even European level .
- ( PL ) Madam President , a framework directive on soil protection will in my view be an instrument that promotes the production of foodstuffs and adequate supplies of clean water for subsequent generations of EU citizens .
The soil also performs many other important functions : it is a substrate for human activities , along with towns and infrastructure , and also for nature and valuable landscapes .
Protection of the soil is essential for the maintenance of our natural heritage and raw materials .
In view of this situation , a flexible framework directive recognising the principle of subsidiarity will be an instrument that encourages Member States to protect their soils .
A directive couched in such terms is binding for Member States in respect of the results that may be achieved in the area of soil protection , but leaves Member States the choice of the forms and methods used to achieve such protection .
The proposals contained in the directive whereby Member States are to draw up lists of contaminated areas , including on a regional scale , to be published and updated every five years , are worthy of note .
This is important information for the protection of the life and health of EU citizens .
( FR ) Madam President , I would also first like to congratulate our rapporteurs and applaud the difficult job Mrs Gutiérrez has accomplished in producing a result to protect our soil .
Unlike other fellow Members , I believe a more restrictive legislative approach would have provided better protection .
I also think it is a pity that our fellow Members whose countries have stricter regulation than that proposed here are still trying to water down this report with amendments that I would urge you very strongly to reject tomorrow .
Our agricultural and industrial activities and transport plans have drastically affected the quality of our soil .
However , this same soil is the foundation of biodiversity and our food .
It filters and stores organic matter and minerals , and also helps us to access water .
It plays a prominent role in the fight against climate change .
Furthermore , faced with growing demand for food and energy production , it is essential that we safeguard and restore the quality of our soil and prevent desertification .
Without legislation at European level , we cannot hope for results .
( NL ) Madam President , I am speaking here on behalf of my colleague Mr Blokland .

This debate is a further demonstration that the proposed soil policy is very controversial .
Now that there are two proposals - the strategy and the Directive - it seems as though a new branch of environmental policy is being introduced .
I say ' seems ' , as nothing could be further from the truth .
Sustainable management of soil use already comes to the fore in 33 European directives , such as the Water Framework Directive .
Why , then , are we presenting overlapping legislation , entailing yet more burdens , particularly for Member States that already have a well-functioning soil policy ?
I shall be supporting Mr Prodi 's Thematic Strategy .
In my opinion , Member States who have yet to develop a soil policy must do so on the basis of the strategy .
The framework directive , on the other hand , is disproportionate and also , in my view , contravenes the principle of subsidiarity .
Unlike air and water , soil does not have a cross-border dimension , and policy is often implemented on a regional or local scale .
This is also the reason that I - that is , Mr Blokland - have joined in signing the amendment rejecting the Commission proposal .
Madam President , we are familiar with the idea that a land grab is the unwarranted appropriation of property belonging to another .
It seems to me that this soil directive amounts to an unwarranted power grab by Brussels , and of course brings with it an inevitable layer of fresh bureaucracy .
Soil , as has been said in this debate , unlike air and water , does not flow from state to state .
It has no cross-border dimension .
Thus policy on soil is and should remain a Member State issue .
IPPC , cross-compliance obligations , the Landfill Directive and the Nitrates Directive all give us more than enough EU involvement .
Hence I have no apology for favouring total rejection of this power-hungry proposal .
But , if , true to form , the EU nonetheless decides to meddle in this national issue , then one initiative it could consider is to introduce a payment to farmers in return for providing carbon sequestration in soil management and farming practices .
( FR ) Madam President , my first thought on this proposal for a directive was to reject the text .
I also think that a framework directive was perhaps not an appropriate solution .
Why have another text on the protection of soil when we already have a whole raft of regulations on soil , waste , pesticides and the protection of nature ?
Within the framework of better lawmaking , I was thinking that we should not appear to be going through the European Commission mill again .
I was putting myself in the shoes particularly of the mayors of our municipalities , who would find themselves with another text to dissect .
However , the reality is this : human practices have not respected the soil .
We have worn out the soil with intensive production .
In addition to this there is climate change and desertification .
Our urban planning policies have mineralised the soil , degraded it , and our fellow citizens are now surprised when they experience catastrophic flooding because the soil no longer absorbs the rain .
Who has not seen the open wounds in the landscape caused by the quarries that supply us with such valuable materials ?
Impoverished , dried out , degraded , polluted and bruised soil - that is what has become of this land , which previous generations spoke about with veneration because the land was everything to them : their work , their food , their life and , for many , their only property .
What was once our mother Earth we now regard with suspicion .
What will be the consequences of this degradation , this pollution , for our environment and health ?
Mrs Gutiérrez has done a remarkable job in trying to find an acceptable approach , in trying to bring closer together those who did not want this directive and those who did .
She has listened to Parliament .
She has found balanced positions that respect the need for subsidiarity in the choice of methods , because there is enormous disparity between the Member States .
The final text has evolved a great deal .
It avoids increasing the burden of administrative costs by encouraging us to put right the mistakes of the past , our agricultural , industrial and urban practices that did not respect the soil .
This report , completely remodelled by Mrs Gutiérrez , is satisfactory .
There is such soil diversity in the European Union that the subsidiarity guarantee is essential , while ensuring the protection and sustainable use of the soil .
( HU ) It is our fundamental goal to guarantee a healthy environment for our citizens , and there is stringent Union legislation for most elements of our environment .
Soil is the only element of the environment that we have not yet been able to regulate , so there is currently no Union instrument to halt the pollution of soil and the erosion of its quality , even though this causes many tens of millions of euros ' worth of damage for all of us .
According to the current legislation , it is only compulsory to act against soil pollution when the pollution enters other elements of the environment : groundwater , fresh water , agricultural products , or when it is too late to act in practice .
I would welcome the adoption of this new Directive by the European Union , and I am pleased that a compromise package has been created that is even more acceptable from the perspective of environmental protection .
It is also important from a Hungarian perspective that , as many of us have proposed , the legislation should also deal with tackling soil acidification .
This is a serious threat to agricultural production , so it must be fought using Union instruments for this reason too .
Recognition of the polluted areas will encourage remediation , so we can prevent the pollution of water tables for drinking water , and naturally the cultivation of polluted plants .
Soil regulation is therefore in the interests of farmers .
I therefore hope that certain MEPs from the right , including , surprisingly , some Hungarian MEPs , will not succeed in their endeavour to prevent the creation of a Directive to protect the interests of Hungarian agriculture and the environment .
In the spirit of the Directive , the rehabilitation of the polluted or soil-degraded areas uncovered will be a task for the Union , for which resources will need to be found in future Community budgets .
Madam President , this proposal for a directive on soil protection has huge credibility gaps .
Firstly , soil contents and qualities in different parts of an individual country vary considerably .
How much more variance will there be between the soils of 27 different countries with vastly differing climates ?
It is absurd to suggest that the EU can introduce a one-size-fits-all directive on soil from the Mediterranean to Scandinavia .
Now a word on behalf of our already hard-pressed farmers , many of whom have written to my constituency office to strongly question the need for a directive on soil protection .
They have quite rightly pointed out that they have a vested interest in protecting the soil , because it is their livelihood .
They also suggest that it would place another onerous burden upon them because of the failure to give enough recognition to existing national legislation .
The second large credibility gap is provided by the EU 's short-sighted open border policy , which has encouraged mass immigration from Eastern Europe to my country .
This has generated the need for a correspondingly huge programme of house building on every square inch of land available - some three million new homes by 2020 , we are told .
Even the green belt is under threat .
Burying vast acreages under solid concrete is not my idea of the best way to protect soil .
( NL ) Madam President , Commissioner , I support the soil strategy elaborated in the Prodi report , but oppose the Directive on soil .
I do so quite clearly on the basis of the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality .
Therefore , I have tabled an amendment rejecting it , but also one opting for another instrument , namely open coordination .
The objectives can be achieved in full by this means .
After all , it is abundantly clear that this all centres on stimulation , knowledge sharing and monitoring .
Everything is possible , including financial support from the Union .
The risk of duplication remains : once again , priority areas are designated , and even the sea bed has been drawn back into the debate .
The citizens of my country , the Netherlands , do not understand the reason for unnecessary legislation from above , from European level .
As has been said , there are already more than 30 directives concerning soil quality , either directly or indirectly .
What is the point of central legislation when a decentralised approach is also possible ?
Nevertheless , I do appreciate Mrs Gutiérrez-Cortines 's attempts to steer the rules more in the direction of subsidiarity .
Finally , I have submitted many more proposals , with 40 signatures : amendments aiming to further increase the emphasis on quality and soil protection and to respond to new challenges such as climate change .
No legislation should be adopted at European level , however .
I appeal to my fellow Members to support my amendments in this regard .
( NL ) Madam President , my thanks to Mrs Gutiérrez-Cortines , but I must say that , unfortunately , we do not agree with her .
There are a great many places in Europe with soil pollution or other soil problems such as erosion .
These problems must be solved as quickly as possible .
I assume that everyone agrees with this .
The Commission is proposing to solve soil problems at European level - and , as far as I am concerned , there lies the problem .
After all , soil problems are often local , and only in specific cases do they have a real cross-border impact .
European cooperation is desirable in the case of soil problems with a cross-border impact , and in that instance solidarity and cooperation are important .
In the case of local and national soil problems , however , European policy is completely unnecessary .
Many Member States already have a good national policy for solving and preventing soil problems .
Their policy offers a level of protection that is at least as high as the one now on the table .
The Directive on soil should take these Member States into consideration - they should be exempt from European obligations - and therefore we plan to vote against this Directive .
Madam President , I came to this debate from the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , where we rejected the proposal for a directive .
I favour the Prodi strategy with some reservations .
All of us want our soils protected , but I think those of us who are concerned about this directive believe that it is not necessary to do it in this way .
Mr van Nistelrooij pointed out a much better way of doing it , through open coordination .
The difficulty that I see in terms of soil protection is that we are not doing enough research on how to protect soils and that a great many researchers and advisers in the agricultural area are involved in form filling - forms that are created here in the European Union and which take them from their jobs of being involved with farmers in best practice in terms of soil protection .
It is very difficult for farmers to come to terms with more bureaucracy .
They are dealing with this every day , with cross compliance .
I believe that soils are being protected through good agricultural practice .
It is a Member State issue .
I had hoped that the debate here tonight would convince me that we need a directive but so far I have not been convinced of that .
I accept the work done by the rapporteur , and certainly she has taken out a great many of the concerns we would have , but it does leave me wondering why we need this at all .
I think that Irish farmers , who are in large measure now worried about the Reform Treaty , will see this as another attempt to stifle them in their everyday activities , unless we can convince them that is not the case .
I repeat the point that my concern is that the research and advisory work is , in fact , almost being destroyed by the levels of bureaucracy that the EU has created .
Yes , we need to deal with soils that are contaminated , but we have directives that already do that ; they are in place .
I am not convinced , from today 's debate , that we need such a directive .
I will remain open-minded until the end of this debate and see if I am thus convinced , but , so far , I am afraid not .
Yes to the strategy , but no to the directive .
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
Firstly , I would like to congratulate Mrs Gutiérrez on having spent a great deal of time and energy compiling a draft text that has actually managed to come for plenary debate and voting despite the resistance that can be experienced in the Parliament .
Today , when the extreme weather conditions caused by climate change and civilisation mean an increasing burden on soil and thereby on the whole living world , this legislation is of particularly great importance .
For my part , the Directive is one of the most important statements on the importance of agricultural activity , and the undying merit of the people who work to maintain , protect and improve the soil .
Without them , we would not only be deprived of food , but the environment around us would also suffer serious damage .
Sustainable agriculture implemented with knowledge is one of the mainstays of environmental protection .
However , one of the most important conditions for this is information . Information about the condition of the soil that is accessible to the public would be one of the fruits of the new legislation , which would finally protect people and farmers instead of polluters .
In my homeland of Hungary , the picture is typically two-fold : on the one hand , there is land of excellent quality and a high degree of legislative protection but , on the other hand , there is industrial pollution caused by forty years of Communism , and cleaning it up will take at least another forty years and EUR 4 billion .
Right now we are spending Union money on remedying this , but we would like to speed this process up in future , and this legislation would be a great help .
Finally , ladies and gentlemen , by adopting the Soil Protection Directive we are completing a process in the theological sense too .
We have already regulated all the elements that created the world : air , water , fire - meaning energy - and their importance is thoroughly and appropriately protected by the Union , so now it is the turn of the fourth element , earth , thus completing the circle . Thank you very much .
( NL ) Mr President , Secretary , I should like to start by expressing my sincere congratulations to our rapporteur , Mrs Gutiérrez-Cortines , and by thanking her for her enormous efforts to strike a balance between supporters and opponents of this Directive , in what is after all a very difficult dossier .
Personally , I am firmly convinced that a European Directive on soil protection is necessary , for various reasons .
I hope that there is still a chance of my convincing Mrs McGuinness .
Some MEPs reject the framework directive because their country already has far-reaching legislation on soil .
My region - Flanders - has also been conducting a progressive soil policy for some years .
For example , a system of compulsory soil certificates in the case of property transfers - even now inconceivable in many Member States - has been in place for a long time .
I should like to turn the reasoning of these Members around .
This flexible Directive not only provides a framework for those Member States that do not yet have a soil policy but is also clearly capable of preventing the undermining of the competitive position of the countries and regions that are already making an effort .
For this reason , it is very important that all Member States take the measures presented in the report .
There is certainly a cross-border impact in a great many places : for example , erosion in Flanders could generate sludge in the Netherlands and vice versa .
The Directive also provides a coherent framework for existing legislation on soil protection .
I could give more reasons but , because of time constraints , I shall conclude by saying that the report under discussion today fills all the aforementioned needs much better than the original Commission proposal .
I myself have also tabled many amendments and am very pleased with the result .
The proposal provides the Member States with sufficient elbow room , creates no additional administrative burdens or duplication , and also explicitly recognises the role of regional authorities .
I therefore hope for strong support from my fellow Members in tomorrow 's vote .
Mr President , may I first of all congratulate Mrs Gutiérrez-Cortines .
I think she has done an absolutely fantastic job on a report which is not needed or wanted by most of us and , Commissioner Dimas , in my opinion brings this House and the Commission into total disrepute .
You are bringing out legislation which is totally and utterly unnecessary .
What you should be doing is enforcing the legislation that we have .
The Commission usually fails totally in enforcing legislation which is already there .
I can give you a number of cases , but I do not wish to do it just now .
If I were to look , for example , at your colleague , Mr Kyprianou : we have just had yet another outbreak of foot-and-mouth in the United Kingdom ; we have got bluetongue ; today it was announced that we have avian flu .
He promised to stop all this .
He was going to do everything to stop it .
I believed him .
I believe the Commission when it says something , and yet what happens is that it does not enforce the legislation that is in place to stop these sorts of things coming in .
I call on this House to totally reject this piece of legislation .
I think Mrs Gutiérrez-Cortines has done an absolutely fantastic job and I will support her totally if this House decides not to reject it , but I shall briefly mention something that Mrs Scheele and Mrs Corbey said on erosion .
I totally agree with them .
Erosion is a big problem , but not necessarily in the European Union .
It is a problem where we have deforestation , and that is something that we could do something about .
I thought Mr Allister 's points were absolutely correct .
I think the Commission is failing us .
It fails to enforce regulations .
I will leave you with one last thought .
As a farmer , the soil is my life .
I will protect it to the very best of my ability .
Do not put more legislation in place .
Allow me to get on with protecting the soil , which provides the food , which provides the income for the people who live in the rural communities .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , what the Commission states - that soil is the crucial basis for the long-term , sustainable production of food , feed and biomass - is true .

It is also true that we cannot be satisfied with the state of the soils in the European Union , but to draw from that the conclusion that we need a directive at European level is to head off in the wrong direction .
Why is that ?
We are not taking account of the fact that there are already numerous regulations within the European Union that apply to soil and that we could use effectively .
Examples are the Habitats Directive , the Directive on integrated pollution prevention and control , the Water Framework Directive , the Groundwater Directive , and the rules on cross-compliance : with these , we can have a financial influence on the improvement of the situation in individual countries .
These are all existing measures , and if we add the Soil Protection Directive to them it will create regulatory duplication - parallel legislation - that really only creates more bureaucracy .
We say we want to reduce bureaucracy by 25 % by 2010 , but this will only achieve the very opposite !
It will achieve a 25 % increase .
In the Treaty , we undertook to regulate locally the things that could best be regulated at that level , and that is what we must do , and we must accelerate this .
The claim that the deterioration of soil is causing climate change is , however , unacceptable .
Scientists are unanimous that this deterioration is a result of climate change , and not the reason for it .

The rapporteur has certainly put a lot of work into this , but when we see that rules that are implemented by other directives have priority , that is unacceptable : we do not have top-priority directives and then lower-priority directives .
If we really want to achieve something , let us stick to the method of open coordination , transferring expertise from country to country .
That is the right approach and it will surely bring a result .
This Directive , on the other hand , brings only bureaucracy and confusing legislation .
( DE ) Mr President , where is the added value ?
Where is the justification for European regulations on soil protection ?
The Commission 's arguments concerning cross-border effects are rather artificial - at least from the ecological point of view .
Nor can I accept the argument that the internal market is distorted by different national soil protection legislation .
If the Commission really meant that , it would not present us with a framework directive , which accords the Member States the greatest possible self-determination in the definition of goals for soil protection .
That would increase the differences in soil protection legislation more than it would even them out .
Does not this approach reveal that the Commission is unsure as to how it should proceed in terms of subsidiarity when it comes to legislation for soil in specific locations ?
In such a case , where we all wish for better soil protection , but national legislation differs , should we not first use the instrument of open coordination ?
I believe so .
The Framework Directive takes the second step before the first .
We are missing out on the opportunity for countries without legislation to learn from countries with excellent soil-protection practices .
We shall also experience bureaucracy , particularly in those countries that already have tough legislation .
Why should they have to examine their entire country and define risk areas , even though they already have exemplary legislation ?
We do not need this bureaucracy , nor do we need the gilt-edged soil-protection system that Europe is now demanding from us .
In closing , a comment on the argument that Parliament itself asked for this Directive years ago .
Yes , that was the case five years and more ago .
However , in the meantime we have had experience of the Habitats Directive , the Directive on integrated pollution prevention and control , the Water Framework Directive and many more .
As well , unlike the Commissioners , we are held accountable locally .
Therefore we do not hold fast to five-year and ten-year plans when businesses and local authorities on the ground are telling us that it is too much of a good thing .
I acknowledge the efforts of the rapporteur to make the Directive less stringent , but bureaucracy is best avoided at source .
We still have the opportunity to do that by rejecting the Directive .
I hope that we give the Council a strong signal that it cannot expect its nations to accept this wave of bureaucracy .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all I would like to thank the speakers in this debate for their positive contributions and I would like to outline the Commission 's view on a number of key issues raised by Parliament .
Let me state that the Commission will follow the development of its proposal in the Council and in Parliament and consider its position under the light of these developments .
I will start with those aspects of the thematic strategy which appear in the report of the Committee on the Environment and which are not covered in the directive .
I welcome the support given in the report to tackling soil protection at a European level and the crucial links between soil protection and any strategy to combat climate change , biodiversity loss and desertification .
I also agree on the fact of reviewing existing environmental legislation to fully exploit and further strengthen the potential synergies with soil protection .
Finally , the resolution you have approved proposes a number of recommendations as regards a new directive on biowaste and a communication on desertification .
The Commission will take these recommendations into account when developing further measures implementing the thematic strategy .
Let me now turn to the soil framework directive and outline the Commission 's current thinking regarding the issues raised .
Many of the amendments proposed by the Committee on the Environment provide useful clarifications to the proposal .
I am referring in particular to a better clarification of the objective of the legislation and the role played by soil functions in ensuring sustainable use of soil in Article 1 , pursuant to Amendment 36 .
In addition , elements such as the introduction of voluntary codes of good practice or of a non-binding annex on possible measures to combat soil degradation can be supported in Articles 4 and 8 , pursuant in part to Amendments 58 and 65 .
The addition of acidification to the list of soil degradation processes that need to be tackled in order to consider the different soil conditions that apply in some new Member States .
The Commission also considers the clarification introduced in the provision dealing with the identification of contaminated sites in Article 10 , pursuant to Amendment 74 , as an improvement to the text .
However , there are also a number of amendments which raise concerns for the Commission .
Firstly , Amendment 38 on Article 1 , to make the soil framework directive subsidiary to other European Union legislation so that soil protection provisions contained in other Community legislation would take precedence over the provisions of this directive .
Secondly , it is clear that there must be a date by which the programmes of measures for tackling agricultural threats should be drawn up .
Thirdly , some amendments , such as Amendment 77 concerning Article 12 , eliminate the provisions concerning the information on soil contamination to be provided for certain land transactions .
The soil status report is a very important part of the Commission 's proposal .
It will increase the level of transparency in land transactions , assist the competent authorities in identifying contaminated sites and speed up the establishment of the inventory .
The costs involved in producing this report are negligible compared to the amounts of land transactions of such industrial sites .
I would like to emphasise the importance of keeping a common list of activities in Annex 2 .
This annex is of fundamental importance if a meaningful , enforceable , systematic and cost-effective inventory of contaminated sites is to be achieved .
Many Member States and regions already use a very similar list to carry out their investigations .
It is very important to have a common list to ensure harmonised implementation and to avoid a distortion of the internal market for the different sectors .
Thus we will provide investors , economic operators , public authorities and society at large with legal certainty and a common ground to assess the progress in identifying contaminated sites .
I shall provide a complete list of the Commission 's current position on the amendments to Parliament 's secretariat .
As I have already mentioned , I can assure you that the Commission will follow the development of its proposal in the Council and Parliament and consider its position in this light .
Once again I would like to thank the rapporteurs for their efforts .
Commission 's position on amendments by Parliament
Gutiérrez-Cortines report
The Commission will follow the development of its proposal in the Council and in the Parliament and consider its position in the light of this development .
The Commission 's current position on the proposed amendments is that there are 50 amendments which the Commission can accept fully , in part , or in principle .
These are amendments : 1 , 7 , 12 , 13 , 15 , 20 , 22 , 30 , 36 , 41 , 42 , 45 , 47 , 49 , 53 , 55 , 58 , 59 , 61 , 62 , 63 , 64 , 65 , 69 , 73 , 74 , 79 , 80 , 83 , 86 , 89 , 90 , 92 , 96 , 98 , 99 , 103 , 104 , 108 , 115 , 117 , 137 , 142 , 143 , 144 , 145 , 146 , 147 , 148 and 150 .
It cannot accept 111 amendments : 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 14 , 16 , 17 , 18 , 19 , 21 , 23 , 24 , 25 , 26 , 27 , 28 , 29 , 31 , 32 , 33 , 34 , 35 , 37 , 38 , 39 , 40 , 43 , 44 , 46 , 48 , 50 , 51 , 52 , 54 , 56 , 57 , 60 , 66 , 67 , 68 , 70 , 71 , 72 , 75 , 76 , 77 , 78 , 81 , 82 , 84 , 85 , 87 , 88 , 91 , 93 , 94 , 95 , 96 , 97 , 100 , 101 , 102 , 105 , 106 , 107 , 109 , 110 , 111 , 112 , 113 , 114 , 116 , 118 , 119 , 120 , 121 , 122 , 123 , 124 , 125 , 126 , 127 , 128 , 129 , 130 , 131 , 132 , 133 , 134 , 135 , 136 , 138 , 139 , 140 , 141 , 149 , 151 .
The debate is closed .
The vote on the Gutiérrez-Cortines report will take place on Wednesday at 12 noon and the vote on the Prodi report on Tuesday at 11.30 a.m.

Written statements ( Article 142 )
in writing . - ( DE ) In the light of the recent agreement on the Reform Treaty , the European Parliament , and with it the whole EU , must support and strengthen this renewed confirmation of a spirit of closeness to citizens and of the protection of subsidiarity , starting with the current initiatives .
The present proposal on the Soil Protection Framework Directive does not do justice to this intention .
The bureaucracy required in connection with it bears no relation to the actual usefulness of the Directive , and there is no way it can be justified to the citizens of Europe .
Quite the contrary , it runs counter to the decision of the European Council to reduce bureaucracy at EU level by 25 % by 2012 .
Soil is first and foremost a local resource .
Effective soil protection must , therefore , be carried out at the most suitable levels - at the regional or local level .
Only at these levels can the very wide range of soil characteristics be dealt with comprehensively .
Despite the extensive improvements made by the rapporteur , I reject this proposal , because it infringes the principle of subsidiarity .
Some Member States already have extremely good regulations , which could even be weakened by this Directive .
If necessary , the open-coordination method could provide a solution .
- ( PL ) Soil degradation is a fact .
One factor causing of this state of affairs is ... the common agricultural policy .
Self-sufficiency in foodstuffs has been achieved at the cost of the intensification of agriculture and degradation of the soil .
An increase in economic efficiency leads to the elimination of small and medium-sized farmers , the vast majority of whom are more environmentally friendly than large profit-oriented agricultural businesses .
This is the final call to slow down the process of abandoning farming and return to a rational and balanced agricultural model that protects the soil .
The current distribution of agricultural subsidies is , however , in conflict with this model .
Subsidies are directed above all to agricultural concerns and large intensive farms - 1.39 % of beneficiaries receive almost 30 % of subsidies !
The CAP must be amended .
Its main aim should be the production of healthy foods , not increased competitiveness .
Good soil should be a key element in this new policy .
That is why I support all actions that serve to protect the soil and restore its fertility .
Let us not compete with products originating from monocultures and intensive livestock rearing .
Let us say NO to cheap meat crammed with hormones .
Let us not compete with fruit that has little nutritional value , with cheap , low-quality wine or with GM foods , whose consequences we still know little about .
The European agricultural model should genuinely make us stand out in the world and be an example to it .
Amendment of Directive 2003 / 87 / EC so as to include aviation activities in the scheme for greenhouse gas emission allowance trading within the Community ( debate )
The next item is the report by Peter Liese , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Directive 2003 / 87 / EC so as to include aviation activities in the scheme for greenhouse gas emission allowance trading within the Community - C6-0011 / 2007 -
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it gives me particular satisfaction to open today 's discussion on the proposal to include aviation activities in the scheme for greenhouse gas emission allowance trading , known as the ETS , within the Community .
I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Liese , and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety for their efforts to date .
I should also like to thank the other three committees for their participation and their contribution to the discussion .
It has already become widely accepted that climate change is taking place and is being caused by human activity .
The measures we take over the next 10 years will determine whether we manage to bring the situation under control or let climate change reach levels so dangerous that it threatens the wellbeing and stability of our societies .
The EU has the capability , the resources and the will to lead the global effort to combat climate change .
This is the clear message that we will be delivering in a few weeks ' time in Bali , where the Future International Action on Climate Change Network is to be discussed .
This opportunity has allowed all three bodies , the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission , to set ambitious and binding targets for reducing emissions .
To achieve these targets , all sectors , including that of international air transport , must take their share of responsibility .
Until now , international air transport has been relatively favourably treated compared with other branches of the transport sector .
In terms of taxation and VAT , international air transport continues to enjoy privileges enjoyed when it was still a small , emerging economic sector after the Second World War .
In negotiations on the Kyoto Protocol in the 1990s , air and sea transport were exempted from targets to reduce greenhouse gas emissions .
These targets affect only internal flights .
Now air transport has grown considerably , and it has become the cornerstone of globalisation , as it brings peoples and economies closer together .
The Commission fully recognises the importance of air transport for international trade and economic development .
On the other hand , the negative impact of air transport on the environment has begun to make itself felt , the dramatic increase in greenhouse gas emissions being a palpable example of this .
The contribution of air transport to global emissions of greenhouse gases is equivalent to the total emissions of the UK or Canada .
In the EU , CO2 emissions from aircraft are nearly double their 1990 total , and the forecast is for 150 % growth by 2012 .
We cannot of course allow this situation to continue without taking measures to combat it .
The air transport sector must also contribute to the fight against climate change , otherwise we shall be seeing air transport favoured over other branches of the economy which are already making significant efforts to reduce their emissions .
This is precisely why the Commission proposed in its communication in September 2005an overall approach to combating the impact of air transport on climate .
Our strategy is based on policies already applied by the Community , but it also strengthens and extends them .
Our current policies include research into new , cleaner technologies and further improvement in the air traffic management system in Europe through the Single European Sky and Clean Sky programmes .
Yet these measures alone are not enough ; further action is needed , and for this reason , in December 2006 , the Commission proposed that air transport should be included in the Community system for emission allowance trading .
This is the proposal we are discussing here today .
The Commission 's approach is in two stages .
Firstly , from 2011 , all flights within the EU will be included in the system .
In stage two , from 2012 , all flights to and from EU airports will be covered .
We are starting with internal flights : this shows our willingness internationally to take the lead in this effort .
At the same time , we are exhorting our international partners to join the common endeavour .
At the last conference of the International Civil Aviation Organisation ( ICAO ) in September , we faced strong opposition from many third countries regarding our plans to include all aircraft in the trading system , regardless of nationality .
The reasons vary from country to country , but it became clear that the developing countries in particular believed we should begin at home before also applying the system to flights to and from their countries , and to their airlines .
As a result , we must show greater determination .
One of the main points of the proposal is that it must be applied to all airlines operating on the routes covered by the system , irrespective of their nationality , in order to avoid discrimination .
The proposal is in line with the Chicago Convention and the bilateral aviation agreements .
This position was supported by all 42 European states at the ICAO Conference .
Europe registered a formal reservation on this issue , thus allowing us room for manoeuvre .
The ambitiousness of the Commission 's proposal can be gauged by its call to stabilise emissions at the 2004-2006 average .
Given the forecasts of rapid growth in air transport , this will have a considerable environmental effect .
In 2020 we will be saving a total of 183 million tonnes of CO2 a year , equivalent to twice Austria 's current annual greenhouse gas emissions from all sources .
This means a 46 % reduction in emissions compared with a situation whereby air transport would not have been included in the Community trading system .
As regards the allocation of emission rights to airlines , we propose a simple approach .
In the period before 2013 , a percentage of the air transport emission rights will be made available by auction , in line with the percentage auctioned to other sectors .
The remainder will be distributed free of charge according to a benchmark , rewarding high-performance airlines .
From 2013 , the proportion of allowances made available by auction must be in line with the proportion agreed in the general review of the ETS .
Lastly , the same harmonised benchmark methodology will continue to be applied to the distribution of the remainder .
Ladies and gentlemen , combating climate change is now the EU 's highest priority .
The proposal under consideration concerns one of the most rapidly increasing sources of greenhouse gas emissions .
It therefore symbolises the Union 's resoluteness on this issue .
Through specific measures it seeks to control a difficult problem in a branch of the economy where effective policies have not hitherto been successfully developed .
Europe has a duty to play a leading role , but must do so in a way that does not provoke its international partners .
In view of the serious doubts expressed by many of them , we must both show our determination and adopt a sensible position .
The Commission firmly believes that the proposal we are considering tonight corresponds precisely to this need .

Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , over the last few months , almost everyone has realised that we must do something to prevent dramatic climate change .
Reports by the International Panel on Climate Change ( IPCC ) and by the former chief economist of the World Bank , Sir Nicholas Stern , have made it clear that the cost of doing nothing is very much greater than the cost of doing something .
Sir Nicholas even said that , if climate change continues unchecked , this could have the same negative effects in economic terms as the two World Wars .
This example makes it clear that this is not a trivial matter or some line dreamt up by the Greens , but a matter of tangible economic interests and something that truly affects every individual .
It was , therefore , logical that the summit of EU Heads of State or Government in March decided that the European Union would reduce its emissions by at least 20 % by 2020 and , if we reach an international agreement - which we do want to do - by 30 % .
It is therefore inconsistent for a major area of the economy not to reduce emissions at all and instead let them continue to increase unchecked .
As the Commissioner said , aviation emissions have doubled since 1990 .
It is a good thing , then , that the Commission has made a proposal to reduce CO2 emissions in the aviation sector .
However , this proposal also has flaws , and I am certain that the European Parliament will address these tomorrow with numerous amendments .
I should like to thank all those who have made it possible for us to come to what I believe will be a satisfactory result tomorrow , especially the shadow rapporteurs , Mr Jarzembowski , the rapporteur in the Committee on Transport and Tourism , who was involved in the Hughes procedure , and all the participants from the other committees that provided an opinion .
Although some positions diverged , I think that we were agreed on many important points , and shall agree tomorrow when it comes to the vote .
We are agreed that we want one single starting date .
Both flights within Europe and intercontinental flights that take off or land in Europe should be included in the system on the same day .
This is essential for reasons of competitive neutrality , and also because two thirds of CO2 emissions come from intercontinental flights rather than flights within Europe .
Naturally , we must also speak with third countries , so the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety also adopted a motion that the Commission should continue to negotiate with third countries .
If we can then agree on common goals and a common approach that achieves just as much as the Commission proposal , then we should also enter into negotiations with third countries .
We are agreed - this is a second point that I should like to highlight - that we wish to auction a much larger proportion of allowances .
This is important for newcomers , but mainly to lessen the ' windfall profits ' that are so prominent in the electricity sector .
Electricity prices have risen even though the allowances were distributed at no cost .
This is why a larger proportion must be auctioned off and the revenues given back to citizens in the form of lower taxes and charges on environmentally friendly transport ; this is also what the committee decided .
We are agreed that the upper limit for emissions should be below 100 % , because this is about reducing and not just stabilising CO2 levels .
In addition , the Committee on the Environment has decided to introduce a multiplier of two , in order to take nitrogen oxide emissions into account .
If the Commission makes a proposal - which is then adopted - as to an alternative way to deal with nitrogen oxides , then this multiplier can be dropped , but for now , we need it .
Furthermore , it is also very important to bring in an efficiency clause , and the Committee on the Environment has also decided on this .
The goals that the airlines set themselves for improving efficiency must be achieved , and the aviation industry must not be able to simply buy its way out .
Ladies and gentlemen , tomorrow there will be some very close voting in some areas .
There are some points on which we do not all agree .
On behalf of my group - not as the rapporteur - I can say that the Committee on the Environment has gone too far at some points .
For example , we shall not support a cap of 75 % , and we should still like to obtain relief for small and medium-sized enterprises .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats will vote in favour of the report in any case , and I believe that Parliament as a whole will give a clear signal to the Council .
We should not be satisfied with merely formulating general goals to tackle climate change , but should also implement specific legislation .
We shall note with great interest whether the Council puts its words into action or whether it falls short of its own targets or even weakens the Commission proposal .
The European Parliament will not accept that .
( Applause )
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , rapporteur , I would first like to offer my warmest thanks to the Commission for having dared to break the aviation taboo , without waiting for the IATA decisions , and I congratulate the rapporteur for having supported this .
As draftsman for the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , I will concentrate on just one point : the issue of competition .
You mentioned , Commissioner , that this directive removes an error in the regulations that favours other modes of transport over aviation .
That is an excellent point .
It should not be the case that the way it is applied ends up favouring certain companies over others .
Practically every one of us has , at least once this year , flown with an airline that did not exist three years ago .
We cannot therefore guarantee an income to the existing companies .
The greater the share allocated for distribution by auction , the better the competition will be .
Rapporteur for endorsement Committee on Industry , Research and Energy . - ( RO ) Mr. President , Mr. Commissioners , dear colleagues , as rapporteur for the ITRE opinion , I can tell you that the directive has been intensively debated in our committee as well .
We have tried to find a balance , as correct as possible , between the necessary environmental protection actions , on the one hand , and , on the other hand , the necessary actions to assure the competitiveness of the European air industry and to establish equal treatment for all the airlines in the European Union .
I am glad to find proposals also made by the Committee on Industry in Mr. Liese 's report , especially regarding the simultaneous inclusion into the trading system of greenhouse gas emission shares of all arrival and departure flights in the Community and the provision of access on the market for all newly-established airplane operators .
At the same time , I have to say that I regret the solution found for establishing the total quantity of shares to be periodically distributed to airplane operators .
The 2004-2006 reporting period , accompanied by the continuous periodic decrease of the total quantity of share , does not take into consideration the fact that the aviation sector is under full development in the new Member States , thus disadvantaging the airline operators in these countries and , at the same time , it could prevent a competitive development of the European aviation sector , according to the transport requirements brought about by the economic and social development of the European Union .
I appreciate that the variant voted by the ITRE Committee , which proposes 2008-2010 as a reference period , with the possibility to change the total quantity of shares in order to take into consideration the future developments in the sector , either increasing or decreasing , better defines the necessary framework for a correct competition between the airplane operators in the European Union and for the competitiveness of the overall European economy .
I hope the vote to take place this week will be as close as possible to the line adopted by the ITRE Committee .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Transport and Tourism . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we in the committees are unanimously of the opinion that the starting date for European airlines and airlines from other countries that fly into our region must be the same , for we must consider the competitiveness of our airlines .
Nevertheless , at the ICAO Conference we saw that the other countries opposed this .
In this respect , there is no point in having a double deadline .
In the Committee on Transport and Tourism , however , we believe that the deadline should be 2012 .
Commissioner , you quite rightly pointed out that aviation was excluded according under the Kyoto Protocol .
In this respect , 2012 is the correct year , because this allows the best chance of convincing third countries to participate after all .
It provides enough time for them to join our system or to set up an equivalent system .
We cannot accept your leading role and that of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , which goes even further and wants to see 2010 , because this completely overlooks the global dimension of aviation , the nature of the competition between airlines .
We cannot disadvantage our airports , our airlines and employees in this area .
Therefore , the best acceptable time would be 2011 , but the date must apply to all airlines .
Furthermore , we must strike a balance .
We want to reduce the effects on the climate of aviation , but we must also keep in mind the competitiveness of our airlines , and consider the airports and passengers - especially those from remote areas - and keep prices affordable for them .
We therefore advocate achieving a reference period soon , and having a sensible percentage for the allocation of allowances - the Committee on Transport was in favour of 110 , but just under 100 would also be feasible - and a sensible percentage for the auction .


There is one thing we must not do : we must not make it too expensive for our passengers in Europe from more remote areas to travel by air - so , please , let us have a gentle introduction to emissions trading .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , Mr Liese has produced an excellent report .
Nevertheless , as PPE-DE Group shadow on the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , I support my group 's amendments , which seek what we think is a better balance between wish and reality .
In my view , the emissions trading scheme is the most cost-efficient , demand-sensitive and objective market-based instrument available for reaching Europe 's greenhouse gas emissions reduction target of at least 20 % by 2020 .
The aviation sector 's contribution to greenhouse gas emissions is growing fast , and I therefore fully support its inclusion in the emissions trading scheme .
We must have a single start date .
I think 2011 is a reasonable compromise between the different dates we have before us .
And with this , Europe will lead the way strongly for the rest of the world .
The amount of allowances allocated by auctioning should be set at a reasonably high and increasing level , in order to avoid the disadvantages for competition which are associated with grandfathering and benchmarking .
Auctioning is much more economically efficient ; it encourages new entrants , innovation , and the reduction of emissions through technological and operational improvements .
The revenues generated from the auctioning of allowances should be reinvested in R & D in the aviation industry .
There is much potential for technological innovation , to reduce the sector 's CO2 emissions .
Furthermore , the single European sky , which the Commission mentioned , when fully implemented will reduce CO2 emissions by up to 12 % , and this should be put into operation with urgency .
In our amendments we have highlighted the importance of giving special consideration to remote and isolated regions .
Now we can only hope that the Council will respond positively to Parliament 's insistent wake-up call .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to start by thanking the rapporteur , Mr Liese , for his fair and constructive cooperation over the last few months .
The inclusion of aviation in emissions trading is the first legislative procedure after the Spring Summit , at which the Heads of State or Government set some ambitious goals .
We in the European Parliament have also put the topic right at the top of our political agenda by setting up the Temporary Committee on Climate Change .
Experts and climate researchers have reminded us in hearings in the Committee on Climate Change that we must reverse the trend in CO2 emissions in the next 8 to 10 years .
After that , emissions must not increase any further ; instead , greenhouse gas emissions must be reduced so that global warming can be kept to less than two degrees .
The starting date of 1 January 2010 that was voted on in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety has central significance .
We need to have 2010 as the starting date because there is no time to waste in combating climate change and the ' braking distance ' in climate change matters is very long and increases with the passing of time .
As far as the Commission draft is concerned , that is , the distinction between flights within Europe and intercontinental flights , I must say that I am very glad - Mr Jarzembowski mentioned this - that we in Parliament are agreed that we want one single starting date .
As well as the time-related components , the upper limit for the emissions allowances to be issued is very significant .
Here we need to proceed realistically and be ambitious .
Capping emissions from aviation at 80 % of the 2004-2006 figure is a good and fair approach .
This capping is necessary so that the 87 % increase from aviation between 1990 and 2004 does not undermine the reduction in other industrial sectors .
To ensure that allowances fetch an appropriate price so that the emissions trading scheme can be effective , the proportion of allowances to be auctioned off must be much higher than the Commission has proposed .
Therefore , the Socialist Group in the European Parliament suggests increasing the proportion of emissions allowances to be auctioned to 25 % .
As far as revenues from auctioning off the allowances are concerned , the Member States should use these for measures to adjust to climate change and for the fight against climate change , both within and outside the European Union .
Another important matter : all aircraft upwards of a take-off weight of 5.7 tonnes must be included in the emissions trading scheme .
Tomorrow we shall vote on an amendment that provides for only aircraft with a maximum take-off weight of more than 20 tonnes to be included .
Our aim must not be to leave business jets out of the emissions trading scheme while fully including aircraft carrying holidaymakers .
I should like to think that tomorrow we shall be bold in moving towards more climate protection , and I hope that tomorrow we shall set it in motion .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , my thanks in the first instance to the two rapporteurs on this topic , Mr Liese and Mr Jarzembowski , who evidently did not always have a smooth ride together on this topic .

Together with investment in new technologies and the creation of further infrastructure , emissions trading can make an important contribution to the reduction of CO2 emissions in aviation .
In doing so , emissions trading must allow growth rather than hindering it .
It should provide incentives to renew fleets and create more efficient , more modern aircraft .
The Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe is making the case for including all airlines in a single starting date of 2011 .
In our view , the emissions from 2004-2006 should serve as a basis .
This rewards those airlines that have updated and modernised their fleet in the past .
My group proposes setting the cap at 90 % .
This is ambitious , more ambitious than the Commission 's proposal , but not excessive .
A maximum of 30 % of the allowances should be auctioned off , in our opinion , to make it easier for new operators to enter the market .
The revenues from the auction should primarily be used by the aviation sector to reduce emissions .
We are also in favour of increasing the take-off weight to 20 tonnes , because we want to keep the bureaucratic hurdles for small operators to a minimum .
I make the case for including aviation in a trading system that is as open and efficient as possible .
Limiting how credits can be used makes no sense ecologically .
Just as every gram of CO2 emitted must be regarded in the same way , the reduction of emissions , too , has the same effect everywhere .
There are good economic reasons for unlimited , flexible access to credits if emissions can be reduced elsewhere less expensively .
Aviation is vitally important to Europe 's economic growth .
Globalisation is unthinkable without airlines that are competitive .
In future , people will want to fly more , not less , not only in Europe but also , in particular , to other parts of the world ; we have to acknowledge this .
The EU is single-handedly deciding to include aviation in emissions trading and is making both friends and enemies internationally in the process .
If we Europeans want to lead the way in climate politics , we have to ask ourselves not only how far we should go but also how we can take everyone else with us .
This question will come up again in Bali .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is time to distance ourselves from insular EU solutions in climate policy .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( LV ) Thank you , Mr President .
Greenhouse gas emission trading is the correct response for reducing gas emissions in aviation .
However we need to carefully evaluate the terms for introducing quotas in order to avoid distortion of competition for the Member States ' aviation companies and EU residents ' travel opportunities .
The majority of air carriers in the new EU Member States are lagging far behind the aviation companies in the older Member States , in terms of both the number of passengers carried and greenhouse gas emission volumes per capita .
It is difficult to evaluate the extent of the future growth of air carriers in the new EU Member States , but I am in no doubt that in order to balance the mobility indicators for residents of the Member States , transport volumes in the newer Member States must grow significantly .
It will hamper the equalisation of EU residents ' mobility if terms are not laid down in the rules for greenhouse gas emission trading to specify how rapidly growing aviation companies will be able to continue their growth , so that the resources spent on the acquisition of emission quotas do not act as a brake on their development .
Parliament 's Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety has supported the proposal to create a reserve for new aircraft operators , and this is the right approach .
However , in order to ensure that aircraft operators with varying initial positions and growth trends , are treated equally , we ought to reserve part of the quotas for aircraft operators with rapidly growing capacity .
Growth that exceeds the average EU annual rate of growth in passenger numbers by a factor of at least two could be taken as an indicator of rapid growth in capacity .
Both of these proposals are vital for fostering competition in the EU air carrier industry . Thank you .

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I should like to thank Mr Liese for his excellent cooperation and congratulate him on his work .
However , I have to say that I appreciated his work a lot more before he had to seek compromises within his political group , which , if adopted , would substantially weaken the position taken by an overwhelming majority in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety just last month .
That matters , because we have to substantially strengthen the Commission 's original proposal if we are to have any real chance of seriously reducing the impact of aviation on our climate .
According to the Commission 's own figures , all its proposals are currently going to achieve is that , by 2020 , instead of aviation emissions growing by 83 % under a do-nothing scenario , they would grow instead by 78 % .
That reduction is the equivalent of less than one year 's growth in air travel .
That is not serious , it is not ambitious , it is not global leadership .
To achieve emission reductions via trading relies crucially on scarcity of permits .
Since aviation emissions have already doubled since 1990 , to call for an initial allocation equivalent to average emissions over the period 2004-2006 , or even 80-90 % of that , is simply too generous .
I therefore urge you to support my Group 's amendments for an initial allocation that is 50 % of that amount .
We also need 100 % auctioning so that there are no windfall profits at the expense of the passenger .
Finally , I urge you to vote against the ALDE Group 's frankly scandalous amendment , which seeks to remove the restrictions on access to clean development mechanism and joint implementation project credits , not just for aviation but for all sectors in the ETS .
Removing such limits provides an open invitation to business as usual .
Aviation and the other industries will be able to continue to increase their emissions without constraint by merely buying up the supposed reductions made elsewhere , and , considering recent reports that up to half of reductions from CDM and JI projects are questionable , this will fundamentally undermine the integrity of the entire scheme .
Tomorrow the European Parliament faces a serious test of whether it really wants to take real action on climate change , and , if it is going to show genuine leadership , then it needs to support the Green amendments .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( GA ) As the shadow rapporteur for the GUE / NGL Group , Jens Holm , is absent , please accept his apologies for the fact that he cannot be here with us for tonight 's debate .
It now falls to me to outline the GUE / NGL view .
It is time for airlines to become involved in the efforts to combat climate change .
Greenhouse gas emissions from international aviation have doubled since 1990 and account for between 5 % and 12 % of carbon dioxide emissions in the EU as a whole .
The EU 's leaders committed themselves in March of this year to achieving a 20 % reduction in carbon dioxide emissions - compared with the 1990 level - by 2020 .
We now have an opportunity to show the wider world that we will meet those targets .
The Commission proposal recommends that the aviation sector should not have to comply with the average for the years 2004 to 2006 .
That is more than 90 % above the 1990 level .
The Commission is also recommending that auctioning should account for no more than about 3 % of the allowances .
Airlines will have no incentive to lower their levels themselves if they can get their carbon emission permits free of charge .
The auction percentage should be 100 % - as we ourselves as well as the Greens are advocating - since this would be consistent with the ' polluter pays ' principle .
The GUE / NGL Group believes that the proportion of allowances to be allocated should be 20 % of the average for the years 2004 to 2006 ; this would limit the amount of allowances that the aviation sector could buy from other sectors or under the ETS scheme ; and the auction rate could rise to 100 % .

Airlines are a major contributor to greenhouse gas emissions in Europe and throughout the world .
It is time to put an end to special treatment and take into account the impact on the environment and on climate change .
Mr President , climate change is a transboundary environmental problem and the EU is an important actor in the global climate work .
Emissions are rising globally and time is short .
The Swedish June List therefore supports the main thrust of the proposal we are debating this evening .
Integrating aviation into the EU 's emissions trading scheme is an obvious and cost-effective step in the climate work .
However , it is not the trading in itself that leads to reduced emissions , but the total emissions ceiling which we choose to establish .
The scheme needs to be broadened to include other climate-impacting sectors in order to achieve the climate goals we have set ourselves .
We are in favour of the Committee 's proposal of a single start date for the Directive .
It is unacceptable that the Commission has allowed itself to be influenced by international political pressure aimed at delaying the climate work and distorting competition .
The Directive should also apply to everyone .
We cannot allow exceptions for particular persons or events .
Our Heads of State must pay for their costs like the rest of us .
Anything else would be unreasonable .
Finally , I would like to point out that common environmental goals should not be used as a means to introduce a common tax policy .
The revenues from the action should not be transferred to the EU as proposed by Amendment 14 .
Each Member State must be allowed to decide for itself how to use the revenues from the sale of emission allowances .
Mr President , we propose to bring a new industry , aviation , into the European emissions trading system ( ETS ) , yet that system is spectacularly failing .
It has not reduced carbon emissions at all , yet it has created a whole new stratum of bureaucracy , administration and expense for industry .
It has transferred large sums of money from countries which have been responsible with initial allocations to those which have been profligate , notably from Britain to France and Germany .
Within Britain it has had the perverse effect of transferring funds from hospitals to big oil companies .
The ETS has created a complex web of politically influential vested interests and rent seekers who have lobbied to manipulate the system for their own ends .
The Commission 's plans to get tough over allocations will simply move the problem on .
With lax limits on allocations bought in from outside Europe , EU funds will flow to countries like China , where regulation is minimal and records may not be accurate .
So big foreign polluters will make vast profits for little effort , great damage will be done to European economies and CO2 emissions will continue unchecked .
Mr President , it is quite simply scandalous that we propose to bring a new industry into this failing system .
I say to you that you must put your own house in order before you think of extending it .
( DE ) Mr President , it is always interesting to hear how some Members refuse to accept reality .
I find the Commission proposal good .
I also believe that Mr Liese has further improved it .
This is a classic case of the internalising of external costs .
Markets can function only if we create the right framework conditions .
We have all undertaken to apply the ' polluter pays ' principle , but this also means that those who bring the costs into being must also pay the price .
This means including all costs , and that includes the environmental costs brought about by the CO2 emissions of aircraft .
I also believe that we must bring more courage and ambition to this matter .
We all know that for all of us , including many people in the United Kingdom , doing nothing in this case would be much more expensive than taking this step .
However , we must also be fair .
All sectors must contribute to this system .
We know that CO2 emissions at a great height have a much more damaging effect than CO2 emissions on the ground .
This must also be taken into account when we are talking about including these aircraft emissions .
In addition , this is a sector that is characterised by very high growth rates .
Secondly , we must also say that we have the potential to introduce various management measures to further limit these CO2 emissions .
That must also be taken into account .
The Community has an obligation to function as a role model in the international arena .
We cannot expect other countries to get on board if we are not setting a good example .
I also believe that we have significant opportunities here to build on the competitive advantage in this particular sector that we already have to some degree , so we should provide innovative companies , in particular , with the support they require .

( NL ) Mr President , first of all , my compliments to Mr Liese , who has prepared a superb report .
My compliments also to our shadow rapporteur , Mr Groote .
Aviation , like other sectors , must make a contribution to the fight against climate change .
We cannot achieve the climate objective of a 20 or 30 % reduction by 2020 unless everyone makes a contribution .
The aviation industry is utterly opposed to receiving excessively tough action , but we hear this from all sectors , and if we appease everyone , absolutely nothing will come of our climate policy .
Thus , it is a good thing that the Commission wants to bring aviation within the ETS , but it has been rather too generous in terms of the number of emission allowances it plans to allocate to the sector .
In my opinion , 80 % of emissions should really be the upper limit .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety rightly wants to see a gradual decrease in this ceiling , in line with the European climate objective of a 20 or 30 % reduction .
Aircraft operators have promised a 50 % increase in the efficiency of aircraft engines .
The Committee on the Environment intends to hold them to this , and that is a good thing : the more economical the better .
A third important point concerns the auctioning of allowances .
In my view , as many as possible should be auctioned : 25 % is really the minimum .
The proceeds of the auction must go towards combating climate change and , in particular , to adapting developing countries to climate change .
The least developed countries make hardly any contribution to climate change but have to suffer its gravest consequences .
This legislation enables us to do something about this .
Mr President , I have here a letter from General Motors complaining about Parliament 's position on reducing carbon dioxide emissions from cars .
I have another letter from British Airways - another bit of special pleading - complaining about this measure and how the extra costs will mean it will be more difficult for them to invest in the lower carbon technology in planes that they wish to have .
I do not believe a word of these letters !
Just special pleading from one industry after another .
Have none of these executives read the United Nations report ?
This report says that , within 20 years , up to two billion people will face severe water scarcity , partly because of climate change .
We have to do something about this .
Michael O 'Leary of Ryanair may be the unacceptable face of public relations for the airline industry , but he speaks a lot of truth when he says , very clearly , that he does not give a toss for the environment so long as he can stuff his pockets and those of his company full of gold .
Well , we have to provide some balance .
We have to ensure and facilitate the position of our constituents who enjoy travel , but we also have to make sure that the concerns for the environment are properly addressed .
Now , this measure here goes a small way towards slowing the spectacular growth of the airline industry .
It will encourage the industry to invest in abatement measures .
It will ensure that at least the basic principle that the polluter pays should be incorporated into our approach .
But above all we have to ensure that we have a cap which encourages measures to be taken , a cap which , I think , must be at least a little bit more ambitious than that currently proposed by the Commission .
- ( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , may I thank all the rapporteurs .
We are faced with a complex problem .
On the one hand we have environmental considerations relating to our atmosphere , while on the other we have to contend with the development of air travel , an important source of economic activity , embracing transport and tourism and operated in a very competitive market .
Decisions on this matter must be prudent and unambiguous , but in no case should they discriminate against European carriers , including those from the new Member States .
This could be very damaging to European aviation without achieving the goal of a reduction in harmful gas emissions .
It is obvious that the earth 's atmosphere knows no borders .
Inclusion of carbon dioxide emissions from civil aviation in the EU scheme must therefore be recognised as legitimate .
In addition , I am of the opinion that we should take account of emissions of other gases too , such as toxic oxides of nitrogen .
I feel that the most important actions are those that will effectively restrict harmful gas emissions through the use of innovative solutions in the aircraft engine sphere , the design of aircraft with better aerodynamic parameters , and a radical improvement in air traffic control that limits unnecessary time spent airborne .
I see emissions trading at this time as something of a substitute .
I would see it as sensible today to accept a baseline period of 2007-2009 , to set an emissions ceiling at a level of between 5 to 10 % over 100 % in view of the rising interest in flying , and to include in addition non-EU carriers operating within the EU .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , climate change is one of the most serious problems we face .
If we want to safeguard our future , we can no longer ignore the environmental question and we must be ready to change our lifestyles , particularly in terms of mobility .
Transport is one of the sectors that contributes most to energy consumption and the one that relies most on the use of fossil fuels .
Within this sector , aviation is playing an increasing role .
In 2004 , greenhouse gas emissions from aircraft in the EU rose by 87 % compared with 1990 .
Europe is responsible for around half of CO2 emissions from aviation .
This trend is no longer sustainable and it is essential that we take proper measures , for example by cancelling the tax benefits for this industry .
I believe that the Commission 's proposal for a directive on emissions quotas for aviation is a vital tool for tackling head-on the problems relating to climate change and we welcome the report by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety that reinforces the original directive .
However , and it is important to underline this , we need to maintain some qualifying points in the debate and vote that will be held tomorrow .
Of these , I think the Community emissions trading system should apply to all flights , both to and from the EU .
This cannot be put off until after 2010 .
It is also important that a significant proportion of quotas are allocated by auction and the proceeds of these must be used to subsidise the cleanest forms of transport , for example by abolishing taxes on environmentally-friendly transport , in order to create low-cost tourism that uses less polluting forms of transport such as trains .
We also need to encourage research into more efficient aircraft engines and more effective air traffic management .
I hope Parliament will not devalue the compromise put forward , which will allow Europe to become a leader in the fight against climate change .
( NL ) Mr President , I am speaking here on behalf of my colleague Mr Blokland .

The proposal to incorporate aviation into the emissions trading scheme should be a clear signal from the European Union of the need to contribute to the ambitious reduction targets agreed at the start of this year .
In the light of this , the parliamentary committee responsible has endorsed the Commission proposal and even pushed for it to be tightened up .
Last week it seemed we were on course to reach an agreement at first reading .
This hope was reinforced by the Council Presidency but proved to be unfounded , as no mandate could be obtained from the Council .
This week it is important , in my opinion , that we do not settle for a dilution of the Commission proposal but strive for a proposal with clear ambitions in order to be consistent with the course charted this spring with regard to emission reduction .
Thus , I wholeheartedly support the course charted by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety .
( DE ) Mr President , I agree with the points that almost all the other Members made .
I say ' almost ' all the Members , and will concentrate , therefore , on three formal aspects .
Point 1 : We do it over and over again in this Parliament , and today we are doing it again : we relegate important legislative proposals to the evening sitting .
That way , we ensure that as few people as possible are listening and that , with only a very few exceptions , there is nobody sitting in the visitors ' gallery , and we ensure that journalists , who should be reporting all this , are most likely already giving their attention to other things in the evening .
Secondly , we are always hearing , and we have heard in this debate too , that we , the European Parliament , have to stick our necks out at first reading and take particularly demanding positions , as the Council will subsequently put the brakes on anyway , and in the end we shall not get where we want to go .
I caution against this position : it was true for a long time but is increasingly no longer the case .
We saw it in relation to the air-quality regulations , for example , where there have been and still are initiatives where the Heads of State or Government , and even the Ministers for the Environment , have gone a long way with us even at first reading .
With the results we have decided upon , that will mean that in 10 to 15 years , in Central Europe , we shall have to cordon off all cities between Nuremberg and Bologna because we cannot keep within the values that have been set .
Thirdly , here in the European Parliament , we must implement a viable working relationship to achieve sensible joint solutions .
In what has occurred in relation to this Directive over the past weeks and months , I see a successful path and a successful attempt to do that .
Environmental , transport , economic and industrial matters are not yet included in a wise compromise , but they will be , I believe , after the result of tomorrow 's vote .
Now all we have to do is persuade the rest of the world to join in and do something for the environment .
Mr President , first of all , I would like to say that it is lovely it is to see Mr Dimas back .

It is pretty much accepted that the carbon emissions in relation to aviation are currently a very small proportion of the overall carbon emissions of the EU .
But you would have to be a fool not to see the incredible growth in the sector in recent years and to recognise that the industry 's own plans for expansion are enormous .
Currently , the technology for alternative , less polluting fuels are limited in relation to aviation .
This is why it makes absolute sense to accept that aviation is likely to continue to grow , but we need to ensure that this growth is offset in other sectors of the economy which do have alternatives in terms of reducing carbon emissions .
That is why it is essential that aviation is brought into the emissions trading scheme ( ETS ) .
I would also like to underline the point that the EU has a principle that it is the polluter who should pay .
Under the current ETS , far from the polluter paying , we have seen many polluters making windfall profits thanks to the ETS .
This has to stop .
It is right , therefore , that many of these carbon creators should be auctioned , especially when the wholesale reform happens .
Perhaps one of the most interesting aspects of this debate is the question of where ETS auction money should be spent .
In the forthcoming ETS review , there is potentially EUR 200 billion which could be raised if we went for full auctioning .
I am sure many of us could think of countless ways to spend that kind of money , but I believe it would be sensible if we could steer this money via the EU budget , if possible , to spend on climate change initiatives which could include transfers of finance to the developing world including , for example , to pay for reforestation in developing or emerging countries .
But , also , there needs to be recognition that even in our own Member States we are likely to see a huge increase in terms of energy poverty .
Perhaps we should think about steering the money in this direction as well .
So the decisions we make tomorrow will give an indication of where we should go , in terms of the ETS reform as a whole .
( NL ) Mr President , instead of all manner of ineffectual taxes and charges , the Commission is proposing the present market-based instrument ; a choice I endorse wholeheartedly .
It is environmentally effective , economically efficient and eminently suitable for broader application ; at least , it has the potential to be all of these things .
It became clear quite early on that opinions in this House are somewhat divided .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety ended up diametrically opposed to the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
My colleague Mr Krahmer has said all that needs to be said about that .
Compromise amendments have now been drawn up , and tomorrow 's vote will show whether or not emotion leads the way .
Climate issues are hot , and voting Green is extremely sexy .
There is not so much wrong with that in itself , but as I see it , a stranglehold on the European aviation sector and the associated employment cannot be the intention .
I consider it counterproductive to attempt to artificially diminish one particular mode of transport , in this case aviation , in favour of another .
All the evidence suggests that demand for high-speed transport outstrips supply .
We need all modes of transport ; we really cannot manage with trains and buses alone .
The aim was to develop a model that was as workable as possible and could be extended and / or copied worldwide - and , yes , if we really want to be environmentally effective , the latter is of vital importance .
If not , our efforts will remain just a tiny drop in the proverbial ocean , and that is what I should like to avoid .
Mr Rack put it so aptly when he said just now that , to be effective , we have to persuade the rest of the world , as only then will our action be of any use .
( PT ) Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as a Member elected for one of the seven outermost regions , I must inform this House of the immense concern in those regions regarding the implementation of the directive under discussion .
That is for one simple reason : the outermost regions are almost exclusively dependent on air transport and any increase in the price of that service , which would inevitably arise from the implementation of the directive , will make access more difficult , increasing their isolation , which was a determining factor in granting the outermost regions special status at European level , as enshrined in Article 299 ( 2 ) of the EC Treaty .

On the other hand , the increase in air transport costs will result in an even greater competitive disadvantage for those regions , penalising tourism , the main economic activity for the majority of them .
We can expect a reduction in the number of tourists and / or in the amount each of them spends , which could lead to a drop of at least 2 % in GDP according to studies carried out by the Government of the Canary Islands .
Yet improving the accessibility of outermost regions to reduce their isolation , and promoting their competitiveness , are two of the three major EU policy priorities for the outermost regions set out in the Commission communication , ' A stronger partnership for the outermost regions ' , which Parliament fully supported .
We have to highlight how contrary to and inconsistent with those priorities the implementation of this directive will be .
I think that , for the first time we have before us an EU legislative act which would have the effect of increasing the isolation of these regions .
Certainly Amendments 5 and 6 tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats following a compromise between the rapporteur , Mr Liese - whom I must congratulate on his excellent work - and Mr Jarzembowski and Mrs De Veyrac , do to some extent offset the effects of the directive , but they are not enough .
I therefore call on the three institutions to try to find better solutions , in the next stages of the legislative process , to lessen the impact of this directive on the outermost regions .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the rapidly growing aviation sector must be integrated into the emissions trading scheme as quickly as possible .
That will mean that this form of transport also starts making a contribution to the reduction of the anthropogenic greenhouse effect .
From the point of view of transport policy , our legislative task now is to refine the framework conditions .
These framework conditions must be defined in such a way that the possible impetus for savings is provided via an appropriate price per tonne of CO2 , without drastically limiting the number of flights .
To achieve this , when the airlines are first issued with allowances , for example , this must be done in such a way that the lack of such allowances can be realistically balanced out on the market , otherwise flights would have to be cancelled , and I do not know how much of that we and our society could cope with .
Even if airlines were issued with 100 % allowances upon entering the scheme - and none of us is asking for that - an annual growth in aviation of 5 % would require an equally high volume of savings in terms of CO2 emissions .
That is no small challenge .
The greatest potential for reduction is in the realisation of the Single European Sky , which means that it depends on the political will of the Member States .
The airlines ' only option for the time being , therefore , is to update their fleets , if there is sufficient capital left over for this purpose after the planned auction sums are taken into account .
That will hardly be the case for regional airlines .

Mr President , bearing in mind that politics is the art of the possible and that sometimes the best can be the enemy of the good , I would like to thank my colleague Mr Liese for the tremendous effort he has put in to reach a position - an agreement - not least amongst all of us in the PPE-DE Group but also with colleagues across this House .
International aviation is outside Kyoto obligations , and the complete lack of progress in ICAO over the 10 years that they have been mandated to address emissions makes it important that the EU takes the lead .
The proposed emissions trading scheme should apply to all flights , including from third countries , from a common start date for competitiveness reasons .
I would now like to concentrate the remainder of my two minutes on one point that I do not think any other colleague has raised .
It is a point that is a very serious national problem for Ireland .
Under the proposal , fungibility or convertibility of aviation allowances to Kyoto allowances free of charge is proposed .
An airline may demand conversion of its aviation allowances to these Kyoto-backed allowances , and the issuing Member State must comply .
This is a huge problem for us in Ireland , because , if airlines were to convert free of charge , we would have to replace these Kyoto allowances by those that the Irish state would have to buy on the market at full market price .
The Irish registry will carry a disproportionate share of flights on our books due to the size and geographic spread of some airlines , as the airlines , particularly Ryanair , are registered with the Irish Aviation Authority for all of their EU operations .
The success of Ryanair means that they have 20 operational bases across the EU serving almost 130 destinations and , yes , increasing .
But they operate only a small proportion of those flights in Ireland .
I would like the Commission specifically to say whether it will accept Amendment 47 , which deletes those particularly difficult sentences .
The polluter-pays principle cannot be interpreted to mean that the Irish taxpayer pays for pollution in our fellow EU Member States .
( FI ) Mr President , urgent action is needed to fight climate change and , just as has been said here , all industries that release greenhouse gases into the atmosphere have to be involved in that action .
Aviation cannot be given a free ride .
The greenhouse gases from air traffic are increasing fast .
This is important to remember , as it is often said that air traffic only accounts for two or three per cent of greenhouse gas emissions .
As said before , greenhouse gas emissions from aviation have increased by as much as a half since 1990 .
The idea now to include air traffic in emissions trading is specifically an EU proposal .
The purpose is also to establish a global system over the longer term , one where air traffic also shares the burden .
We might now learn a lesson from the drawbacks of the general emissions trading directive and increase the proportion of auctioned allowances in the initial allocation of rights .
The initial allocation , and the system as a whole , must encourage a reduction in emissions , so that short air journeys are replaced with train journeys , and that would suit especially well those regions with a dense urban network and population .
On the other hand , we have problems in areas where there are fewer inhabitants and which are a long way from urban centres , and it is important that the European system should take account of remote areas in a balanced way .
( NL ) Mr President , by introducing emissions trading into aviation , Europe shows ambition , the ambition to tackle CO2 emissions and combat climate change .
After all , nowhere in the world to date - not even in California - has such an ambitious approach been proposed .
Even compared to the emissions trading scheme for industry , this is a very ambitious plan .
However , what did our Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety do ?
It tightened up this proposal considerably on the key points , and thus we have flown past our objective .
Europe must show leadership , but leadership means not only taking the lead , but also persuading others , winning them over - and this in the extremely competitive environment of international aviation .
Therefore , the new regime should on no account lead to high costs and bureaucracy , particularly for Europe 's airlines , but there must be a gain for the climate .
A net climate benefit must emerge , preferably worldwide .
I am pleased , therefore , that amendments have now been tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats and also by the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , which I expect to steer us onto a realistic course tomorrow .
This is necessary in order to promote cleaner flying in practice , too , as having to go through the bureaucratic mill of an auction - even with clean aircraft - is hardly salutary .
As regards the number of available allowances , too , I look forward to a more realistic outcome tomorrow .
However , this proposal alone will certainly not suffice .
The Commission and the European Parliament must stand shoulder to shoulder to bring about the Single European Sky , as five times more environmental gain is to be achieved from that .
Mr President , I hope that we can step up the pressure on Member States in this regard , too , as only then can we make a real difference to the climate .
Mr President , tonight , for once , Parliament really can lead the way in protecting the environment .
I think , as Mr Belder said , the Commission was really a bit timid in its original proposal .
The European public , I think , will be looking to this Parliament to set the highest standards and ambitious targets .
As a member of the Committee on Transport , and along with my colleagues in the PSE Group , I did not support Mr Jarzembowski 's line that was pushed through with , I regret to say , the support of the Liberal Group , the ALDE Group .
We wanted to strengthen the original proposal , not to water it down .
So I say congratulations to Mr Liese for his report , and I quote , ' we do not just inherit this planet from our ancestors , our parents , we borrow it from our children ' .
And , like Ms Lucas , I appeal to all the groups in this Parliament to think about how they vote tomorrow ; be prepared to compromise , be sensible , be realistic , but above all , be positive , because Parliament has a chance to be at the forefront of protecting the environment for 500 million citizens and their descendants .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , many thanks to the rapporteur , Mr Liese , for his good report , and to Mr Jarzembowski .
I believe that , overall , the compromises are very workable .
Politics often depends on symbols , and we are sending a clear signal here : it is the first legislative proposal since the Spring Summit .
Thus we are beginning actively to implement climate protection .
The seven key points of this report - the commencement of emissions trading , the reference period , the number of permits , the use of the proceeds , exceptions for smaller aircraft and the method of calculation - have , in my view , been sufficiently and reliably addressed in the compromises .
I do not wish for any derogations , although I do believe a special additional arrangement for the outermost regions is required , so that these areas are not disadvantaged .
I believe that the proposal is very good and that competition has been sufficiently acknowledged .
We should not forget : even if 100 % of the allowances are auctioned - purely theoretically , as we have just heard - that is a sum of EUR 2 billion , definitely a manageable sum for the airlines , which will , no doubt , have an effect on the setting of prices .
However , I do not envisage any problems with this , including in connection with the large number of flights .
I should like to see the EU push further ahead with this in the context of climate protection , and I hope that we can convince all the other major competing airlines to join this agreement .
Mr President , civil aviation seemed to be a luxury in the past , when mostly the rich and the so-called jet society used the advantages of quick flights .
Nowadays , at least in the European Union , civil aviation is a necessary part of our life , without which the Parliament and the Council simply could not work .
If the distance from Brussels is more than 1 000 km , there is no realistic alternative to flights in the absence of rapid trains .
With the accession of the new Member States and the boom in low-fare airlines , we have two or three times more flights than before the enlargement of the EU .
International aviation is not yet covered by the Kyoto Protocol .
However , direct emissions from aviation account for about 3 % of the EU 's total greenhouse gas emissions , and this is increasing fast .
I think that the quantity of the three allowances should have been based on the emission rate per capita of greenhouse gases in the different Member States , as there are large differences between them .
I feel that it is unfair that western European countries have the right to emit around three times more greenhouse gas from aviation as Hungary and other new Member States .
I think this principle should be applied in other environmental policies requiring a total amount of decrease instead of a percentage decrease .
Otherwise , those who polluted less in the past will be punished .
- ( SV ) Aviation must pay for its environmental costs , and therefore this proposal is good .
Aviation cannot be exempt from environmental costs which other means of transport pay .
But I have a problem with the frenzy against aviation permeating this debate as if it were the greatest environmental villain and the best thing would be if we stopped flying completely .
That is quite simply not true .
Aviation accounts for five per cent of carbon dioxide emissions .
A full aircraft uses less fuel per passenger kilometre than a car .
It can and must be made even better , but through us making tough demands on the aviation industry which drive developments forward , not through us stopping flying .
Travelling and meeting people from other parts of the world is important .
I am convinced that Ryanair has done more for understanding among the peoples of Europe that the EU 's cultural projects together .
Less travel must therefore not be an end in itself .
Isolating people takes us back in history to a dark period .
The Commission 's proposal is heading in the right direction , but it has a cynical perspective - that it is someone else who should fly less .
An attempt has been made to exempt flights by Heads of State or Government , while at the same time citizens are required to act responsibly .
Proposals like this cause politicians to be held in well-deserved contempt , and I am glad that we on the Committee on the Environment have removed these particular formulations .
Equally cynical is how a number of Left colleagues are demanding that we reduce aviation by more than half in only a matter of years .
Those who make such proposals are unlikely themselves to take the train from , for example , Stockholm to Brussels .
It is as if their own journeys are invaluable but others travel just for fun .
With that kind of irresponsible proposal it will be ordinary people who are forced to pay , not politicians and corporate executives , where someone else picks up the bill .
It will be students who can no longer afford to study abroad in order to go out and see the world .
It will be grandmothers up in Norrland who will not be able to see their grandchildren in the city so often .
It takes us back to a time in the 1980s when an SAS cabin consisted only of corporate executives , politicians and union bosses .
Instead we shall vote tomorrow for tough but realistic demands on the aviation industry which force them to pay for their environmental costs , which force the development of better and more environmentally friendly aircraft technology , but which above all make it possible to prioritise , to compare aviation with the real carbon dioxide villains , like coal-fired power stations .
The important thing is that emissions are reduced , not flying .

- ( PT ) Mr President , whilst agreeing with the Commission 's and the rapporteur 's proposal , I should like to draw your attention to the fact that it is not in line with Parliament 's objectives set out specifically in the report on reducing the climate change impact of aviation ; I would draw attention especially to the situation of the most isolated territories which are particularly dependent on air transport , especially the outermost regions .
Nor does it follow the line of the question raised by the Commission itself in its communication of last September on a ' Strategy for the Outermost Regions ' . I quote : ' What measures are needed to prevent the aim of reducing emissions from adversely affecting the accessibility , economy and citizens of the ORs ? '
In voting for Amendments 99 and 100 supported by the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , Parliament will be addressing the issues raised through possibly setting up an impact assessment and suitable mediating measures to ensure that the outermost regions are included in the emissions trading scheme in the future - a necessary step that must be done in an appropriate way and guarantee environmental and economic sustainability and mobility in those regions , which are totally dependent on air transport due to their geographical situation .
- ( PL ) Mr President , today we are discussing a draft resolution on the inclusion of European civil aviation in the EU 's emissions trading scheme .
In my view , this very important draft was drawn up in haste , without proper consultation with the aviation industry , especially representatives of the new Member States , and without analysis of the economic and social consequences of its introduction , as well as from the aspect of environmental protection and of the consequences for civil aviation and the threat to Europe 's economic development , for example in the sphere of tourism , which is the main source of income for very many regions .
The draft also constitutes a threat to the competitiveness of airlines and may cause a radical deterioration in the already difficult financial situation of many European aviation companies .
I therefore think that the earliest start time for inclusion of the aviation sector in the scheme for all communications is 2012 .
I definitely support the scheme 's so-called broad geographical scope , in other words the inclusion of all flights from and to the EU , regardless of the national attribution of the carrier .
This is the only solution that guarantees that the required environmental effect is achieved and that does not expose European carriers to a drastic fall in competitiveness .
In my view , the total number of allowances allocated to the aviation sector should be set at Community level by reference to mean emission levels arising from aviation , at least for the years 2005-2007 , while the emissions limit should be set at a level of 100 % .
Bearing in mind the diverse positions presented during the course of our discussion and the fact that this project relates both to the environment and to the economies of all EU states , as well as to our citizens , we should take decisions that are both measured and good .
Mr President , I guess I come from one of those ultra-peripheral regions , in this case called Finland .
If I was not able to fly here , it would probably take me two days to get here .
This is not by bike : it is by boat , car and train .
That is just by way of introduction .
I think there are really six points here , and I would like to focus on one - but I will go through all six .
Point number one : entry into force - I would go for the EPP-ED compromise , in other words , 2011 .
Caps on emission rights : for me , 95 % .
Reference , yes , for me : 2005-2007 ; auction , for me : 25 % ; profits : partly back to the airlines , and then partly to other good climate change causes .
But for me the big issue is number 6 : the allocation basis ; in other words , ATK versus RTK .
Now , I realise that this is a difficult issue for many , but for me it is not an environmental issue in that sense .
Really , the cap has already been set .
What we are talking about with ATK and RTK is the allocation between the different airlines .
Neither system is perfect , but we cannot be in a situation where airlines coming from the more peripheral areas will be punished and unequally treated in comparison to those airlines which might be based in Frankfurt , Berlin , London , Brussels or Paris .
Train is not an option for us : it is that simple .
The way in which climate change is going , I am afraid the only place where we are going to have snow in the winter in the future is going to be Lapland .
I know that those flights might be full going up there , but they may not always be full coming down , so we have to be very careful that we do not make this into a race to the bottom .
So I would urge all of my friends and colleagues tomorrow to vote on ATK rather than RTK .
It is a life and death issue for the peripheral areas , but I know it is not a life and death issue for those coming from the middle .
It remains to be seen whether Father Christmas 's sleigh will be included in the scheme for greenhouse gas emission allowance trading within the Community .
- ( PL ) Mr President , I fly here from Kraków , where it was white over yesterday and snow had covered the entire city , so it is not so bad yet .
Protection of the natural environment and countering negative climate changes have become a challenge for the whole of humankind .
As an EU citizen , I highly value involvement in the protection of the European Union 's environment .
However , we should never forget the impact of legislation in this area on the European economy .
In discussing the directive on CO2 emissions in aviation today we have run up against this problem .
Air transport is currently experiencing a sharp increase .
This concerns the new Member States in particular , where this market is developing exceptionally rapidly , providing an increasing number of jobs .
On the macro scale , this is leading to a rise in GDP .
It is consequently my view that the new Member States should have the opportunity to adapt the level of development of aviation to that of the old Member States , which could be achieved by having a very long introductory period for the directive .
The new directive in its proposed form may hinder the development of this sector , which would be contrary to the policy of creating a level playing field in the Community .
A further hazard is a loss of competitiveness among European companies compared with third countries , so it is a matter of importance that the new regulations are accepted globally , not just by the European Union .
I would like to avail myself of the opinion held by scientists and comment that no development of new technologies capable of effectively reducing CO2 emission levels in aviation is anticipated .
It is therefore of exceptional importance to seek restrictions on gas emissions wherever this is feasible .
One effective tool is the modernisation of air traffic control , where , according to analysts , fuel consumption savings of between 6 and 12 % may be achieved .
To conclude , I would like to emphasise that in conducting a pro-environment policy we should bear in mind its impact on each Member State .
The baseline period should therefore , in my opinion , cover as far-reaching a period as possible , in other words the years 2007-2009 .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all I would like to thank all the speakers in tonight 's debate for their positive contributions and I would like to turn to the details of some of the amendments .
There are many amendments that are acceptable , at least in part or in principle .
For example , the Commission accepts that it would be useful to require aircraft operators to develop monitoring and reporting plans .
Operators in the current scheme must also do this to obtain a greenhouse gas permit .
This will facilitate credible verification and thus safeguard the environmental integrity of the scheme by preventing fraud .
Other examples include the exemption of certain activities such as humanitarian or firefighting flights .
However , while I fully agree that we need to get started as soon as possible , a 2010 start date would be very challenging .
There would be insufficient time to complete the preparatory work and , in particular , to complete the allocation process which requires more lead time than the process used in the current system .
Regarding the scope , I have already explained why the Commission still believes a two-step approach would be helpful to convince third countries that the European Union is ready to take the lead , consistent with our special obligations as a region of developed countries .
Regarding the call for more auctioning , I am well aware that this is in line with the growing consensus about the advantages of auctioning and I expect we will soon discuss this a lot more in the context of the general ETS review .
However , in the period before 2013 , aviation should be treated as much as possible like other sectors .
The share of allowances auctioned should therefore be the average percentage of auctioning applicable to other sectors , as laid down in the national allocation plans for 2008-2012 .
What happens after 2012 should depend on the general review of the ETS .
Finally , I will share with you some concerns we have regarding amendments that relate to limits on the use of non-aviation credits , to the use of a multiplier for non-carbon dioxide effects and to an additional energy efficiency factor .
These amendments all have the effect of limiting the possibility of aviation operators to use allowances , other than aviation allowances , to cover their emissions .
This is not consistent with the fundamental idea of open emissions trading , which is what ensures cost-effective solutions .
Moreover , these changes would complicate the scheme significantly .
The Commission 's proposal already provides aircraft operators with extra incentives to improve fuel efficiency .
There is , in our view , no need for additional features that will just make it more complicated .
In summary , the Commission can support 27 of the 100 proposed amendments fully , in part or in principle .
I will give Parliament 's secretariat a list detailing the Commission 's position on the amendments , including Amendment 47 for which I would like to say that the Commission will maintain the provisions which foresee a change of the registry regulation , but is open to consider ways to ensure that conversion of aviation allowances does not burden Member States ' compliance with a Kyoto target .
Commission 's position on amendments by Parliament
Liese report
The Commission can support fully , in part , or in principle 27 amendments : Numbers 1 , 3-5 , 7 , 8 , 10 , 14 , 17 , 26 , 29 , 30 , 36-38 , 40 , 45 , 47 , 49 , 51-53 , 57 , 65 , 70 , 76 , 79 .
The amendments which the Commission cannot support are Numbers 2 , 6 , 9 , 11-13 , 15 , 16 , 18-25 , 27 , 28 , 31-35 , 39 , 41-44 , 46 , 48 , 50 , 54-56 , 58-60 , 61-64 , 66-69 , 71-75 , 77 , 78 , 80-100 .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , from 11.30 a.m.

Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( FR ) The need to act quickly and effectively to reduce greenhouse gas emissions is an obvious fact that can no longer be denied .
Within this context , reducing the impact of transport on global warming will play a decisive role .
The text we are discussing is one of the measures taken to achieve this , and I support this initiative .
This legislation , however , will only be a success if we manage to reconcile the environmental objective with the objective of mobility for citizens , while respecting countries outside the EU .
It is therefore essential that we achieve a reduction in CO2 emissions at the lowest possible cost for passengers .
What is demanded of aviation should be sufficient not to compromise the reductions achieved by other sectors but balanced enough not to penalise the growth of the aviation sector .
That is why I believe that targets for reducing CO2 emissions that are too rapid and too harsh , though laudable from a purely environmental point of view , are out of touch with reality and are in danger of having a counterproductive effect .
I hope our vote tomorrow will take account of these different parameters .
in writing . - ( FI ) We are to introduce a unique system , with air traffic having its own climate policy instrument .
Emissions trading in the area of air traffic involves risk factors , and I appeal to you all to pay attention to one or two important issues .
Although we are , with good reason , worried about increasing emissions from aviation , air traffic itself is nonetheless the future .
I might even say it is inevitable for the environment .
For example , according to the highly regarded MIPS survey on the overall incidence of environmental pollution , air traffic has its own benefits and would appear to be a solution for the future .
Completely emissions-free aviation would thus solve the problems of emissions from transport , and that should be our priority objective .
For that reason , in the building of compromises I wanted to channel revenue from emissions trading specifically into research and development in the area of aviation .
If the growth in emissions is really worrying , the available resources should be spent specifically on the development of emissions-free transport .
Hopefully , the Council also understands how important this is .
On the other hand , the directive should also ensure that the Union 's peripheral regions are able to compete fairly in the emissions trading system .
This is especially relevant in the matter of non-auctioned rights in the allocation system .
The ATK ( ' available tonne kilometre ' ) model , which is based on an aircraft 's maximum capacity , would be the best way to guarantee fairness in emissions trading , and would ultimately be better for the climate .
This is true because the system where non-auctioned emissions rights are allocated by volume of goods and passengers would encourage the use of connecting flights and flying via cities with massive volumes of passengers .
A system meant to protect the climate should encourage a system where air fares tend to be determined more on the actual number of kilometres flown .
At the moment it is frequently the case that longer , and therefore more climate-damaging flights , which also make a stop en route , are cheaper .
That is not rational as far as the environment is concerned .
in writing . - ( RO ) The inclusion of aviation into the European emissions trading scheme is a positive action , emphasizing Europe 's pioneering work in combating climate changes .
The aviation emissions trading should not cause a decrease in the number of flights and an increase in prices , negative consequences for passengers , for the aviation industry and for the sustainable development of transports .
Under these conditions , it is important to solve the technical causes .
The reduction in emissions can be achieved by manufacturing engines with a new design , which would ensure more efficiency in the fuel consumption , by improving the aircrafts ' aerodynamics , using new metallic alloys and composite materials for building fuselages .
We also have to take into consideration research in the field of alternative fuels .
NASA has announced the launching of a programme to find solutions for improving kerosene .
Therefore , it is necessary to supplement financial resources for research and development and to encourage private investments in this field , while the funds obtained from bids within the scheme should be used in the fields of research and aeronautical innovation , which are capable of providing concrete solutions .
I also ask the Council and the Commission to continue their efforts in negotiation with the international bodies and the partner third countries in order to obtain all the necessary agreements as to avoid any international litigations in the case of enforcing these legal provisions .
in writing . - Aviation should be brought within the scope of the Emissions Trading Scheme .
The ETS has shown its worth since being set-up two years ago .
It should be a useful means of ensuring that the aviation industry plays its part in the fight against climate change .
However we also need to reform the scheme so that it can fulfil its role effectively .
Of course , none of us believes that this development alone is the answer to the emissions problem but it does represent a significant step in the right direction .
Furthermore , it shows that the political will is there to take difficult decisions for the benefit the planet and its inhabitants .
What we must also see is essential reforms of the way the emissions trading scheme works .
In all of this we must ensure that the consumer is not unfairly burdened with huge rises in the cost of flying and consider looking at other ways in which CO2 emissions from the aviation industry can be reduced .
I am aware that EU Transport Ministers are currently doing this by examining ways of modernising air traffic control and introducing new systems of landing fees related to greenhouse gas emissions .
in writing . - ( HU ) An ever-increasing proportion of the population of the developed world understands the threat posed by climate change .
However , we need to take drastic steps if we are to reduce our emissions by 20 % over 13 years .
Unfortunately , we are hardly seeing any steps to take us in this direction .
It doesn 't matter which of the emitting areas we investigate , there will always be ' voices ' that want to protect the very industry we are talking about now .
At the same time , we know that we can only meet the target that has been set if we involve every affected area in reducing emissions .
If we make an exception for one , we will have to make up for it somewhere else .
Which one will be the odd one out ?
Air travel today is a tiny area , but one that is growing dynamically .
Its growth is closely linked to the global price of raw materials , on which it does itself have great influence .
We as politicians will truly support European businesses from a strategic perspective if we create an environment for them that encourages innovation .
None of this affects passengers , since the measures taken towards reducing CO2 will increase the ticket price for routes within Europe by a sum of no more than approximately EUR 1 .
This is a fraction of what we have to pay for anti-terrorism security measures !
Together with this , however , a good-quality railway of 1000 km must compete with aviation and , to achieve this , the airlines must bear the costs to which they give rise , to the same extent as we expect it of railways and road traffic .
Comitology ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on comitology .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , the comitology reform that was decided in July 2006 introduced a ' regulatory procedure with scrutiny ' , which gives a veto right to the European Parliament on measures of general scope that amend a basic legal act adopted under codecision .
In the framework of this reform , the three institutions concluded a joint statement in which they committed themselves to adapt 26 priority basic acts to this new procedure , and the Commission adopted 26 priority alignment proposals at the end of last year .
It is in our common interest to have these alignment instruments adopted as soon as possible .
The Commission is therefore very pleased to see that Parliament is now ready to vote on several legislative resolutions , after having reached good and fair compromise solutions between the three institutions .
Other important dossiers will be on the agenda of another session of the European Parliament later this month , and I am confident that we will be able to settle these dossiers as well .
I want to thank the rapporteurs from the different committees for their very cooperative and constructive approach .
Consequently , the whole package of the 26 priority alignment proposals could be ready for adoption before the end of this year .
This would be a very good result which will pave the way to the so-called ' general alignment ' .
As you know , the Commission made a commitment to review all existing codecision basic legal acts , in addition to these 26 priority acts , with a view to bringing them into line with the new regulatory procedure with scrutiny .
The Commission will respect this commitment and propose this general alignment of all non-priority acts .
It concerns in total more or less 220 acts .
This will take the form of four to five omnibus or package proposals , the first of which should arrive in the European Parliament shortly in November .
The next two omnibus proposals will follow within a couple of weeks and the final proposal just before the end of the year , or very early next year .
A third aspect of revising Parliament 's scrutiny rights is the revision of the agreement concluded in 2000 between the Commission and Parliament on comitology procedures .
Here I would like to thank Parliament and , in particular , Mr Galeote and Mr Corbett for the excellent spirit of cooperation which prevailed throughout the negotiations .
I would also like to thank them for recognising that the special procedures foreseen in the agreement will apply in all extremely urgent cases .
I am pleased to announce that the results of these negotiations have been politically endorsed and that the Commission will be ready to proceed to the formal adoption of the revised agreement , as soon as Parliament formally endorses the outcome of the negotiations .
I am confident that the agreement we reach will help our two institutions work more efficiently in the future .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , this discussion on comitology has been going on for a long time .
On the basis of the Basel II report , the European Parliament has finally won rights of scrutiny that should actually be normal in a democracy , against huge opposition from the Council and opposition from the Commission .
Now we must attend to adapting the directives accordingly . Here the focus has been on the question of adapting the relevant directives - and that is understandable .
The question of the extent to which we adapt the directives legislatively is certainly an important aspect .
However , the agreement between Parliament , the Commission and the Council is about how Parliament can be appropriately involved .
The Commissioner expressed her hope that Parliament will adopt the relevant alignments in the current year .
It is important to us that Parliament be informed about the processes in good time and that the exchange of information to Parliament via the comitology committees take place promptly .
The actual implementation phase is yet to begin and time will tell whether or not this will strengthen the rights of Parliament .
The same applies to requests for urgent debate .
To take one example : accounting is next on the agenda , IFRS 8 .
Here the procedure was that we in the comitology process were , unfortunately , only informed by the Commission at the last minute .
Then we were expected to take a decision relatively quickly .
The key , apart from the formal alignment process , will be whether the Commission , the relevant Directorates-General , the officials working in this area , are willing to include Parliament in the work in good time .
Only then will effective scrutiny be possible .
This is where it will be revealed whether the Commission as a whole is for this or not .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , here we are , talking about comitology again .
Basically it is a matter , as you said , of implementing the agreement that we all welcomed as a success when we entered into it in July 2006 .
There are two aspects to it : the practical aspect , which I will not go over again , but also its translation to each of the directives and , today , we are concerned with the 26 priority directives .
I am speaking in relation to those referred to the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
From that point of view , I would like to express our determination that the European Parliament 's position , when it examines these 26 priority directives , should be as coherent as possible .
The same comitology agreement needs to be applied to these 26 directives , hence the idea of a parallel approach .
However , as we well know , in these negotiations the devil is in the detail , and we met him during these negotiations on three particular points I would like to mention briefly .
The first point concerns something that , within the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs - but not only there - has felt like a kind of provocation .
On the subject of accounting standards , an area in which the European Parliament exercises its full powers and competencies , the Commission presented a proposal that said that urgency should be applied as an automatic procedure .
We did not accept this and fortunately I see that we managed to get the Commission to back down on this point and forced it to give up its demands for systematic urgency , which would have deprived Parliament of an effective right of control in an area where , on the contrary , it has demonstrated its ability to be useful , effective and relevant .
The second point is , of course , the issue of what are known as the ' sunset clauses ' or revision clauses .
The Commission and the Council really wanted these clauses to disappear .
They felt that this was an inherent element of the comitology agreement made last year .
In a spirit of cooperation , we have ensured that the Commission will be invited to check the efficacy and democratic functioning of the conditions of transmission of implementing powers regularly , every three years .
I believe this is a good way to proceed and I see that , in the commitment the Commission agreed to sign through what is now known as a revision clause , it is invited to look at the extent of its competence and justify any changes in legislation or the absence of such changes .
The third area is obviously the issue of scope .
What we see is that the Council has not always followed the Commission 's proposals , whether on transparency or prospectuses , the definition of cross-border missions or equivalences .
I do believe , however , that in a spirit of cooperation , including on the part of the Portuguese Presidency , we are reaching a result that should satisfy all the institutions and I am pleased about this .
( ES ) Mr President , following the speeches from the Vice-President of the Commission and my colleague Mrs Berès , my speech is almost superfluous .
I was responsible for producing the report for the Committee on Legal Affairs and , in agreement with our fellow Members from the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , we arrived at the conclusion that the urgent procedure that the Commission was asking for in Article 6 ( 2 ) ( 2 ) was unnecessary , because at the moment cooperation between Parliament and the Commission , and also the Council , is excellent .
Consequently , the report by the Committee on Legal Affairs asks for this article to be removed and adopts two further recitals , two further changes to the recitals , aimed at highlighting the flexibility of the procedure .
After the adoption of recitals 1 and 2 in committee there were negotiations between Parliament and the Commission , which Mrs Wallström referred to , and we tabled a final amendment , Amendment 4 , which replaces the current Amendment 2 , and establishes a formula for cooperation between the three institutions .
In other words , what is important in this text is the final sentence , which says that the Commission , the Council and the European Parliament need to act diligently in order to ensure that these rules and interpretations can be adopted in time , in order not to undermine the perception and , ultimately , the confidence of investors .
I think that , at the moment , this formula of compromise between Parliament , the Council and the Commission could help to solve the problems without us having to resort to the urgent procedure that the Commission originally proposed .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , thank you for your constructive comments at this late hour .
Let me just make two short last comments .
First of all , on the register , I think you are absolutely correct in underlining the need to have information about the procedure , to be well-informed about the progress of different files , and one of the measures that we have agreed on is , of course , to update our comitology register as well .
This we have agreed between the institutions , and the Commission is investing in this and we are sure that it will be in place by March next year .
So I think at least this will help , but we will also encourage , of course , our services to work as closely as possible with the Parliament .
The other comment is simply to say that I hope that we agree that the whole idea behind this particular procedure is to ensure that we have a consistent and coherent application of the new rules .
That is also why we have proposed this sort of package or omnibus proposals , and that is , I think , the way forward : to make sure that we follow closely what has been agreed and that we can , between the two institutions , handle it as effectively as possible as well .
The debate is closed .
International accounting standards ( debate )
The next item is the motion for a resolution on international accounting standards .

Chairman of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , there is a certain logic in the sequence of discussions we are having because , in this debate , we have to decide whether or not to adopt the so-called IFRS 8 standard at European level .
In a previous debate on 25 April 2007 , when Parliament had to decide on this standard , we were unequivocal in stating that we felt the conditions were not in place for us to be able to do this .
There were two reasons for this .
The first was that we had just given the European Commission and the Council a very clear message that we felt that the convergence process the European Union was entering into with countries outside the EU for the recognition of their accounting standards could not simply amount to a cut-and-paste of their standards with the international standard .
We also felt that the convergence process should be a mutual process .
When it came to the IFRS 8 standard , we had the impression that this was not the route that was being followed by the international organisation and we wanted to alert the public to this .
The second reason for doing so was that many people were warning us , quite rightly I believe , of the fact that this accounting standard was being proposed for all users , namely auditors , investors and supervisors , without an impact assessment having been carried out first .
Now , we know the obsession of the Commission chaired by Mr Barroso with having these impact assessments carried out regularly as part of better regulation , which it uses as a roadmap .
It seems to us that what applies at European Union level should also apply to the self-regulating international standardisation bodies We have therefore asked the Commission to conduct this impact assessment itself , in the absence of any assessment by the international body .
The Commission met its formal commitment by presenting the conclusions of this impact assessment to the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs in early September , as agreed .
Nevertheless , in future , we need to acknowledge that the scope of this assessment and the way all the parties were interviewed undoubtedly needs to be reviewed to improve the spectrum of those interviewed , so that it is not only those known as the preparers , that is those who draw up the accounts .
Through its desire to move forward with this debate and perhaps also to contribute to the international standards becoming the reference throughout the world , Parliament still wants to adopt the IFRS 8 standard today and this demonstrates both its sense of earnestness in the procedure for adopting the accounting standards and also its sense of responsibility .
As important discussions begin with the United States to establish the conditions for its own adoption of the accounting standards , it seems important to us to show our determination to do so ourselves in a lucid and responsible manner .
I hope this Parliament will adopt the IFRS 8 standard tomorrow , while stressing that when it is revised - and this is already in progress at the IASB , the International Accounting Standards Board - account is taken of the need for precise financial information about the reality of group activities .
Many NGOs in particular are sensitive to the fact that through this information , a clearer picture of the activity of groups - for example , mining in a particular geographical area or country by country where this is significant - can be given to those affected by these activities .
Finally , as my last point , I would like to say again to the Commission that we feel the result of this procedure is a very important call to respect the European vote , as a matter of equivalence , and that , when impact assessments are carried out , these enable all parties to express their points of view .
I would like to point out to you that the vote will not take place tomorrow , but on Wednesday .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to warmly thank the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs for the excellent work they have carried out regarding the adoption of International Financial Reporting Standard ( IFRS ) 8 - Operating Segments , the new standard on segment information .
After the International Accounting Standards Board ( IASB ) issued the standard in November 2006 , a debate ensued concerning the suitability of IFRS in the European context .
This debate was useful .
We had to make sure that the European Union would not adopt a new accounting standard just for the sake of convergence with the equivalent US standard , but mainly because it improves the quality of financial information and is conducive to the European public good .
Before reaching a final decision , the Commission and Parliament agreed in May 2007 that the Commission 's services would carry out an analysis of the potential consequences of adopting IFRS 8 .
They ran a public consultation during July and August and gathered the views of stakeholders on the cost / benefit implications and the overall impact of adopting IFRS 8 .
On the basis of almost 200 contributions , my services have prepared a report which was provided to Parliament on 10 September 2007 .
The report 's main conclusion is that the benefits of adoption of IFRS 8 would outweigh its costs .
Further , many constituents stressed that a swift endorsement of IFRS 8 would remove uncertainty about the treatment of financial statements for the period ending in December 2007 .
Let me stress that we did not ignore the concerns that had been raised regarding the introduction of the so-called ' management approach ' , which gives management more leeway compared with the existing standard on segment reporting .
Some constituents were concerned that IFRS 8 lacks strict requirements on detailed geographical information because it allegedly does not require sufficient detail on a country-by-country basis .
Discussions with constituents revealed , however , that IFRS 8 is rather expected to improve this kind of disclosure .
Further , it seems that particular concerns in this area , in our view - and in the view of the majority of respondents to our consultation - cannot be resolved through a financial reporting standard on segment information .
This could be better done through a further development of a framework regarding corporate social responsibility aspects .
We agreed that IFRS 8 should not be adopted solely for the sake of convergence , yet we believe that it is crucial to see the issue also in the broader context of the European Union adopting a set of standards which are truly global .
A couple of years ago we all agreed that Europe should not opt for its own set of standards but rather support and promote the development of a high quality and global set of standards like IFRS .
We are working on improving the governance of the IASB .
On 7 November the European Commission , the US Securities and Exchange Commission and the Japanese Financial Services Agency made a joint statement announcing their agreement to seek certain changes to strengthen the institutional framework of the International Accounting Standards Committee ( IASC ) Foundation .
These changes are intended to strengthen the accountability of the Foundation 's trustees , in particular by replacing the current self-appointment process for the appointment of the trustees with a process in which public authorities are responsible for the final approval of trustees .
The joint statement also recognised the importance of further strengthening the IASB 's due process , including by carrying out impact assessments .
This agreement provides a strong basis to address the concerns expressed by this Parliament .
It also reflects the issues identified by the Commission 's two monitoring reports to ECOFIN concerning the IASB 's governance .
We will work with the IASC Foundation and the international partners to develop more detailed proposals in the coming months .
We will , of course , maintain a close dialogue with the European Parliament throughout this process .
I am confident that the outcome of this process will ensure that standards respond to European needs and are easily acceptable and applicable by all stakeholders in the EU and also globally .
Let me conclude .
The swift adoption of IFRS 8 is important for two reasons . It improves the quality of financial information and it provides certainty to all market participants .
The discussions of the last months have demonstrated that a stronger involvement of the European Parliament in the endorsement process is necessary .
The Commission will also continue to work with the IASB and the IASC Foundation and with our international partners to ensure that the process of developing international accounting standards is fully accountable , transparent and meets the needs of European stakeholders .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , Commissioner , the IFRS 8 process is symptomatic of where we stand today with regard to implementation , endorsement , of IFRS in Europe .
I should like to say very clearly from the outset , to those who perhaps always assume the opposite of Parliament , that the majority of the European Parliament is in favour of IFRS , of a global standard , and of taking the same course on this , the right course .
We ought to examine this IFRS process , in particular , in relation to whether all is well with it at the moment : the Commission presents the European Parliament with a standard at short notice , the Commission and industry are expected to implement it relatively quickly , pressure from industry gets stronger and stronger , and those who have the duty of justifying it to citizens on the ground are not given any opportunity to form an opinion on it .
The Commission has prescribed an appropriate phase , but we are going to have to do some straight talking about what has happened now , as the implementation phase is now being postponed retrospectively .
To avoid this happening in future it is vital that the legislative institutions , such as the European Parliament , are informed about the work in good time .
I welcome the announcement last week by the Commission , with the SSI , the Japanese and IOSCO .
What the IFRS organisation then presented - regarding providing its own governance - is a correct , but long-overdue step towards appropriate legitimisation and governance . We , the European Parliament , shall pay particular attention to whether democratic rules of play are observed .
That does not mean that the European Parliament must be directly involved , but only if the process is working correctly shall we be able to ensure that it operates optimally in future when each individual standard is implemented - and in future we shall be consulted about each individual standard .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , adoption of the IFRS 8 standard will enable our companies to use the standard for the current financial year and put an end to uncertainty .
The management approach will enable our companies to report publicly , with the same structure used internally , thereby reducing the burden of reporting .
Users will have access to information that was previously kept internally .
So IFRS 8 is a win for both the companies and the investors .
But I have some concerns about the impact assessment that follow a pattern about which I have spoken before .
Respondents this time seemed predominantly producers rather than users , and with regard to users there were no questions on comparability .
A more pro-active approach may need to be taken with respect to impact assessments generally , and it certainly cannot have helped in this instance if one hoped-for sector of respondents does not have key questions posed .
Further , some of the justifications in the report do very little to justify .
Indeed , to me they look more like the type of document that is written ahead of meetings in the hope of reaching agreement .
I am very British about this and prefer my minutes and responses and reports to look like they were drafted after events .
I regret that European companies have been kept waiting for our endorsement of the standard , but Parliament should not be expected to give its assent , on a say-so , without time and proper information to make an assessment .
However , I am pleased that there has been an improvement in cooperation recently , and I look forward to that continuing .
Mr President , the importance of appropriate accounting standards cannot be exaggerated .
In today 's world there is a growing need for clear , comparable and sufficient information for investors as well as facilitating business by reducing compliance costs .
Therefore , I agree with my colleagues on the importance of prudence in the question .
Decisions should not be taken lightly , and I really think that the views of all colleagues who have mentioned timely impact assessment as an important tool to find balanced solutions and make sure that all stakeholders and their opinions are considered are very important .
Parliament should , of course , be kept duly informed .
Of equal importance is to ensure that the EASB governance system is reviewed and adjusted so that regulatory authorities can support its standard-setting process and its result .
It is , after all , the only body we have to do a cross-border account standards setting process .
However , while the process has not been perfect , we must not let this delay our work to close the gap between us and our economic partners .
Today 's world is much more interconnected , and it is in our interest to make it function as smoothly as possible , and compatible standards are vital to this end .
Within the Transatlantic Economic Council , both sides are eager to make this work , and IFRS standards and financial reports are an important tool to find this mutual recognition of standards .
For now , the IASB is the best way we have .
European stakeholders must be involved and the functioning of the IFRS should be monitored .
It can and should also be changed to correct possible mistakes , if we make mistakes .
Democracy , of course , takes time but sometimes it is needed to correct mistakes .
Many of my colleagues have mentioned that it was very important that Parliament was able to raise some concerns and make improvements to the process .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , at 12 noon .
Membership of political groups : see Minutes
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of sitting
All that remains now is to thank our last six surviving fellow Members , our two courageous visitors in the gallery , the 15 or so officials and our 69 interpreters - there are more of them than all the spectators put together - for their participation .
( The sitting was closed at 11.50 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9.00 a.m. )
Draft general budget for the 2008 financial year ( deadline for tabling draft amendments ) : see Minutes
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( announcement of motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Commission legislative programme and work programme for 2008 ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the Commission Legislative and Work Programme for 2008 .
President of the Commission . - Mr President , the next 12 months will be of vital importance to Europe for our future effectiveness , for our place in the world , for the confidence of our citizens in our ability to meet their expectations .
We have every reason to be confident .
The agreement on the Treaty of Lisbon was very welcome , but so too was the manner in which it was reached .
There was a refusal to be distracted from the primary purpose of equipping the Union with the tools it needs for the future .
There was a real determination to get down to business .
At the same time , our economic agenda has brought results in terms of growth and jobs , helping to offset the risks of added turbulence this year .
We are tackling the big issues : from energy to migration , from employment to development aid , namely in Africa , and in just a few weeks we have an opportunity to underline our global leadership on the fight against climate change in Bali .
In short , the European Union is delivering .
It was able to overcome the very difficult situation we faced in 2005 .
The twin-track strategy proposed by the Commission in 2006 has paid off , focusing on concrete results for citizens , and at the same time investing in a solution for the institutional settlement .
The Union , I believe , is on track for 2008 .
We need to use this to best effect , implementing our commitments , taking forward key proposals already on the table , keeping up the momentum with new initiatives and , at the same time , keeping long-term challenges on our radar screen .
In addition , of course we must respect and promote the process of ratification of the Treaty and show citizens what the European Union can offer in the run-up to the European parliamentary elections of 2009 .
I therefore welcome this opportunity to set out the Commission 's contribution to a successful 2008 by presenting our Legislative and Work Programme for 2008 .
In doing so , I would like to thank the European Parliament for its active involvement in the work of developing this Programme .
In particular the comprehensive summary report prepared by the Conference of Committee Chairmen and endorsed by the Conference of Presidents helped to shape our programme .
Many Commission proposals are a direct match to the priorities set out in your summary report .
But first allow me a quick word on the implementation of the 2007 programme .
This time last year we discussed a targeted list of strategic initiatives for delivery this year .
To cite just a few of the most visible initiatives , this has meant a series of key actions like the Strategic Energy Review , the recent proposals on labour migration , flexicurity , the wine market , market access .
By the end of next month , all the strategic initiatives will have been adopted , with just one exception .
This is the Emissions Trading Directive , which I have decided to put back one month to January .
The reason for this was to ensure no distraction from the crucial talks in Bali - where I want the European Union to appear united .
It will also give us the time to finalise the consultations needed on how to realise the European Union 's agreed targets on greenhouse gas and renewables .
I am sure that you will agree that this makes sense and in fact that it can represent time that we gain because the preparation will allow , I am sure , a better possibility of a consensus with our Member States .
In addition to the strategic initiatives , we undertook to deliver a large number of priority initiatives over an 18-month period .
Many of these are now coming forward .
The coming weeks will see proposals on mortgage credit , Trade Defence Instruments and reducing CO2 emissions from cars .
We should see a delivery rate of 70 % by year end and at , or close to , 100 % by the end of the 18 months , next June .
2007 is also proving a crucial year in preparing for the future .
In particular , next week we will launch a set of key proposals for the Union 's economic and social future . The single market review will gear up the single market as a strong , innovative and competitive market , bringing direct benefits to consumers and entrepreneurs and positioning Europe to shape globalisation to best effect .
Alongside this , we will adopt a vision on how to promote opportunities , access and solidarity in the Europe of the 21st century , to be backed up next year with a full communication on a modernised social agenda .
We will be paying particular attention to how we will be able to use the Treaty of Lisbon and its protocols to move forward on services of general interest , using these new opportunities to see how we can bring real added value to ensuring the role of these services in improving the quality of life of all Europeans .
I very much look forward to the reactions of the European Parliament and the Council to the internal market review and the social vision .
I believe that , taken together , they give us the balance needed to move ahead in key areas of our economic and social agenda .
They show that Europe has the right tools and offers the right platform for our citizens to adapt to and to shape globalisation .
Let me now focus on the Commission Legislative and Work Programme for 2008 .
This is our political programme for 2008 .
It sets out our main initiatives and builds on our commitment to provide added value to Europe 's citizens .
We have sought to strengthen both the policy content and the process .
As for 2007 , the work programme for 2008 concentrates on a limited number of new policy initiatives , including 26 strategic initiatives grouped together in 12 packages , which the Commission commits to deliver during the year , and 61 priority initiatives , grouped together in 49 packages , to be delivered over a 12-month to 18-month period .
We will centre our initiatives in five areas , which are of direct relevance to everyone in Europe : growth and jobs , sustainable Europe , managing migration , putting the citizens first and Europe as a world partner .
We are also determined to strengthen our commitment to better regulation with a guarantee to deliver what we promise .
We have noted with particular satisfaction that the European Parliament 's summary report agrees with the key areas of central importance we identify for 2008 .
Close cooperation among institutions and Member States will be essential to realise our goals .
For several of the areas mentioned in your report , concrete initiatives are either already adopted or planned to be adopted still in 2007 .
For next year , I am pleased to be able to note the inclusion in the Programme of a number of initiatives highlighted as of particular interest to the European Parliament .
Just to list some of the key areas : the Lisbon Strategy for growth and jobs , which we agree remains central to our goals of a more prosperous , environmentally responsible and socially inclusive European Union ; climate change , with this year 's stress on mitigation , complemented by a new approach on adaptation ; greening of the transport sector ; a Small Business Act for SMEs ( in fact it is a package of measures for SMEs ) ; legislation to strengthen consumer protection regarding contractual rights and a new Consumer Scoreboard ; better access to justice for citizens ; improving the regulatory environment in Europe with a strategic review of better regulation .
On the bulk of our agenda there is a large degree of agreement between the Commission and Parliament on the need to act and on the way forward .
It is true that there are some suggestions in the summary report where we cannot give a definitive answer at this stage .
For example , we are working actively on intellectual property and financial services , but feel that it is premature to fix now the form and level of ambition for specific initiatives .
On waste management , we would accommodate the issues you have raised through the Action Plan on better implementation of waste legislation , rather than a new initiative at this stage .
Let me make one point clear : what is not included in the list of new initiatives is not being neglected .
The Commission 's essential work of implementing Community law , of executing programmes , and of negotiating international agreements , will continue and is made more visible in other parts of the Programme 's text .
Also a new chapter on ' shaping new policies ' seeks to reflect the multiannual nature of most of the activities of the Commission .
We have also inserted in the Work Programme the communication priorities , but have added a novelty in this respect : we propose a number of those priorities to the other institutions so that we can work together to promote them .
But this is not about centralisation - quite the contrary .
We believe that a common understanding of priorities offers the springboard for ' going local ' , adapting communication to best fit different needs in different parts of the Union .
We also believe that in this communication area partnership is crucial if we really want to connect Europe to its citizens .
The Commission looks forward to a lively and fruitful debate reflecting the strategic dimension of the Commission 's work programme and a strong political message to our citizens .
The year 2008 is indeed a crucial year for Europe .
Together the European Commission and the European Parliament can build on our excellent work together in 2007 , can make the difference and can make , I am sure , 2008 a great year for Europe .
( Applause )
Commission President , I would also like to extend a very warm welcome to the many members of the Commission who are present for this debate today .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , may I start by saying to you , Commission President , that having heard your minatory words last year about the attendance of Members of this House , there are more Members than Commissioners in the Chamber today , and I trust that you have noted that fact with gratification .
On behalf of the PPE-DE Group , may I also voice some words of encouragement : we encourage you , during the coming year - the crucial year for the ratification of the new Treaty - to utilise your Commission 's most important competence , namely the right to bring forward legislative proposals for Europe , in a way which ensures that you address the issues of serious concern to citizens effectively and utilise the opportunities at your disposal to narrow the gap between citizens and the European Union .
We support your general approach as set forth in your programme , as well as the priorities you have chosen , from growth and jobs - whose success is crucial to underpin social cohesion in Europe - to many other detailed aspects , up to and including migration and research .
My colleagues will focus on individual issues .
We welcome the fact that you have indeed taken up various proposals arising from the structured dialogue with the committees .
We would like to see this dialogue being intensified even further .
We would also welcome it if your planning were not only to cover the first few months of 2009 but were perhaps to encompass a two-year cycle which could be developed further on a year-by-year basis .
What we feel is missing is an indicative time schedule , and we also see a gap between your programme and the budgetary procedure , which it would be sensible to close .
You intend to bring forward a total of 79 legislative initiatives and around the same number of non-legislative actions .
If we look at this in terms of your stated intention to reduce bureaucracy , I am not sure whether you are genuinely serving that objective .
The items of legislation whose repeal you have announced notably include many which would have expired anyway .
To that extent , reducing bureaucracy is more about ' talking a good game ' than achieving a real and effective objective .
Next year is the year of the new Treaty .
You have the opportunity - and I am confident that this Treaty will come into force - to incorporate this Treaty into your programme already at this stage .
The Treaty will bring in important new elements : operability , transparency and democracy .
It will also bring in an element which is vital for us and to which I recommend you devote some attention , and that is the principle of subsidiarity .
A new debate on subsidiarity is starting in Europe , and the main partner for that debate is you , Mr President , and your Commission .
A storm of protest erupted in some parts of Germany a few days ago over the issue of fruit and apple wines .
I do not want to discuss the public reaction to this issue in detail , but let me say this , Mr President : what sort of spirit is at large in an administration which , at one bureaucratic stroke , obliterates regional traditions which go back hundreds of years , and does so in such a cold and insensitive way ?
There is a problem with this approach , and it is your problem , Mr President .
It is a problem with your Commission .
You now have an opportunity , in the spirit of the new Treaty , to create a new culture of subsidiarity .
That is the opportunity - the great opportunity - for your Commission to achieve more consensus among the population at large , and it is an opportunity which we in the PPE-DE Group would expressly encourage you to seize with both hands .
( Applause )
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commission President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , may I also welcome you very warmly on behalf of my Group .
Much of what the Commission President has said and which is included in this document meets with our approval .
I would like to focus on two points which are crucial , in our view .
These points are addressed at the end of your programme .
I would have liked to see them included at the beginning , but their location in the text does not make them any less important .
The first point is communication .
I can only endorse what Mr Nassauer has said .
We must convey a clear message to citizens about what Europe is all about and what we are trying to achieve with our various legislative proposals ; otherwise , we are wasting our time .
I am very pleased with the approach to the issue of communication - which also lies in the hands of Madam Vice-President - and the proposals she has put forward , which envisage a joint approach with Parliament .
However , it is also a question of the language we use when we communicate with citizens and how we convey the message about what we are trying to do .
Last year , we dealt with a number of items of legislation which improved the legal position of consumers , notably in telecommunications and other sectors .
However , we have still not managed to convince our citizens satisfactorily that we are here for them and that we are not an elite group of people working away somewhere in Brussels .
We need to do more here .
I hope , Madam Vice-President , that you will be able to say a few words at the end of this debate about what you are planning in specific terms , for it is our common goal , and that is a message which we must convey in 2008 in particular .
There is another important sentence which is also to be found towards the end of the document .
It talks about social problems and the social dimension of the EU in the context of globalisation , in particular jobs and migration and citizens ' concerns .
Unfortunately , Mr President , the document you have presented to us does not contain many answers to these questions .
This is not just a matter for the Social Affairs Commissioner , who is also doing good work . This dimension must be addressed by the Commission as a whole .
Indeed , it is a matter for the President of the Commission himself .
He , too , must focus on achieving this social Europe .
There are many areas involved here , and I would like to cite just two of them .
One of them is international trade . Is it not a scandal that there are still European companies which are reliant on child labour in India and other countries ?
What are we doing to tackle this ?
This situation creates fears here in Europe and exacerbates poverty . That is borne out by various studies : it exacerbates poverty in countries which are our trading partners .
In other words , trade policy must also include a social dimension , perhaps by means of social clauses .
( Applause )
As to immigration policy , your document talks about ' an integrated approach to migration ' .
Would it not be better to say : ' no migration without integration ' ?
Indeed , should the Commission not have been sending out a much clearer and unequivocal message here ?
Yesterday , we discussed this issue with Commissioner Frattini .
His initial comments about the situation of the Roma population in Rome , for example , were not very encouraging .
His statements yesterday were much clearer and more helpful .
Is it not the case that the Roma issue is also one which we have often neglected , not only in the new Member States but in the old ones as well ?
Mrs Merkel and Mr Sarkozy are saying ' no migration policy without integration policy ' .
Surely this is an approach which the Commission should have adopted long ago ?
I doubt that Mr Sarkozy and Mrs Merkel mean the same thing as we Social Democrats do when they talk about integration .
Nonetheless , the basic message is absolutely correct and the Commission must adopt a much clearer approach here .
( Applause )
Combating right-wing extremism is therefore not only about addressing the issue on an ideological level ; it is of course about social issues as well .
Unemployment , social exclusion and anti-social elements are still present in our society and are being exploited by the extreme right in their campaign against Europe .
For that reason , Europe and the European Commission must take action here .
My colleague Mr Schulz , the Chairman of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , has often said that we want a social Europe .
That is our primary goal and it should be the primary goal of this programme as well .
You have said that we can make ' 2008 a great year for Europe ' .
We think that 2008 should be a great year for social Europe .
My plea to you , Commission President , is this : please , take the lead in achieving this social Europe !
( Applause )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , this is a political programme which suits a year in which the pace of integration is going to quicken dramatically with the completion of the Reform Treaty process and the expansion of the Schengen and the euro zones .
But preparing for the bringing into force of the Treaty will be our principal task and here the Liberal Group have two principal concerns .
First : that in building the area of freedom , security and justice the integration of the third pillar with the first should be as fast and comprehensive as possible .
And secondly , with relation to the CFSP , reaching a first class agreement between the Council , Commission and Parliament upon the setting up of the external service promises to be fairly exciting and quite tricky .
To explain and justify the Treaty to national parliaments and to public opinion , we ought to put greater stress on the social and cultural dimension of the single market , such as migration policy , as well as on the fight to combat climate change .
These things will assist us to sell the Treaty .
The CAP Check should be directly associated with the future reform of the financial system through an expansion of a cofinancing of the CAP .
Finally , I should be grateful to hear the college 's assessment of President Sarkozy 's plan to establish a further ' Comité des Sages ' to brood on the future of Europe .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , President of the Commission , Commissioners , you have presented us with 26 strategic initiatives and 61 priority initiatives .
I am not going to comment on all of them in four minutes .
In debates of this kind it must always be borne in mind that the Commission has a responsibility and a quite special role to play in the Community decision-making process .
It is you who have the monopoly on legislative initiatives and it is you who wield the power by screening the various amendments , whether they come from Parliament or from the Council .
You have huge responsibility for the type of result that we are able to obtain as far as Community legislation is concerned .
I can therefore assure you that , as ever , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance is probably the most united of all the political groups in its support for this Community procedure , because I believe that the Commission has been entrusted with a formidable task in having to confront not only national interests but also the sensitivities of the various national governments .
To get straight to the heart of the matter there are three points that I would like to raise .
The first is energy policy : 2007 has been a big year .
The Nobel Peace Prize was awarded and the March European Council adopted a number of objectives that in our view could have been more ambitious , but which we supported nevertheless .
As you have pointed out , 2008 will now be a year for implementation .
This is where some real vigilance will be called for on our part .
We were really disappointed by the results on vehicle emissions .
We believe that your approach to biofuels ignores the negative impact that this type of technology is having on our environment .
We are of the view that in the second phase of emission permits we should be moving towards a bidding system rather than freely distributing what amount to nothing more than new financial assets .
We are somewhat surprised that as far as the internalisation of transport policy costs is concerned you have only announced what amounts to no more than methodological studies .
It appears to me that the economists have been debating this for at least 15 years and that the Commission could follow the example set by good national experience .
We also think that this thinking needs to be applied to all aspects of energy policy , and that you should resist the idea of making too much use of so-called ' soft ' instruments in order to please different lobbies or to meet different governmental requests .
We need to employ restrictive instruments because the example set by the car industry shows us that voluntary agreements do not really work .
As regards renewable energies we do not believe it is a very good idea to introduce flexible arrangements between the Member States .
Everyone should do their bit .
The second subject that I wish to raise concerns immigration policy .
This is one area for which you have supreme responsibility .
I recall the speech that Kofi Annan made to the European Parliament several years ago .
It would be wonderful if the European Union could win the Nobel Peace Prize for a successful immigration policy .
We are counting on you to see to it that such an immigration policy , which you have included in your work programme , and which has already commenced , does not result in the introduction of a common biometric passport for all Member States .
I think that as well as creating a disastrous situation for people here , that would also damage the EU 's credibility in the eyes of the rest of the world .
Finally , the last point I wish to raise - and this surprises me , Mr Barroso - is the fact that your programme does not include anything on the international financial markets .
If you want the citizens of the Community , or at least a large majority of them , to be more positively disposed towards globalisation and its various issues then the European Union , and the Commission in particular , cannot dissociate itself from the situation in the financial markets , the continued investigation of tax havens and our inability to debate issues surrounding the exchange rates between the euro , the Chinese yuan and the dollar .
I believe that people are waiting for the European Union to deliver ambitious initiatives that will ensure that the financial markets operate for the benefit of the economy and society , not the other way round .
I am reminded of the debates that Parliament held on this subject at the start of the current legislative period .
Various people now appear to have lost all sight of this .
For this reason it seems important to me that you should re-launch such an initiative with the backing of Parliament .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , President of the Commission , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , along with my fellow Members I listened closely to what Mr Barroso said .

He set out the Commission 's strategic objectives , with growth and employment naturally being at the top of the list of priorities .
Nevertheless , I noted that , as in the communication from the Commission , there was something singularly missing from his presentation and I would now like to ask the Commission President quite specifically about this .
Is it true that on 23 October the College of Commissioners debated a proposal that had been put by Mr Mandelson concerning European firms and businesses that had moved their production to third countries where wage levels were low ?
This proposal was possibly aimed at exempting the said companies from the anti-dumping duties that apply to products exported to the Union at prices that are significantly lower than their normal value .
Is it true that this proposal received a large measure of support and that the Commission is to take a formal decision on this subject after 5 December ?
How do you respond to those who see in such a measure nothing more than a financial subsidy for relocating production ?
Would such a move not be totally inconsistent with those sections of the Commission communication that we are discussing here today , including the following :
Recent research shows that the main concern for EU citizens is ' the social dimension of the EU in the context of globalisation ( in particular jobs and the fear of unemployment ) . '
Or else : ' The global competitiveness agenda contributes to creating lasting growth and jobs at home . '
( FR ) Why was there no mention either in your presentation or in the Commission communication of the legislative programme for 2008 or of any project relating to major political issues such as the promotion of employment in the EU , industrial policy and , more generally , the benefits that the Community can derive from the current phenomenon of globalisation ?
Finally , is it true that , foreseeing the major disruption that such a subject could cause during a vote in Parliament , not to say in the Council , you are planning to bypass the legislators by opting for guidelines instead ?
I believe that my Group is not the only one here hoping for a clear response from you to these questions , failing which each of us will have to consider what form of reaction would be the most appropriate .
If you enjoyed the manner in which the House mobilised its efforts against the Bolkestein Directive then you will certainly love the outcry that will be caused by the Mandelson Regulation .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - Mr President , with your permission , I would like to start my speech in Irish .
( GA ) I approve of the Commission 's projected legislative and work programme .
The Commission is aiming above all to promote job creation and development in Europe ; to make the EU come to grips with the problem of climate change ; to bring about a common policy on migration ; to give pride of place to EU citizens ; and to ensure that the EU acts as a force for good all over the world .
And of course the whole issue of globalisation is one that will concentrate our minds over the next number of years - not just in the short term for 2008 - and I welcome the initiatives taken in particular by the Commission to prepare Europe to deal with the effects and impacts , both positive and negative , of what globalisation will mean .
We can see around the world that there is a threat to democracy also , and the actions that we must take with regard to ensuring that we can best deliver not just aid and assistance to those who are in trouble but also the promotion of the values of democracy , the rule of law , the separation of powers .
We have seen in recent weeks that Pakistan , Georgia and other parts of the world are suffering from new forms of resistance towards democratic controls , new threats regarding the freedom of the press , and , most importantly of all , the annihilation of the will of the people to be heard and to be recognised within those networks .
In particular , the continuing crisis around the world - particularly in the developing world with regard to the AIDS , HIV and other areas - requires us to be more imaginative and innovative in how best we can deal with these areas .
But one issue in particular concerns me as we look to the future , in particular the short-term future , and that is the whole question of taxation within the European Union .
Many of us have grave concerns with regard to proposals coming forward from the Commission concerning corporation tax , the common consolidated base for corporation tax and , in particular , the relentless desire of certain Commissioners to drive forward the proposal which we - I and others in this House - believe the Commission does not have the legislative or legal basis to move forward on .
I am delighted that the Lisbon Reform Treaty has ensured that the issues of taxation still require unanimity .
I am delighted at the fact that no changes can be made without the 27 governments agreeing .
There is a place in Europe for ensuring that there is competition , not just in economic and in environmental terms , but also in the whole area of taxation .
This tax competition is healthy , and we must be given assurances that any proposals coming forward will not have a negative impact with regard to economic growth and employment growth , which is so necessary for the peoples of Europe .
Even if you look at America there is tax competition within the states and it appears to be working extremely well there .
The last point that I would make is that , as we look to the future and move forward , the peoples of Europe are not asking for more bureaucracy , they are not asking for more regulation .
They are asking for vision and a rapid response to the real problems that they face on a day-to-day basis , not some abstract ideologies from an ancient past which I hope we have left behind us .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( DA ) Mr President , there is an election in Denmark today .
I hope that the new Danish Parliament will have members who take the trouble to read the Commission 's annual programme and the EU legislative proposals and consider them .
For it is the EU that determines our laws , and it is sad to have experienced an election battle where the formulation of laws is simply not debated .
Instead , in Denmark there have been discussions concerning municipal and regional matters such as food at playschools , education and hospitals .
The Danish input into the legislative process within the EU is not being discussed amongst the elected people 's representatives ; democracy is being drained as a form of government .
The Commission 's annual programme should ideally be distributed for consideration by all the specialist committees within all the national parliaments and , in connection with this , all parties should take a position on what should be legislated at EU level and what should be kept under national jurisdiction .
Proximity and necessity controls - or subsidiarity and proportionality to use EU jargon - should be considered by the national parliaments , first in connection with the annual programme and then subsequently when the Commission submits the various legislative proposals .
This could connect the national parliaments with the EU and give citizens the opportunity to be involved before they receive a decree from Brussels , which has also promised to comply with the recommendations of the national parliaments , yet very few come .
The national parliaments are asleep on the job , and it is depressing for those of us who are fighting for them , but it is good to see so many Commissioners at once .
( DE ) Mr President , o sonho europeo , the European dream , der Europäische Traum !
I think that the vast majority of Europeans have a fairly clear idea and generally agree on what this should be .
That being the case , why is there so much mistrust directed towards the Commission in so many countries ?
You say that it has to do with communication .
However , a great many citizens , even those who only consider these problems in passing , are saying , no , it has to do with the specific projects , and it has to do with the Lisbon Strategy and its obvious failure to date .
Mr Swoboda says that the social dimension is missing and I must admit that on this issue , he is right .
However , at the same time , Mr Duff has said that the social dimension of the Constitutional Treaty - my apologies , you call it the Reform Treaty - must be the focal point .
That is all very well , but where does it say anything about the social dimension there ?
In which form is this Treaty actually readable , and where in this Treaty does it say anything about basic democratic principles such as the separation of powers ?
If you actually did what you said and what you apparently intend - namely to convey the message effectively and implement your intentions in a way which is verifiable in hard data - communication would become far less of a problem .
The President of the European Court of Auditors offered you a very clear starting point yesterday evening .
He mentioned very specific numbers for the first time : EUR 4 billion incorrectly disbursed from the Structural Funds alone .
Let me quote from his speech : ' The most frequent errors were claims for ineligible expenditure and failure to carry out tender procedures as well as a lack of evidence to support the calculation of overheads or the staff costs involved .
The supervisory and control systems in the Member States were generally ineffective or moderately effective , and the Commission maintains only a moderately effective supervision of their functioning . '
You need to take action . Please do not attempt to improve communication about what you are not doing !
That is bound to go wrong .
President of the Commission . - Mr President , I should like to thank all the groups for their very interesting and challenging comments .
Let me first try to answer some specific issues , and then I shall make some general comments .
I should like to thank Mr Nassauer for the general support he gave to our priorities .
Regarding the main issue - subsidiarity - he mentioned , let me say that we are as committed as he to the goal he has set , more precisely : to create a new culture of subsidiarity in Europe and to give our own example .
I really am committed to that .
I am not pretending that we are perfect .
Sometimes it is difficult to change old habits , but we are moving in the right direction .
When there are mistakes , which sometimes happens , then we try to correct them .
The recent case we mentioned regarding the Apfelwein is a good example of that , and we should accept that sometimes we cannot foresee all the consequences of the regulations we are preparing .
I want to assure you that I and the college that is present here are committed to subsidiarity .
In all our initiatives we are now looking at the need for a specific legislative initiative - the impact assessment and the quality of our proposals - and we try to do it that way .
Let me just highlight that , out of the 26 strategic initiatives I have announced , only 8 are of a legislative nature ; out of 61 priority initiatives , only 28 are of a legislative nature ; out of 87 , only 36 are of a legislative nature in general .
On top of this , we will withdraw 30 pieces of legislation .
However , the point I want to make to you is the following : when we speak about the new culture of subsidiarity , I need your help to explain to our citizens that this is in order to strengthen the European Union , not to weaken it ; in order to make the institutions more democratic and more accountable , and not to give in to those who are attacking Europe and the European Union in a populist , demagogic way .
This is not the way I see subsidiarity .
Sometimes , in some of our Member States , people say that , because of subsidiarity , the Commission or the European Parliament should not come forward with this kind of programme because this goes against subsidiarity .
In fact , if what they do not want is the European Union to act when European action is needed , then I do not agree that this is indeed in favour of subsidiarity .
To give you a recent example : in March the European Council adopted , as you know , some very important ideas for energy and the environment , namely protection against climate change .
For instance , we adopted the general principles of unbundling .
This was a decision of the European Council .
However , I have sometimes heard some Member States state that the Commission should not insist on unbundling , because this is against the principle of subsidiarity .
I do not agree with this , and I have to say so . It is , in fact , resistance to an important European movement that is in favour of creating a real internal market for energy and of having a very strong policy against climate change .
This is not in favour of subsidiarity .
This is the point where we need your help .
We need your help to explain when the European Union action is needed , and to be critical of us when you think that European action is not needed , so that we should , if necessary , scrap some legislation .
I will come back to Mr Swoboda 's point on communication later , but I think he is right .
In fact , I , together with Vice-President Wallström and the whole college , are working on this .
But the basic idea is , precisely , partnerships .
Let us be honest about this .
We cannot do everything by ourselves .
When I say ' we ' , I mean the European institutions - the Commission and the European Parliament .
We need the active involvement of leaders at all levels - national and regional .
This is important for subsidiarity .
For instance , the Länder in Germany , the regions in most of our Member States , are critically important , and my college and I have been all over Europe in the national parliaments , sometimes in the different regions , explaining .
I was recently in Poland , saying this very clearly , saying that Europe is not them in Brussels or Strasbourg : Europe is us , all over Europe , and this is a collective responsibility .
That is , once again , a change of paradigm , because if you want to motivate the citizens for the European idea , we have to share with them those priorities and not just think about ' some people in Brussels or in Strasbourg ' telling the other citizens what they should or should not do .
We have mentioned the social dimension .
I could not , of course , highlight all the points . Let me just tell you that in our programme there are many legislative and non-legislative initiatives in this area .
Most importantly , we will conclude the work on stock-taking of European society with the vision of how to promote opportunities , access and solidarity in the Europe of the 21st century .
This will pave the way for a new social agenda and provide the framework for a dynamic and modern approach to the contribution of European Union policy to European society today .
The Commission will also submit proposals to amend the European Works Council Directive in order for them to anticipate and accompany restructuring .
Another piece of legislation will concern the conditions of pregnant women , aiming at improving existing maternity protection provisions with a view to reconciling professional , private and family life .
An initiative will concern the deepening of the open method of coordination in the areas of social protection and social inclusion .
This will be accompanied by a recommendation on active inclusion of people furthest from the labour market , concentrating on three pillars : job opportunities and vocational training , income support , and better access to quality services .
This takes place in the context of the overall Lisbon strategy for growth and jobs .
Finally , the Commission will adopt the communication on anticipating and managing change , launching the second phase of consultation of European social partners on anticipating company restructuring .
Just to give you some examples that we are indeed committed to the social agenda in Europe .
Mr Duff , as regards the need to ratify the Treaty , as you understand , I fully share that priority , and I think , precisely , that the social and cultural dimension of Europe should be highlighted .
I am doing my best in this matter , trying to explain that in Europe we need a strong internal market , but Europe is more than a market , and I think you can agree that this is also a shared commitment .
Regarding the ' Wise Men 's Group ' proposal of President Sarkozy , about which you have asked for my opinion , the Commission has discussed this issue .
We are , naturally , in favour of any initiative that promotes debate and reflection on the future of Europe .
As real democrats we like debate .
That is perhaps our tropisme , but we like debate , we like ideas and the exchange of ideas .
So I think that President Sarkozy 's initiative should be seen as part of the promotion of such debate and reflection .
However , the Commission is keen to make sure that this initiative , if it were to be approved by the European Council , does not undermine our efforts to build on the success of the Lisbon Treaty and , most of all , does not undermine its certification .
We must be clear about this .
That is why we think that this group , in the event of approval by the European Council , should not engage in a new institutional debate .
I do not think it would be wise to do this , so I will ask the ' Wise Men ' ( and women , hopefully ! ) to be wise enough not to open new institutional debates , but rather to concentrate on a vision for Europe in 20 or 30 years ' time .
This is important , and why should we not have a good debate on this ?
We should not , either , engage in a negative debate about the geographical limits of the borders of Europe .
This could be divisive , and it should not undermine our ongoing processes at European level , such as the budgetary review and normal conduct of enlargement negotiations .
It is important because of defending institutions .
We are for all kinds of debate , but let us be honest : we have institutions .
We have the European Parliament , we have the Commission , we have the European Council and , in the end , the institutions are responsible - not wise men or , as we would prefer maybe to say , ' the bright kids ' - and what they could bring as a stimulus to our debate .
We also believe that the timing of the report of such a group should be given careful consideration ; the end of 2009 seems appropriate .
( FR ) Mr Jonckheer , thank you for your comments , especially as regards the Community method and the Greens ' support for it .
We shall be very mindful of this .
You will doubtless have noticed that during the debate on the Reform Treaty - the Lisbon Treaty - certain attempts were made to dilute the Community process .
The Commission , which had cooperated effectively with Parliament , managed to avoid anything that could challenge the principles of the Community system .
You said that 2007 has been an important year for the ' great cause ' , namely the challenge of climate change , and we in the Commission and in the European Union are proud to have contributed to this effort .
Indeed , the Commission 's Green Paper provided the basis for the agreement that was eventually reached at the March European Council .
The European Union can be proud of having taken the lead in this area and it intends to continue its efforts in this direction , especially with the forthcoming Bali Conference and in the wake of major recent meetings such as the High-Level Event in New York and the G8 at Heiligendamm , which also proved decisive .
It will do this with a view to launching a process that , by the time of the Copenhagen meeting in 2009 , will lead - we hope - to the establishment of a post-Kyoto regime by 2012 .
This really is an ambitious target .
In any event , we are aware that we need to motivate our other partners in this direction .
Turning to the issue of migration you say that the European Union should be awarded the Nobel Peace Prize .
It could also be similarly recognised for its activities in other areas , too .
In fact , I think that the European Union has long merited a Nobel Peace Prize , for when it comes to the experience of peace in the world there are few regions better qualified than the European Community , now the European Union .
Let me give you an example .
This month I am going to Singapore to take part in the ASEAN Summit and the Association invited me because it is seeking inspiration , based on our experience of regional integration , to work for peace , economic growth and social development .
We should be proud to be an example to others in the world and this is something that we are working at continuously .
On the subject of migration I wish to reply here to several questions that have been raised by Members of this Parliament .
I have said this repeatedly and I say it again here : I find that it is absurd to have to deal with 27 migration policies in Europe .
We have an integrated area here and we therefore need to have a common approach .
Now let us be clear : some Member States are against it .
However , we shall persist , for in an integrated area there is a greater probability of being confronted with problems of the kind that Italy has had to face recently , including that posed by certain citizens from Romania .
We need more immigration in Europe , not less : that is the truth of the matter .
That is why we are calling for an immigration policy that is responsible and that is based on two key aspects .
Firstly , we have to be resolute when it comes to security by openly combating all forms of exploitation in the workplace and by eliminating the illegal labour market .
For this reason we fully support the initiative put forward by Vice-President Frattini for a directive that will criminalise the employment of persons residing illegally in EU territory , the objective being to prevent the exploitation of such workers and to crack down on the criminal networks involved .
We have to deal firmly with illegal immigration and with all types of activities that act as a cover for certain networks that are often nothing more than criminal gangs , for these groups are not only connected with illegal immigration but also with drug dealing , human trafficking and other forms of organised crime .
At the same time we need to adopt an open , generous and united approach to the problem of how to integrate , first and foremost , those who are Community citizens and then , more generally , those who belong to the various migrant groups .
We need to have the courage to say that this is a task that has to be shared out .
The role of the European institutions is to put the framework in place , but when it comes to the practical side of things who will take care of the actual integration process on the ground ?
Not the European Parliament and not the Commission , but the national governments , the regions , the local authorities , the NGOs and sometimes even the churches , indeed everyone who has a presence on the ground and who has a duty to improve integration .
All this is a major challenge .
You mentioned Kofi Annan .
I have discussed this matter with him on several occasions .
If there is one area that is poorly regulated on a global scale it is migration .
We have laid down certain organisational principles for world trade and indeed for the environment , too .
It is astonishing to note that migration , which is one of the greatest challenges the world has to face , is one area where organisation is lacking on an international level .
I support your proposal that we in the European Union -precisely because we are a special case when it comes to integration and freedom of movement - should double our efforts to promote certain principles because Europe and the wider world are currently facing real threats in the form of xenophobia , populist movements and negative forces from the past that are opposed to those principles that we uphold , namely humanism and hospitality .
We have to steer well clear of extremist positions and must work towards a rational , fair and progressive approach .
( Applause )
Mr Wurtz , you asked a number of questions about trade protection instruments .
First of all , I referred to these instruments in my speech by saying that we would very soon be introducing several initiatives in this area .
Let me say to you that we are very much in favour of establishing effective mechanisms for safeguarding our commercial interests and providing protection against unfair practices .
It is for this reason that we are presently looking at various ways of making these instruments more effective .
What is more , we shall do this in a transparent fashion .
A major consultation has just taken place with a view to ensuring that our businesses , especially the SMEs , are better equipped to cope with international competition .
We intend to take the relevant decisions in this area in December .
It should be recognised that Europe 's businesses are the most international in the world .
European production and distribution chains have now been established in every corner of the planet and are not merely restricted to the Member States .
We believe that this business presence on the global stage is a source of competitiveness and growth for the European economy and for European jobs .
I can assure you that we have no intention of rewarding or subsidising European companies that decide to relocate to third countries or set up part of their production facilities there .
However , I will be completely honest with you in saying that we are not going to sanction or punish the European companies that are the most global and the most competitive in the world .
We therefore need trade protection instruments that are both solid and transparent .
We shall be reviewing our trade protection instruments with a view to introducing stronger measures - and indeed it will never be our intention to weaken them - by adapting them , obviously , to the new realities of globalisation .
I am not going to dwell on the topic of globalisation .
I shall be back here again tomorrow to discuss the document that we presented to the last European Council , and to the Community at large , on bringing added value to Europe and on the means for shaping globalisation to best effect .
We are very aware of the need to defend European interests around the world , to protect our interests without resorting to protectionism , to comprehend and to have the courage to say to the people of Europe that if we in Europe close our doors we will be the first ones to suffer .
It will not be easy but it has to be done .
Europe is the world 's largest exporter .
It would be self-defeating and against our own interests if we were to go down the road of protectionism .
The important thing is to work out how to keep our doors open without being naïve , how to maintain and even extend the opening-up of the global markets while at the same time defending our own interests , and this includes taking account of our concerns for the employment sector .
Mr Crowley , thank you also for your support for our general programme .
About the specific point - I know it is a worry and concern for you - let me be clear about the initiatives on taxation .
As you know , the Commission has been working for some time on the issue of a common consolidated tax base .
This is a very complex area and views are very different between Member States .
I know well the sensitivity in Ireland .
I also know the sensitivity in other Member States .
As is usual practice , the Commission is carrying out an impact assessment to analyse the issues and to look at the likely impact of different possible solutions before making any formal proposals .
All of this is public knowledge and it is entirely appropriate that the Commission refers to this in the work programme for 2008 .
But I agree with you that it is clear that unanimity is in the Reform Treaty as the rule for any legislation on these issues of taxation .
So I believe that your concerns are well taken on board .
I think I have reacted to most of your interesting remarks . Let me just say that I , of course , concentrated on the most , let us say , polemic issues .
What I want to say is that we could see here a degree of consensus about Europe .
A consensus that I believe is stronger between the institutions , also with the natural differences between political families and I hope also consensus between the different parts of our very diverse Union .
This , I think , is not the lowest common denominator consensus .
It is mainly the result of three factors .
First , many of the challenges facing us today are impossible to contest .
The imperatives of climate change , the realities of migration , and the risk of worldwide poverty : all these are clear challenges .
And you can be from the left , the right or the centre , you can be from the north or south of Europe , from the old Member States or new Member States , from small or big Member States , yet these are common challenges that only together we can face .
Second , we are making it progressively clear that the European Union is central to resolving these issues .
Action by individual Member States can only go so far but it becomes more and more obvious that the European dimension is indispensable .
Of course we have to see what is the appropriate level of using the European dimension - the subsidiarity issue that was raised by some of you - but I think that we can agree that even the biggest Member States alone cannot face all those challenges and that we need some level of European commitment .
Finally , I believe the effort all the institutions have put into dialogue and cooperation is paying off .
We are wasting less of our energies in scoring points against each other and more on focussing on how to serve our citizens - and always putting the emphasis on the citizens .
A strong Union , yes , but a strong Union not for the sake of the institutions themselves , but a strong Union to deliver concrete results for our citizens : this is our programme .
I think that , 50 years on , the genius of the founding fathers in creating our unique mix of institutions is as strong as ever .
So , I very much look forward to working closely with Parliament as we carry forward proposals on the table into action , as we crystallise our thinking into concrete measures and as we develop our new agenda for the future .
On my own behalf and on behalf of all the college , I want to tell you that we really want to have a working , loyal and dynamic interaction with Parliament .
( Applause )
Growth and jobs
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , I would like to address the Commission 's agenda , particularly in the economic sector , not only because this is the area where the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs ' interest mostly lies , but it is also of vital importance to the Lisbon Strategy .
The Commission must keep its active role in building a genuine single market for financial services .
It is topical for a good reason .
Firstly , the recent financial turmoil has underlined the importance of sound financial regulation .
Secondly , the financial world is more and more intertwined .
We must be able to build convergence with our main allies overseas .
Transatlantic Market initiatives started a very important process which is especially critical to the capital markets .
A few years ago a groundbreaking legislative process in the form of the Lamfalussy procedure was successfully introduced .
The Lamfalussy procedure is the first attempt to shift widely to delegated legislation in the EU .
Even though the first experiences from this procedure are positive , it is crucial to keep on building trust between institutions .
The working relations between the European Parliament and the European Commission in this process are very important .
As for the follow-up , firstly , the Lamfalussy procedure is basically a sound process that is welcomed by stakeholders .
It is also in its early stages .
It is developing all the time .
Therefore no overhaul is appropriate at this point , nor is it the wish of most stakeholders .
Rather we need targeted improvements - particularly Level 3 Committees - there is a lot of scope for improvement in their international cooperation , to challenge each other and explain .
Finally , I would like to say about tax-related issues that the Commission should keep its active role .
Even though taxation might seem a bit difficult , and we all know that it is still beyond unanimity , we must be very courageous in putting forward action in this area .
Enhanced cooperation is a good innovation and the other items of the Commission 's agenda in the field of tax are also very important .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , President of the Commission , I believe that the people of Europe have very high expectations when it comes to the social dimension of European integration and that the strengthening of this social pillar is the weak link , if not to say the missing link , in the Commission 's strategy .
We need to stop opposing the strategy for growth , the establishment of the single market and the strengthening of the social pillar .
This is a key factor for the support of the peoples of Europe and it is also , quite simply , an essential condition for the success of the Lisbon Strategy and for strengthening the competitiveness and economic efficiency of the European Union .
In this respect there is a striking contrast with the awareness of the challenges posed by climate change , which effectively seemed to stem from last year 's spring summit , and indeed the priorities laid down in the Commission 's work programme contain more than a trace of this .
We are a long way from displaying the same enthusiasm when it comes to meeting the challenges posed by social inclusion and the need to create a Europe that works for everyone , a Europe capable of promoting not just more jobs but better jobs too .
There are declarations of intent and there are various references here and there , in the introduction and in the preamble , but these scarcely figure in the action programme , nor are they included in the legislative initiatives .
Take , for example , lifelong learning , which is mentioned and which , as an accessory to the success of the new policy for the reform of the labour market , is essential if we want to have a fair and efficient system of ' flexicurity ' .
However , there is no grand ambitious programme , something the equivalent , for example , of the old Erasmus scheme , which is not only bearing fruit but has also proved a very effective link via which EU citizens can recognise and acknowledge the work of the European Union .
When it comes to combating social exclusion and poverty , and promoting social protection , the proposals for action are essentially limited to non-legislative initiatives .
We also regret the absence of any progress on the Working Time Directive and Part-Time Work Directive .
Similarly , in the area of taxation , we cannot but note that for want of an initiative on a genuine corporate tax base - which is something that Parliament has been advocating and which the Commissioner concerned was working on - we are still not moving towards a more equitable single market in this particular respect .
Finally , we are impatiently waiting for two initiatives that you announced .
The first concerns the review of the European Works Council Directive , which Parliament has been calling for since 2001 , and the second , which you mentioned , concerns maternity leave .
I would like to conclude by referring to two examples of deadlock that seem to us to be absolutely incomprehensible and unacceptable : they relate firstly to services of general economic interest and secondly to social services of general interest .
After so many White Papers , Green Papers , announcements , disputes before the Court of Justice and a number of clear and repeated demands from the Committee of the Regions and the Economic and Social Committee , and even though a consensus was reached between the Member States in the Council on including a new article in the Lisbon Treaty to provide a clear basis for a legislative initiative - in codecision with Parliament - on public services , which are services of general interest , there is still no concrete proposal forthcoming .
Public services lie at the heart of our social model .
The people of Europe are waiting for clarification that competition rules and single market rules will not suddenly just be imposed on them .
Mr President , you should present an initiative to Parliament on this issue .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I welcome many aspects of the Commission programme .
In particular , I am delighted to see the Commission 's commitment to bring forward a specific horizontal directive under Article 13 to combat discrimination in access to goods and services , although perhaps I would have preferred to see specific directives in all sectors .
However , I do welcome it .
This is something I and many other colleagues have been calling for , and I look forward to working with the Commission closely on this .
I also welcome the Commission 's commitment to a communication on hospital-acquired infections .
We need to work towards a code of practice at European level to ensure best practice is shared and standards are raised , given the stark differences that exist between Member States .
I would also like to see an amendment to the 2000 Biological Agents Directive to protect health workers from contracting HIV and hepatitis C from needle stick injuries .
There are over one million such injuries across the EU each year , and I am disappointed that there is no action planned in this 2008 work programme .
I would urge the Commission to bring forward that amendment as soon as possible in line with the Parliament 's request .
I would also say , under health and safety legislation , that I am pleased that you are committed to having impact assessments before any new legislation is brought forward .
But I urge you to make sure that you look at the implementation of current legislation as well .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , I am delighted at the prominence given to energy policy in the Commission 's plans .
I would nonetheless like to draw attention to the need to achieve a balance between environmental and strategic aims .
It is very easy to impose new environmental taxes , and easy to demand better environmental standards for construction and industry , but this will not , however , resolve the problem of our energy security .
Political measures aimed at energy solidarity in a crisis are required .
The principles of the common market should be urgently applied to energy proprietors who also control distribution .
This is particularly important if the proprietors hail from third countries , such as Russia , where the principle of subsidiarity is not applied in the area of foreign investments .
Countries at risk of economic blackmail will be more inclined to bear the cost of environmental programmes if the latter go hand in hand with strategic solutions vital to Europe 's energy security .
I remain under the impression that we have failed to achieve a balance in this area .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , Mr Barroso this morning sounds rather like a bad First World War general : let us do the same thing we did last week , even though it did not work .
There is absolutely no recognition that the model simply is not working .
I mean , how could he talk about growth and jobs without acknowledging that this wonderful , fabled Lisbon Strategy has been a total disaster ?
We have not achieved a single one of the objectives .
And yet we talk about growth and jobs , but what are we going to do ?
Are we going to deregulate ?
Are we going to lift the burden off business ?
No , nothing of the kind .
I wonder how he has got the front to talk about a sustainable Europe when we still have the same common fisheries policy , we are still throwing back , dead , up to 50 % of the fish we catch and yet we are going to stick with the quota system .
But perhaps my favourite is the idea that this Commission programme is going to put the citizens first .
That is laughable !
If you wanted to put the citizens first , you would respect their opinions .
You would have listened to what the French and Dutch said and you would give them , with this new Treaty , the opportunity , in free and fair and open referendums , to see whether they share with you the same vision for the future of Europe .
But you are doing none of that .
You are burying your heads in the sand .
You are pretending it is not happening and you are actually destroying your own European Union because the whole thing falls further into public contempt .
( HU ) Thank you for the floor , Mr President .
Ladies and gentlemen , the members of the EPP-ED Group who are concerned with budgetary matters have essentially been happy to approve the Commission 's plans for 2008 , and Mr Barroso has formulated a clear message that reflects political commitment .
However , the work programme itself is rather an endless wish-list .
If we were to debate the legislative programme and annual political strategy right at the start of the year , drawing them together , then the budget could be shaped to our goals , and not the goals to the budget .
Parliament is committed to the Galileo programme and the European Institute of Technology and expects the Commission and the Council to make a decision on these matters that serves to benefit European citizens .
Finally , I would like to emphasise that the Commission not only serves growth and job creation through many programmes but also uses taxpayers ' money responsibly and demands similar responsibility from the Member States .
I approve of the fact that , in the event of serious abuse , the Commission is prepared to suspend payments to the Member State in question .
Hopefully , this painful step will not need to be taken but everyone , governments and European citizens , should know that the aim of aid is to develop under-developed regions , and that growth and job creation do not constitute an increase in the bank balances of smooth operators and spongers .
The Commission can also count on the strong support and cooperation of Parliament in this area .
Thank you for your attention .
( PL ) Mr President , I am glad that matters relating to growth and employment head the list of the European Commission 's priorities for 2008 .
This is evidence of an understanding that full employment and preservation of the wide range of social services characteristic of the European social model cannot be achieved without swift and sustainable growth .
Unfortunately , the Commission 's document is disappointing because it lacks detail .
The situation will not be improved simply by repeated reference to mantras such as ' the knowledge society ' and ' flexicurity ' , whilst the Lisbon Strategy remains largely confined to paper .
Specific and more determined action is required , so as to encourage European societies to be more active on the labour market , remove barriers within the single market , notably in the area of the free movement of labour and services , and create more favourable conditions for entrepreneurs .
Europe is a world leader in terms of social and environmental protection .
Europe 's potential for growth is too low , however , and will not enable it to retain its position .
Action should focus mainly on developing education , and increasing flexibility and readiness for work .
We must move away from a paternalistic social policy that perpetuates inactivity towards a social policy that rewards activity on the labour market .
The common currency has an important role to play in the creation of economic competition .
I welcome the enlargement of the euro zone to include Slovenia , Cyprus and Malta .
The discriminatory treatment meted out to certain new Member States endeavouring to join the euro zone should be cause for concern , however .
Lithuania is a case in point .
Any recurrence of such errors in the future could be detrimental above all for the eurozone .
We trust that the European Commission will present us with specific proposals regarding support for employment and growth , so as to ensure a high and constantly rising standard of living in a united Europe .
( DE ) Mr President , President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , as far as the PPE-DE Group is concerned , the objectives for the coming year in the field of the internal market and consumer protection are very clear .
Firstly , we want to see the completion of the internal market through the removal of remaining barriers and obstacles .
That is why , Mr Kyprianou , we welcome your proposal for a health services directive , based on Article 95 , which would adopt a very broad-brush approach to the health sector .
We also welcome the fact that Mr McCreevy and his Directorate-General will be looking at further aspects of public procurement as a follow-up to the Services Directive .
Secondly , we want to see comparable standards of consumer protection being established in all Member States of the European Union and , Mrs Kuneva , we greatly welcome your review of all the relevant EU legislation in this area .
We are also pleased that we can act on this review in two directives , firstly in a horizontal instrument and then in a revision directive which will cover all the other areas to be dealt with .
Thirdly , we want to help achieve a situation in which we finally have clearer , simpler and therefore fewer rules in the European Union .
I am turning to you now , Mr Verheugen : as Members of this Parliament we will be looking very closely at all the proposals relating to the free movement of goods from this perspective .
The Toy Safety Directive will come , as will the Construction Products Directive , and I am sure we will see some movement on tractors and defence goods as well .
We hope that we will make tangible progress here .
We are also very much looking forward to your anticipated study on consumer labelling .
Sustainable Europe
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , thank you to the Commission .
The Commission 's policy is Lisbon .
The Parliament 's policy is Lisbon , but Lisbon is not happening .
We want to know why not , we want to see progress and we want to see that monitoring and enforcement .
President Barroso talked about prizes .
Let us have the Barroso prize for achievement each year for the Member State that has made most progress .
Why not ?
Give them some encouragement .
Where we do want progress is on some of the things in the programme .
We obviously want it on emissions trading .
We do not want to see it slipping any more than the one month he referred to .
We want progress on climate change , quite clearly .
We want progress both in terms of what we can do through legislative restriction on emissions and so on , but also what we can do to encourage individuals .
So let us have the things like eco-labelling proposals coming forward .
We also want some progress on the information to patients - Mr Verheugen 's proposal .
We want to see progress on patient mobility and cross-border health .
That is urgent .
Otherwise , we are going to have lawyers deciding policy for us .
We want to see that coming forward along with measures on patient safety , medical professionals ' information , work on hospital-acquired infections , work against the counterfeiting of drugs and so forth .
We want to see that mental health proposal which has been promised and has not yet appeared .
It was promised for this year .
Let us have it please .
That is an important step .
Lastly , this week we have the very first World Diabetes Day - the UN has supported this , as have Member States , the Council and the Parliament .
Let us have a bit of support from the Commission on progress on that as they see the symbol that we are going to erect in the courtyard of this Parliament tomorrow .
Let that be a reminder that we want some action to support the many families , and children in particular , who suffer from that debilitating disease .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , I am very pleased to see that climate change remains one of the key priorities of the Commission for the coming year .
Here we have an awful lot to deliver and I think we should focus on that delivery .
I understand why Commissioner Dimas is delaying the publication of the ETS and the other parts of the energy package until the new year , but I hope that does not mean that we are losing our resolve on climate change .
There is a certain amount of scepticism in Washington and elsewhere about how serious the European Union is about climate change .
It would be a real shame at a time when we are seeing changes in Washington , on both sides , Republican and Democrat , where we are seeing changes in Australia and a willingness to begin dialogue in China and India , if we were to stumble on our reform package on climate change .
We had our summit in March but it is not enough to talk about targets .
We have got to implement them .
We cannot just ' talk the talk ' on climate change ; we have to ' walk the walk ' on climate change .
You , as the Commission , cannot do that alone .
You need the governments of Europe to back you , and there will be a tough debate on burden-sharing in the new year .
I hope this Parliament will be involved in that debate , not just watching on the sidelines , and we look forward to seeing how we can be involved .
But you also need the support of this House , and I say to the colleagues opposite and to the Liberals : last month , on cars , you let us down on climate change because you watered down the Commission proposals .
There will be another test later this morning on aviation emissions and I hope that we will have a strong package .
Finally , Mr Barroso mentioned the committee of wise men or wise people , which Mr Sarkozy wants to set up .
Why cannot these wise people - yes I agree they should not be looking at institutional reform - why cannot they look at delivery , that we actually deliver what Europe promises , and then we will begin to make the reconnection with the citizens that is so often talked about .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I welcome very much the emphasis given in the 2008 work programme to the importance of a sustainable European energy policy .
President Barroso spoke out about the greening of the transport sector and , of course , that is vital .
However , to my mind , the really shocking statistic is that in Europe we use 40 % of our energy in buildings - in heating , cooling and lighting - even though we have the technology to design and engineer our buildings to have virtually no energy requirements at all .
Therefore , I want to make a plea to the Commission to be radical in its review of the Energy Performance of Buildings Directive next year - point 2 ( c ) of the Strategic Initiatives .
Two things are needed .
Firstly , the minimum energy performance requirements for new buildings should be tightened .
We need to move very quickly to a passive house or ' zero carbon ' standard , with no net energy requirement .
Thousands of passive houses are now being built in Europe but , unfortunately , only in a few countries and regions .
Secondly and most importantly , we need to get rid of the 1 000 m2 threshold and bring all buildings with a heating or cooling requirement within the scope of the Directive .
That would mean all buildings undergoing major renovation would be brought up to high energy standards .
We have to look at the energy wasted in existing buildings and not just at new buildings , because 75 % of the buildings which exist today will still be standing in 2050 .
MEPs have been discussing the Commission 's action plan on energy efficiency in the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , and it seems to me that there is the political will in Parliament for a radical revision of the Energy Performance of Buildings Directive .
I hope we can count on the Commission to come forward with some strong proposals next year so that we can stop this completely unnecessary wasting of energy in our buildings .
Mr President , we , too , welcome the Commission 's vigorous efforts , the legislative programme and the work programme .
The programme brings out the need to adopt measures in the transport sector that are more environmentally friendly ; it highlights the Strategic EU Energy Review , the suppression of biodiversity and the marine environment strategy .
We recognise the EU 's major contribution so far to the fight against climate change , about which several Members have already spoken .
My only comment with regard to accepting the inevitable period of climate change we will have to undergo is that I disagree .
Rather than accept it , we should put pressure on our partners to comply with the Kyoto Protocol and abide by the post-Kyoto commitments to reduce gas emissions .
We Europeans should also practise what we are constantly preaching .
The European Commission also emphasises health and proposes numerous legislative and non-legislative packages .
Medical insurance and quality of health services , pharmaceutical products , organ transplants , rare diseases and innovative technologies to fight chronic diseases are among the issues that the Commission intends to include in its programme .
The Commission 's targets are very ambitious , but we shall have to wait and see their finer detail .
Lastly , I must mention the Health Services Directive .
Under what conditions will the free movement of patients and health professionals be permitted ?
How can we avoid a disproportionate burden on health funds ?
These are just some of the questions that we will have to consider in connection with this new directive .
Mr President , I welcome the Commission 's work programme and I look forward with keen interest to hearing how the EU is going to meet its extremely ambitious greenhouse gas emission and energy targets .
I was recently in Washington having meetings with the members of the Congress .
They are fascinated to hear about our emissions trading system and are talking about cap and trade but they are rather incredulous about how ambitious our targets are .
I am also looking forward with keen interest to hearing how we are going to further develop the common research area .
As President Barroso is not here , I will forbear from commenting on the European Institute of Technology and move on swiftly to mention the Small Business Act , the Commission communication for small businesses , because there are high expectations in the small business community of this proposal .
But I am bound to say that in my Member State it may cause some confusion since a non-legislative action described as an act is possibly something of an oxymoron in UK terms .
Nevertheless , the small business sector is vitally important for our economy , for innovation and flexibility , for creating jobs , and it is to be supported .
But we do have this habit at European level of being strong on rhetoric and weak on actions in support of small business .
( DE ) Mr President , the focus on a sustainable Europe arises , among other things , from our priority to protect the climate .
There have been many references today to excessive bureaucracy , over-regulation and the violation of subsidiarity .
It has also been made very clear that these arguments are invariably advanced whenever a new rule or law is unwelcome .
However , in terms of effective climate protection , it is clear that if we had gone ahead 10 years ago and adopted rules to cut CO2 emissions from vehicles , the European Union would now be in a better position and we would not be under the pressure we are now feeling to bring about the effective climate protection that is required .
It is also apparent from the European Commission 's various assessments that one of our decisions , namely to cut CO2 emissions by 20 % by 2020 , could be attained simply through compliance with legislation which is already on the statute books , and so my question to the Commission is this : what specific steps are being taken to monitor the implementation of existing legislation ?
I have another question which relates to risk assessment on genetically modified organisms , which is also mentioned in the Commission 's work programme .
My question is this : what improvements is the Commission trying to make in this area ?
As we know from many debates , this is also one of the main points of criticism of our work and of legislation in this field .
( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , the cohesion and regional policies function on the basis of the regulations with which we established a seven-year framework in 2006 .
A total of EUR 350 billion was earmarked for growth and employment , with priority for the Lisbon objectives , and there was a specific goal in mind .
This is all well and good , you may say , but what is missing ?
I am missing the Fifth Cohesion Report in the plan for next year : it was promised for June 2008 .
The report must lay the foundations for long-term adjustments to the cohesion policy and for our plans regarding the regions and cities .
In our Member States there is a trend towards renationalisation , which Parliament firmly rejects as it covers a whole range of policy areas : R & D , innovation , regional cohesion and rural policy .
In this context , I would like to address Commissioners Hübner and Potočnik .
The PPE-DE Group launched the debate on the medium-term approach with a parliamentary hearing last week , quite rightly to look at the question in more depth and to bring the citizens and regions into focus in the coming years .
Finally , the move to make the new Solidarity Fund more flexible , Mr President , has been blocked by the Council , and we would like to see a breakthrough there .
As far as the Commission is concerned , much more support is required .
( DE ) Mr President , very briefly , I would like to list what I regard as the most important points arising from this work programme .
Undoubtedly a key theme for 2008 is the Health Check for the common agricultural policy .
The 2003 CAP reform should be reviewed and simplified , we all agree on that , and to that extent I hope , as rapporteur , that the important contributions that we in Parliament make to this own-initiative report will be taken into account in the ensuing legislative proposal .
This Health Check must help us find the right path towards a common agricultural policy for the post-2013 period .
A further project is the planned Green Paper on Agricultural Product Quality .
Quality must become an even greater focus in agriculture , and this applies to farm imports from third countries as well , which must conform to the same standards as those applicable to EU producers .
I am particularly keen on an initiative to promote the consumption of fruit in schools .
This is something which we in the PPE-DE Group have been championing for some time , and we are gratified that the Commission intends to take up this initiative .
Other key issues for 2008 such as the Milk Package , the 2008-2009 Budget Review , the Action Plan on EU Animal Health Strategy and the Review of Support for Less Favoured Areas will certainly make sure that there is no scope for any boredom in Parliament !
( DE ) Mr President , the issue of transport and mobility is naturally also viewed as a priority in the programme for 2008 .
Of course , we have very clear challenges here .
We must set priorities in 2008 ranging from economic efficiency , impact on the environment and , not least , the rights of users and their safety : issues which can only be touched on briefly here .
The rules on security controls at airports , for example , were introduced in response to pressure from very topical events at the time .
In the PPE-DE Group , we consider that the relevant directive could now be reviewed .
As to passenger rights , this issue could be dealt with conclusively if we were to focus in more detail on the rights of passengers in international coach travel as well .
That would mean that in Europe , passenger rights would be covered in all modes of transport : air travel , rail and road .
As regards trans-European networks , this is a topic which we have discussed on frequent occasions in recent months .
Here , of course , we face a special situation : too little money and a lot of projects , especially now that the Council has announced several new projects in recent weeks .
We take the view that on the issue of trans-European networks , clear decisions must be taken in 2008 , and that transboundary routes must have absolute priority so that the so-called bottlenecks disappear , allowing effective application of the principle of multimodal transport .
A swift decision must and could be reached by taking account of those countries where cofinancing is already envisaged and where the projects have got off to a good start on a technical level .
( ES ) Mr President , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , in relation to the Commission 's common fisheries policy proposals we again face a number of issues the Commission has not followed up as rapidly as it should have .
Suffice to say we are some years behind in securing a new regulation on technical measures in the Atlantic : this is a fundamental aspect for fisheries management that we hoped to secure by 2008 , since it would be the best possible contribution by CFP to the goal of simpler legislation .
We would also like the Commission to make a start on issuing precise guidelines as to how it intends to apply the maximum sustainable yield model to EU fisheries , particularly multi-species fisheries .
We feel it is important for specific legislative proposals to be put forward for eco-labelling of fisheries products since this will have significantly improve the traceability of these products and provide guarantees to prevent the consumption and sale of products obtained from illegal fishing .
Finally , following the Commission 's announcement that it intends to withdraw the draft agreement with Tanzania , I must pass on the request from the sector that it do all it can to continue negotiations with this country : they are vital to provide the tuna fleet with fishing grounds in this area of Africa through a number of agreements with adjoining exclusive economic zones .
An integrated approach to migration
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , although we are discussing the programme for 2008 , I would like to start by pointing out that we have made major progress in the field of home affairs policy in recent months , and I would like to pay tribute to Commissioner Frattini for that .
We have Schengen , and this week in plenary we have taken major steps forward with Prüm , the Visa Information System ( VIS ) and data protection . This is major progress .
We cannot leave it at that , however .
Now it is about the practical work for tomorrow .
The key priority for all of us , on a practical basis , is to make major progress with SIS II .
In the PPE-DE Group , our main concern is that after the great success of the enlargement of the Schengen area , fatigue will now set in and many Member States will slip into a state of inertia .
That is something we cannot afford .
We need SIS II as a major project for next year .
In the legislative sphere , I would like to touch upon the border security issue again in particular .
Here , we must consider whether in future the evaluation of external border protection should no longer be carried out by Schengen members ' own evaluation teams but by the Frontex agency . That is where this responsibility should lie .
I would ask the Commission to be brave and , on the proposals regarding migration , to actually define a European added value .
If a proposal is submitted for a Blue Card for highly skilled workers , this should not just be a proposal that endorses national rules and applies a common label : it really has to be a European proposal .
The same applies to combating terrorism .
If a system for the transmission of air passenger records is established , we cannot have 27 individual rules , which we could bring in straight away ; we really need a European proposal .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we cannot go along with a lot of what President Barroso has said , especially when he says that the Commission is being tough on illegal immigration but very generous and supportive on integration .
We can certainly agree to the directive on penalising employers who illegally employ non-Community migrant workers , but we find no trace in the programme of those legislative measures on legal migration previously announced by Vice-President Frattini .
No mention is made of the Directives on seasonal workers and highly skilled workers , nor of opening up legal migration channels for unskilled non-Community workers , who constitute the majority of immigrants now present on EU soil .
We believe these measures to be necessary , not least so as to combat exploitation and bring undeclared work out into the open .
The reference to a shared overall approach is fine , and one cannot fail to agree on the need to avoid having 27 different immigration policies , but we look forward to receiving some more tangible information about the European surveillance system announced in the programme .
Finally , Mr President , I would recall that under the new Lisbon Treaty many of these subjects will be handled through codecision as of 1 January 2009 , with this House assuming full legislative responsibility alongside the Council and the Commission .
It might perhaps be useful to prepare the ground for better cooperation among the EU institutions .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , one point I wanted to make was very similar to what Mr Fava has just said about the absence of any major emphasis on the need for an EU policy on legal migration .
We have had the proposals from Commissioner Frattini - and all credit to him - but we need great pressure to be put on Member States to respond to those proposals because the challenge of getting a comprehensive and well managed legal migration system for the EU should be up there with the challenge of climate change .
It links into so many other issues , economic and social .
We should be having a summit of Prime Ministers to look at not only EU competence but also exchanges of best practice on management of migration as well as integration .
I must confess I have my doubts about the emphasis that is put by the Commission on the benefits of circular migration .
I wonder whether that is going to come unstuck in the same way that our experience with Gastarbeiter did many years ago .
I am not sure that it is going to work out .
Human beings do not necessarily leave when they envisaged that they would leave .
My last point is to raise data protection concerns about the envisaged entry-exit scheme and the electronic travel authorisation .
I do not know what electronic travel authorisation will add to the visa information system , and I look forward to hearing a great deal more from Commissioner Frattini about these schemes .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , the 2004 and 2007 enlargements in which 12 new countries acceded to the Union are now behind us .
It is now time to focus on the integration of all the citizens of the 27 countries and to set a common course and common challenges for Europe .
One of the points in the Commission 's programme is to put the citizens first .
With that in mind , future enlargements should be approached with caution and due consideration .
Enlargements opposed by the citizens should be avoided .
I have in mind Turkey .
As Mr Barroso pointed out , we lack a common immigration policy .
I trust that the principle adopted will involve controlled immigration , carefully selected , as in the United States .
After all , immigration is not simply a response to particular circumstances affecting the labour market or pensions .
It involves people with whom we will have to coexist for centuries .
We should select individuals who will find integrating into European civilisation a pleasure rather than an imposition .
- ( EL ) Mr President , Europe benefits from its immigrants , but in today 's Europe xenophobia is increasing rather than diminishing .
The example of Italy is fresh in our minds .
In my country , Greece , an EP delegation recently saw for themselves the wretched conditions in which hundreds of immigrants and asylum seekers are detained on the island of Samos .
This was in a detention centre which Ministers promised would be closed immediately , but which is still open , despite a report by an international NGO condemning it for torturing illegal immigrants .
Unfortunately , in the present dangerous climate , instead of promoting the positive aspects of immigration , the Commission is responding to a climate of fear artfully created in certain sectors .
The problem you have presented us with focuses mainly on policing , and this is somewhat biased .
It is necessary , of course , to combat illegal immigration .
There is a need for solidarity with countries receiving huge influxes of immigrants .
Proper agreements on readmission at European level and the common European protection of immigrants ' fundamental rights are needed .
Immigrants cannot be sent back into danger and destitution .
Europe needs a serious foreign and economic policy to combat the main causes of migration , such as poverty and war , through peaceful yet tough measures .
Above all , of course , a multilateral policy is needed to integrate migrants into our societies .
Instead of this , your programme equates immigration with criminality .
Commissioners , you are specifically stating that the European border control system , a programme that is integrated into the framework of immigration policies , will increase the internal security of the Schengen area by preventing illegal immigration , terrorism , etc .
What does security have to do with immigration , or indeed with illegal immigration ?
What does it have to do with terrorism ?
By associating these bogeys with immigration in the public imagination and in Europe 's policies , I fear you are playing the game of the EU 's far-right forces .
Please eliminate these dangerous attitudes from your strategy documents .
There are undoubtedly criminal immigrants , just as there are English , German and Greek criminals , but the immigrants ' only real crime is that they were born in poor or war-torn regions .
Putting the citizens first
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , from the point of view of budgetary control , the Commission Legislative and Work Programme for 2008 is a disappointment because key issues and problems relating to budgetary control simply do not feature in the programme .
It could be argued that this is about current management , but our concern is this : if we look at the past few years of ' current management ' , it is clear that in order to solve the problems , the Commission really should have adopted an agenda which went beyond current management .
We are unlikely to make any progress on the statement of assurance , although the Commission should be bringing substantial pressure to bear on the Member States here .
You have our support on this issue , yet we do not see you doing this .
As a result , you are very likely to fall short of your own commitments : commitments which the Commission President himself undertook personally on behalf of this Commission .
He pledged to move forward towards a positive statement of assurance .
We are at least as far from achieving this now as in all the years before , as we have known since yesterday evening .
When it comes to implementing the commitments , what we believe is lacking is a serious approach .
The same applies , incidentally , to the Commission 's legislative programme itself .
You should be world champions in practical implementation , not in planning !
Of the 200 items for codification announced for 2007 , just 23 have actually been submitted to Parliament to date , and only six of the 43 announced new items have been tabled so far .
The question which arises is this : why are we even talking about this programme if you will not be putting it into practice ?
You really need to do better in 2008 .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , I wish to express my thanks to the Commission .
A work programme is not just a declaration of principles , but a tool to implement specific policies .
The humblest bid to implement , however , can be a gem , and I feel the real gems in this work programme are initiatives that place the European citizens centre stage : initiatives concerning , for example , patient safety , quality of health services or reconciliation of family and professional life , as Mr Barroso said in his speech here .
We would have liked to have had this in writing in the same detail as part of the work programme .
Perhaps the greatest gem of all , though , is the proposal for a directive to combat discrimination in all the Member States .
We need this directive in this Year of Equal Opportunities for All because it must show that discrimination is not just a social , moral and political error , but also a waste of human resources .
The Reform Treaty states that the EU must encourage not only social cohesion but also non-discrimination .
Consequently , the right directives are needed because all European countries must have the same levels of protection against discrimination .
There cannot be a discrimination hierarchy .
A Europe that tolerates any kind of discrimination cannot purport to be an example to anyone .
I do have one problem here , however , and that is the role of the European Parliament in this issue .
All we have is its opinion , and it is rather ironic that we are encouraging equality here yet when it comes to institutions all of them are equal but some are more equal than others .
I also regret that the introduction to this work programme makes little mention of , or reference to , discrimination against , and integration of , immigrants .
We call on the Commission to keep the promise it made to this House that EU action will cover all areas of discrimination .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , Mr Barroso 's slogan is ' delivering results for Europe ' , but these results must also be in the area of intangible business , not only in the market .
Mr Barroso 's Commission was to become the champion of citizens ' freedoms and rights .
That has been very disappointing up until now , but with less than two years to go perhaps there is light at the end of the tunnel .
As far as I am concerned , the highlight of the 2008 work programme is the proposal for a directive on equality outside the workplace , that is , a general prohibition of discrimination .
At last the Commission is listening to what Parliament has been calling for over the last number of years .
Priority must be given to this matter .
However , the Commission must guarantee better compliance with the existing legislation because there is a discrepancy between the excellent anti-discrimination laws we already have and the Commission 's inability to actually enforce them .
The anti-discrimination principle must also be introduced in other areas , such as inheritance taxes and wills , and the Commission must recognise modern family set-ups in this respect .
I also welcome the proposals to reinforce equality between men and women , for example by reconciling work and family life .
As regards the position of women in the labour market , the proposals for more flexibility are important .
Flexibility is , as it happens , good for women .
Rigid rules for the protection of employees put women at a disadvantage .
Intercultural dialogue has been highlighted as a priority .
The intention is to get rid of social tensions by means of dialogue , but in reality this is often inter-religious dialogue and I therefore object to it , Commissioner .
There is nothing concrete in the proposals for the coming year , and it is therefore not clear what the intercultural dialogue will be , but I fear that it might be the annual photograph of Mr Barroso with the generally conservative ecclesiastical leaders .
I would like the agenda of these ...
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I would like to draw your attention to the following issues .
First , as regards the multiannual strategy to establish an area of freedom security and justice : the draft Reform Treaty foresees the respect for the rights of persons belonging to minorities .
I believe that now we really need a common European policy on minority rights and social inclusion - the recent events in Italy demonstrated this clearly .
Speaking about putting the citizens first , I am sure that we have to return again to the concept of civic citizenship , which includes all permanent residents of the EU .
Mr Frattini , the Commission should take a stand on this .
As regards multilingualism , European policies to promote language diversity must take into account that not only official languages exist but also regional and minority languages .
These languages should benefit from multilingualism policies also .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there is a kind of irony in the Commission claiming that it wants to put the citizen at the centre of the European project in its 2008 legislative programme .
It is true that the citizen , the poor lowly citizen , has never before been central to the concerns of the Brussels-Frankfurt-Luxembourg triangle , where practically all the powers will be concentrated from now on , in other words in the hands of institutions that do not even respect the fundamental principles of democracy .
How , therefore , can we claim that we are promoting the welfare of our citizens in the era of globalisation when in fact we are in the process of abandoning the principle of the republic , which is government of the people , by the people , for the people ?
Caring for the citizen means respecting what he has to say .
In this regard , the Lisbon Treaty is an insult to the people of our nations , because it is just a copy and paste job of the European Constitution that was overwhelmingly rejected and because it confirms the logic of the current Treaties that prohibit us from controlling the euro , from safeguarding our markets , from protecting our borders from illegal immigration and from defending ourselves in international trade negotiations .
In particular - and these remarks are intended especially for my French colleagues in all the parliamentary groups - this Lisbon Treaty does not change the dogmatic concept of competition without balances , without national interests , without frontiers and without any concern for democracy .
Its Charter of Fundamental Rights , which takes precedence over the rights of individual Member States , sweeps away the notion of the Citizen of the Republic as laid down in our Constitution and replaces it with the most dangerous form of multiculturalism .
As for the Citizen of Europe , no one has ever met him : in fact he does not exist .
To conclude , therefore , if anyone here is concerned about the citizen let them start by demanding a general referendum on the Lisbon Treaty .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , from the perspective of the PPE-DE Group in the European Parliament 's Committee on Legal Affairs , I would like to make the following three points .
Firstly , we very much welcome the fact that the European Commission has included a proposal for a European Company Statute in its legislative programme for next year .
This is something which this House has wanted for a very long time , and so it is very welcome indeed .
What we find regrettable is that the Commission has , in effect , been forced into this course of action after we made use of the legal instrument of Article 192 and opted to present a legislative own-initiative report , despite the fact that the Commission has been aware of this problem for a very long time . Indeed , it has been mentioned repeatedly in a whole series of company law programmes ever since the days of Commissioner Bolkestein .
Secondly , we find it most regrettable that this year , the Commission suspended the process for the adoption of the Fourteenth Company Law Directive on the cross-border transfer of the registered office of limited companies .
This is indeed a major problem .
We expect the Commission to reconsider and include it in future legislative programmes .
If this does not happen , may I make it clear here and now that we will again make use of Article 192 and force the Commission to bring forward a relevant legislative proposal .
The Commissioner 's notions that for the application of the Merger Directive , it would first be necessary to set up a company in another country in order to merge with it are bureaucratic and absurd .
This is not a solution that we regard as acceptable .
With a view to the next legislative term , at least , we would also like to see the Commission giving some thought to achieving progress in relation to copyright and perhaps commissioning a Green Paper on this issue .
( ES ) Mr President , we are obviously extremely pleased that citizens are at the forefront of the European project , but I must point out that one of the EU 's major problems is the general public 's vast lack of knowledge of what the Union is .
I think any of us who give talks , teach or speak on the subject witness this phenomenon .
Only the other day the media in my country referred to your colleague Mrs Ferrero-Waldner as the Swiss Commissioner .
Having said this , what we need , year after year , is a specific and broad awareness campaign to bring the European project closer to citizens and to gradually raise awareness of the institutions and how they operate .
I would also ask the Commission for a more accurate definition and smoother communication with this House and the Committee on Culture and Education in relation to the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue 2008 , since the website clearly has some major limitations .
Europe as a world partner
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , it is true that 2008 will be an important year , as the President of the Commission said , but it will be a year of transition prior to the end of this Commission 's mandate .
I think if we can draw one conclusion , it is that the Durão Barroso Commission , notwithstanding the difficult circumstances in which it was forced to handle EU affairs , was clearly equal to the task , both internally - the work programme - and in terms of its external image .
In my capacity as group coordinator in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , I am worried about a number of future international events such as the election of the next President of the United States and the repercussions of this on conflicts in central Asia , talks with a new Russian President , development of the Neighbourhood Policy and accession negotiations , assistance in the event of a statute for Kosovo , the result of the Annapolis Conference in the Middle East , the elections we all wish to see in Pakistan , the Olympic Games in China after the Communist Party Congress and the next EU-Latin America Summit in Peru .
However , Madam Vice-President , please ask the President of the Commission to reiterate our praise of the Commissioners responsible for external relations .


I see that only Mr Rehn is here today and I also wish to extend my congratulations to Mr Mandelson , Mr Michel and , of course , Mrs Ferrero-Waldner .
The most important thing here is for the EU 's external action to be visible and effective , and I would ask you , Madam Vice-President , to exercise extreme caution when applying the provisions of the new Treaty so as not to compromise EU achievements and successes in foreign policy .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , most EU citizens agree that the Union must play a larger role on the world stage .
The Council should play a larger role in this regard , but it is often paralysed or inefficient as a result of internal disagreements .
The Commission will hopefully set a good example this coming year , starting in Europe .
In Turkey the negotiations must proceed smoothly and care must be taken to see that they stay on the right track .
There is much work to do in the Balkans : Bosnia needs help to start forming a state and Macedonia needs to prepare for the start of membership negotiations .
In addition , of course , the European Union will hopefully make an important contribution to the rebuilding of Kosovo and with any luck by the end of this year or some time next year a solution will have been found to the question of its status .
We very much want the Commission , however , to continue with the Black Sea initiative it has undertaken .
It is very important for the European Union to strive for regional cooperation around its borders .
What will the Commission do in terms of the Central Asia strategy that was recently approved by the European Council ?
In this respect , I also wish to ask if we may expect further development of the energy policy that Parliament requested earlier this year .
This is very important , including with regard to relations with the region I called ' zonet ' .
Then there is the European Neighbourhood Policy .
I think that the priority this coming year must be to conclude the negotiations with Ukraine : in this respect we hope - and Parliament will discuss this tomorrow afternoon - that a situation can be created in that country that will allow , over the coming years , for a new type of agreement , a form of association , under which Ukraine can continue the reform process with the new government towards further integration with the European Union .
In that process Moldova must not be forgotten either , as it is in need of a new partnership agreement .
I hope that the Commission will also present proposals on that issue next year .
Naturally we must also look at how to handle a country like Georgia : this is something we will also debate tomorrow afternoon and we would ask the Commission to be proactive in this regard .
Finally , there has been very little progress with Russia so what can we do to move things forward ?
We would suggest renewed action after the presidential elections .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , to my regret I have to say that I am disappointed with the section of your legislative and work programme on Europe as a world player .
There is of course little legislation in the field of external relations , as we all know , but there is all the more work to be done for that and I find that what has been written on the subject , with a couple of exceptions , is in fact grossly inadequate .
There is obviously also difficulty in clearly identifying Europe 's fundamental problem when it comes to foreign policy .
The text glibly states that Europe is a world leader in the fight against poverty , the promotion of sustainable development , human rights and governance , and so on and so forth .
That may well be , but it is not perceived as such by the rest of the world , certainly not by the EU Member States , and I hear very many complaints that it is not so .
What is true , however , is that the European Union is the largest provider of all these things that are listed .
Reflecting this in our image as a world leader , as a body that takes the lead on the global stage , is something else entirely .
I am encouraged by the positive direction of the programme 's proposals concerning Africa .
I feel , for example , that the proposal to establish trilateral discussions between the EU , Africa and China is particularly hopeful and positive .
I also think that the proposals to make greater efforts to promote economic development in Africa is just as important .
We are thus moving in the right direction , although there are still not enough specific goals .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the year 2008 will differ from the current year in that it will not bring a further enlargement of the Union .
The coming year will , however , provide an opportunity to develop economic and political relations between the Union and a number of important countries in Asia , Africa , Latin America and also for instance in the South Caucasus , as previous speakers have already mentioned .
We must keep two Union priorities in mind .
Firstly , participation in peaceful stabilisation , notably in the Middle East and South Asia .
Secondly , exerting pressure on all our partners to ensure that the development of our bilateral relations in the areas of economics and politics is linked to respect for human rights .
This applies to each and every one of our partners , regardless of whether the particular country concerned is a poor African or Asian one , powerful Russia or fast-developing China .
These two areas , the political and economic on the one hand and human rights on the other , cannot be torn asunder and dealt with separately .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ' Europe as a world partner ' is a very nice heading for the Commission programme , but what we are really talking about is the European Union , not Europe , and it is presumptuous to use this heading at all , for Europe is far greater than just the European Union .
The EU wishes to present itself as a world partner , and the Commission 's programme is very honest about this : it talks about a foreign policy to project , promote and protect - and therefore assert - Europe 's interests and values successfully .
How is that supposed to happen ?
The answer , increasingly , is by using military means !
The European Union is now a military actor all over the world .
On paper , this is to provide assistance to people , but in practice , EU interests , or the interests of EU Member States , are being asserted by military means . Congo is a good example .
The EU 's military intervention there has ensured that Joseph Kabila , an autocrat who is acceptable to the EU , is now in power , backed by elections , and his opponent has been forced into exile .
A brutal war has erupted in Eastern Congo , with some 350 000 people forced to flee their homes .
The EU 's military intervention in Chad , too , has primarily served to bolster the position of military ruler Idriss Déby , an old friend of France .
This type of EU military operation is simply a continuation of Member States ' neo-colonial policies .
It seems that it is difficult to voice unadorned criticism of political friends .
Pakistan is a case in point at present .
The basis for all of this is the Reform Treaty , which makes a clearly militarised EU policy possible .
The next issue is Kosovo , and we are seeing what can happen there .
Individual Member States have already announced that they intend to recognise Kosovo on a unilateral basis .
I urge the Commission to reject such measures unequivocally and not to condone any unilateral recognition of Kosovo .
Mr President , at the risk of upsetting Commissioner Dimas again , I will repeat some of the words I said last night .
Only legislate , Commission , please , where it is needed in the new work programme .
Enforce the regulations that we already have in place and enforce them right across the European Union .
Do not bring in policies which actually discriminate against industry , business , opportunities within the European Union .
Commissioner Barroso mentioned something very close to my heart on the Committee on International Trade , and that is trade defence instruments .
Use them where it is necessary to protect the health and safety of consumers in the European Union but do not use them as a protectionist measure .
We live in , as he quite rightly said , a global economy , and I look forward to seeing that .
With regard to Commissioner Mandelson , I wish him well in the WTO Doha Agreement and I hope that we can move agriculture forward with the US and the European Union to ensure we get a settlement , building on things like Euromed , which are very important to the European Union .
We have agreements with Morocco and we must look at these sort of situations .
The US has just put in a free trade agreement on that .
Finally on EPAs : just over a month ago , Trade Commissioner Peter Mandelson was standing strong on his commitment to conclude EPA negotiations by December .
Let us hope that he has relaxed his position and will move forward on that .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are aware of the context and constraints affecting the Commission in the field of foreign policy , and so we are grateful for the efforts it has made , for example , to ensure that aid continues to reach the Palestinian people after the dramatic turn taken by events following the legislative elections .
On this subject , we would suggest to the Commission that it prepare as of now for possible future scenarios , whether the Annapolis conference is a success - as we hope it will be - or a failure .
On the neighbourhood policy , as has already been said , we would quite frankly have expected more than the brief progress report given in the text of the programme .
A debate has begun on the future of our Mediterranean policy - I do not know whether President Sarkozy will choose to broach this topic in his speech today - and the Commission should without doubt undertake a more detailed assessment of these policies .
It should also make proposals for the future , involving this House rather more than it has done in the past , given that tomorrow we are to discuss Parliament 's report on the neighbourhood policy .
Furthermore , we would urge greater consistency between internal EU policies - such as agriculture , fisheries , trade and immigration - and our development cooperation policies with the poorest countries , especially in Africa .
Finally , the reference to Latin America strikes us as very weak .
We would honestly expect relations between the European Union and this major continent to feature more prominently on Europe 's agenda , given that Latin America is so crucial to decisions on the environment as well as to other policies such as trade and energy .
Those , then , are the main points I wished to highlight on behalf of my Group .
( NL ) Mr President , I am speaking here as our group coordinator in the Committee on Development .
It will therefore not surprise you that I wish to congratulate the Commission on emphasising prosperity , solidarity , security , freedom and strengthening Europe in the world .
All these things are directly relevant to the situation in poor countries .
Poverty , war and instability in developing countries have a direct impact on our continent .
Showing solidarity and support for poor countries is not only in the interest of these countries but in the interest of Europe itself .
It is only by cooperating with poor countries that adequate solutions to problems such as migration , energy and climate change can be found .
Indeed , as the Commissioner says , a comprehensive and coherent approach is needed at once .
Mr President , it is precisely in this context that it is so important for Europe and Africa to work together towards a joint EU-Africa strategy for Africa 's development .
This will be defined at the Africa summit in Lisbon in December .
I hope that it will be a good example of a new way of cooperating .
As regards the effectiveness of our policy , I firmly believe in the importance of quality control and impact assessment , and the need to cut red tape .
I hope that in this way Parliament and the Commission can work well together and that the Commission will therefore keep us apprised of the situation in a regular and timely fashion , as indeed it should .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , I should first like to express my thanks to all of you for your comments , whether detailed or general , whether critical or supportive of the Commission 's proposal for the work programme for next year .
The scope of this discussion illustrates also the scope of all the tasks and missions and activities of the European institutions .
It ranges from comments on fisheries policy or fishing agreements with Tanzania to the peace process in the Middle East - the whole range of activities that we are engaged in .
I think also that this debate underlines that the overall objectives that the Barroso Commission has set itself remain valid and urgent .
It has to do with prosperity , security , solidarity and - in everything we do - the role of the European Union on the global scene .
This also came out very clearly in the last statements .
I have now followed this procedure and engaged with the European Parliament , in the committees and also here in plenary .
I think we can say that the way this procedure has improved has also improved the quality of our proposal for a new legislative and work programme .
I appreciate also that all my fellow Commissioners have visited their committees ; I think that we have appreciated this highly in some of the details that we have been able to add or change in this process .
I hope that we can continue to make it even more political , and your comments have shown that we are here to discuss the political content and the overall balance .
It also comes out clearly that the various political groups might have different views on this overall balance .
I would like to comment on the content in relation to four or five particular issues .
First of all these issues come back almost every week on the agenda of the European Commission .
To start with the Lisbon Process and the growth in jobs : I think , for the first time , we are getting very visible results .
It is not correct to say that this is a total failure and that we cannot see improvements .
We have created a clearer focus for the Lisbon Agenda .
We have created more of a political ownership and we have a kind of scoreboard where we make country-specific recommendations - positive or negative comments on what each and every Member State does .
This continues to be the way forward : more focus , more political ownership , higher visibility of the actions .
This is a long-term goal , a long-term objective of the European Union , but we have to continue to put pressure on Member States to deliver .
Another area concerns social issues and the social agenda which , judging by their comments , is of concern especially to the PSE Group in Parliament .
Here , we also had some specific questions on services of general interest .
The Commission has long recognised the importance of services of general interest and we have had years of debate on this particular issue .
We are very pleased that the Treaty of Lisbon and the Protocol on services of general interest have been agreed .
Next week , and as part of our review of the internal market , the Commission will adopt a communication outlining how we will deal with services of general interest .
I hope that Parliament will study our communication very seriously , together with its accompanying documents explaining how and when state aid rules apply to these services of general interest , and also how public procurement rules apply .
Let me be clear in saying that the Commission does not want to close the debate .
It wants the debate to focus on the problems at stake so that we can also concentrate our efforts on providing concrete solutions .
So this discussion will continue and we hope for the contribution of Parliament in this debate .
The other big issue where I thank you for your detailed comments has to do with energy .
( The President interrupted the speaker to call for quiet in the Chamber . )
I will not be able to go into all the details that have been mentioned in this debate ; I am sure that the dialogue will continue in the relevant committees and the European Parliament as well .
Just to repeat what is in our proposal : in the energy package are four different initiatives .
You have touched upon that because it is a policy paper concentrating on the internal energy market , on security of supply and technological developments .
There will be a revision of the Oil Stocks Directive .
There will be a complete review of the Directive on the energy performance of buildings ; this was a particular question during this debate .
There will also be a review of the Energy Taxation Directive , as taxation can be used to favour environmentally-friendly consumption .
The next issue that we find constantly at the top of our political agenda , not only in the European Commission but I am sure also in this House and in all governments around Europe , is of course migration .
President Barroso explained very clearly how we address this issue .
I can assure you that almost every week , thanks to our colleague Mr Frattini , we find this issue on the Commission 's agenda , with discussions on stream and proposals on stream to address the issue of migration .
You know that the policy on legal migration will not be represented next year because we have already adopted a number of proposals on legal migration , so this is not the main focus for next year .
However , there will be two priority initiatives in 2008 : there will be a directive on the conditions of entry and residence of seasonal workers and there will also be a directive on the entry , the temporary stay and residence of intracorporate transfers and remunerated trainees .
That is what you can expect in this particular area .
On the principal position of the Commission on these issues , I would just refer you to what President Barroso said in the debate .
Therefore , you will find that these issues remain at the top of our agenda for next year .
On the external front - because you also mentioned the whole range of external issues and the activities and events where the European Union is expected to participate and play an important role - we have three strategic initiatives for next year .
We have a strategy paper on enlargement ; we have a series of reports on the progress made in the European Neighbourhood Policy - since many of you mentioned that - and we also have a communication on concrete follow-up measures to the EU-Africa strategy .
Therefore , we will have ample opportunities to discuss the external issues during next year .
I can tell you , since this is the second Commission mandate on my part , that I see much more focus - and this has been mentioned in the debate - on implementation .
We have a daily struggle to make sure that we focus on implementation , and a legal act is only as good as its implementation .
This is where we will continue to focus .
I can also tell you that it is not true that we are not reaching out .
If we look at the latest Eurobarometer figures , they have never been so positive towards the concrete results that we have been able to deliver .
When the debate in the European Parliament and the concrete delivery become visible and the results become visible to the citizens , that is when we will also see our democratic legitimacy increased , and that is what we have to focus on .
We will also add a citizens ' summary to our proposals for next year .
Before the end of this year we will present a new internet strategy , since some of you have asked for this .
At the beginning of next year we will also come with a new audiovisual strategy .
It is important that we focus together on a number of communication priorities , and you will see proposals for interinstitutional communication priorities in our work programme .
Finally , next year is the Year of Intercultural Dialogue , which will be launched under the Slovenian Presidency at the beginning of January .
There will be a prelaunch in December , with participation from the European Parliament , and we expect the active involvement of the European Parliament throughout the year .
I thank you again for this debate .
If some issues about which you feel strongly are missing from the legislative and work programme , that does not mean that they have been put aside : the Commission will continue to provide monthly planning updates , including initiatives that have not been highlighted or initiatives which become necessary to respond to unforeseen events .
The dialogue between you , in the European Parliament , and the Commission does not stop today : we will continue working together in the positive spirit that has characterised this whole exercise and procedure and our shared ambition expressed in the work programme .
I see that we diverge less than we converge and that we have a similar view on the overall objectives and priorities for the year 2008 .
I also hope that your motion for a resolution will endorse it and we will provide an excellent basis for continued cooperation .
( Applause )
I thank colleagues for their contributions to the debate , the College of Commissioners for their presence and especially Mrs Wallström for her charm and her courage .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place during the December part-session .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - Mr Nassauer 's speech verged on equating the volume of legislation with the amount of bureaucracy .
This is , to put it mildly , simplistic .
European legislation that creates a single set of common rules for the common market - instead of 27 contradictory and divergent rules - makes life easier for businesses and cuts bureaucracy .
Legislation which protects public health or the environment may cost money in the short run but saves far more in the long run .
Of course we all want to avoid unnecessary red rape and bureaucracy , but to give the impression that all legislation is unwelcome because it inevitably causes bureaucracy is ridiculous .
in writing . - ( HU ) Ladies and gentlemen , Mr President , I welcome the European Commission 's work programme for 2008 , which defines the future of the Union and the next steps in its development .
I feel it is important to emphasise that the document must contain not only principles but also specific recommendations , in the interests of essential action in European politics , especially in the area of social policy .
The emergence of ever-increasing immigration in recent years is a big challenge for all the countries of the EU .
There are not yet any adequate answers for dealing with the social and economic problems related to this .
I agree that the working papers include an integrated approach to migration and press for appropriate management of the movement of labour that is essential for economic development .
Europe needs immigrant labour , but in spite of this they are regularly affected by discrimination and various atrocities .
We cannot renounce the fundamental requirements of humanity and benevolence in our European migration policy .
Reception programmes for refugees must include the employment , training and full integration of immigrants into European society at a human level , and above all the fight against xenophobia and racism .
Legal migration must be supported , and at the same time effective action needs to be taken against illegal immigration and human trafficking .
It would be necessary to prepare a common European refugee policy in order to achieve all this .
Better , more comprehensible legislation , applied consistently , is necessary for this , and for the Union to win the confidence of citizens .
in writing . - I welcome the Commission 's presentation of its work programme for 2008 .
I believe its approach to the challenges currently faced by the EU , such as the volatility in financial markets , combating climate change and ensuring energy security underlines that the EU can achieve together what no one Member State could achieve in isolation .
Only by providing leadership and deliver results in these areas can the EU be assured of its citizens continued confidence .
However , I would sound a note of caution about the Commission 's approach in two particular areas : I believe that moves to develop an EU-wide tax base are misplaced .
Taxation policy remains an exclusive competence of Member States and the proposed CCCTB , despite contentions from its proponents , seeks to undermine Member States ' competence in this area .
I believe this will lead to tax harmonisation by default and I would be completely opposed to such a move .
Such divisive initiatives only serve to create divisions between Member States and undermine citizens ' confidence in the European project .
Secondly , I believe that it is critical that the Commission strikes the correct balance in the forthcoming " health check " on the CAP and the parallel debate in relation to the EU 's budget .
1 .
Participation of Bulgaria and Romania in the European Economic Area ( vote )
- Report : Markov
2 .
EC / Ukraine agreement : short-stay visas ( vote )
- Report : Kudrycka
3 .
EC / Ukraine agreement : readmission ( vote )
- Report : Kudrycka
4 .
EC / Moldova agreement : short-stay visas ( vote )
- Report : Marinescu
5 .
EC / Moldova agreement : readmission ( vote )
- Report : Marinescu
6 .
Interoperability of digital interactive television services ( vote )
- Report : Weber
Before the vote :
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , with the convergence of television , telecommunications and the internet the television has become an interactive medium and TV viewers have become ' actors ' .
The viewer can now research content , select programmes and react to broadcasts ; however , to do this requires an ever growing number of devices .
In order to facilitate the use of this equipment and to avoid additional costs for the consumer these devices need to be able to communicate with each other and work together .
This is what is known as ' interoperability ' .
The report being presented today seeks to promote interoperability within the European Union .
It is also aimed at ensuring respect for pluralism of information and diversity of content in the new technological era , which requires an active , steadfast and vigilant policy on the part of the public authorities at both national and European level .
7 .
Data in the fisheries sector and scientific advice regarding the common fisheries policy ( vote )
- Report : Casaca
8 .
Composition of the Conference of Presidents ( amendment of Rule 23 ) ( vote )
- Report : Papastamkos
- Before the vote :
Mr President , the number of non attached Members may be increased at any time , owing to unforeseen events .
This is in line with the political cohesion of existing political groups and with the possibility of achieving consensus among the non-attached Members , provided there are enough to form a political group .
In terms of legislative policy , the provisions of the Rules of Procedure concerning the composition of the Conference of Presidents should thus not be confined to cases where the number of non-attached Members is small .
The Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament contain provisions of primarily long-term validity .
They should produce useful results , not only at the time of legislation or amendment , but also under changing circumstances in the future .
For this reason , ad hoc situations , which may change at any moment and indeed may change back to the previous status quo , should not result each time in the adoption of new regulations .
This issue touches on parliamentary sovereignty , parliamentary autonomy and Parliament 's ability to organise itself , and I would ask you to vote in favour .
9 .
Amendment of the Rules of Procedure in light of the Statute for Members ( vote )
- Report : Friedrich
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , very briefly , this concerns the amendment of the Rules of Procedure in light of the new Statute from 2009 .
It strengthens the individual Member 's right of initiative , creates more transparency , provides a clear definition of which files can be inspected , and offers what I believe to be an intelligent solution to the question of languages , so that the smaller languages will not be discriminated against .
As we have not debated this issue , I think it is important that you should be informed about it . Thank you for your attention .
10 .
Community statistics on public health and health and safety at work ( vote )
- Report : Scheele
In view of the length of the forthcoming vote on the report by Peter Liese and the need to hold the formal sitting at 12 noon , I propose , ladies and gentlemen , that we bring forward the votes on the reports by Romana Jordan Cizelj , Pál Schmitt and Vittorio Prodi , and put Mr Liese 's report to the vote after the formal sitting .
( Parliament approved the proposal )
11 .
Statutes for the Euratom Supply Agency ( vote )
- Report : Jordan Cizelj
12 .
The role of sport in education ( vote )
- Report : Schmitt
13 .
Thematic Strategy for Soil Protection ( vote )
- Report : Prodi
( The sitting was suspended at 11.55 and resumed at 12.00 )

Voting time
The next item is voting time .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes )
Formal sitting - France
President of the French Republic . - ( FR ) Mr President of the European Parliament , Honourable Members , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I thank you for inviting me to speak to you , in this building where the democratic heart of Europe beats .
I thank you for giving me the opportunity to do so now , at a time when , after some apparent hesitation , Europe is pulling itself together and starting to move forward .
I thank you for allowing me to reiterate before you France 's commitment to Europe and to state clearly that the ' no ' vote to the European Constitution was not an expression of the French people turning its back on Europe ; rather it was an expression of their expectation of greater things from Europe .
( Applause )
From the outset European integration has been carried along by hope .
Now - and this is a responsibility that we all bear - the people expect Europe to deliver on that hope .
Hope for peace , hope for fraternity , hope for progress .
This hope was born of the great tragedies of the 20th century .
This hope was born of the blood and tears of millions of men , women and children .
This hope was born of immense suffering .
It is the hope that never again will the people of Europe wage war on one another , that never again on European soil will we see attempts to conquer , dominate and exterminate , which led our nations to the verge of material and moral destruction .
The European idea came about because one day great Europeans reached out to each other over the borders , borders for which so many people had died .
And the people who had suffered so very much followed them , deciding that hatred was a thing of the past and friendship was now what was needed .
European integration was possible because our people were horrified at what they had done .
They refused to fight any more because they knew in their heart of hearts that a new war would be fatal .
Instead they chose to love each another , to understand each another , to work together to forge a common destiny .
European integration must be seen for what it is : a moral necessity , a political necessity , a spiritual necessity .
European integration is the expression of a desire shared by the peoples of Europe who recognise values , who recognise a common civilisation and who want to keep those values and that civilisation alive .
Europe cannot be just a machine .
Europe cannot be an administrative machine .
Europe cannot be a legal machine that churns out standards , regulations and directives , a machine of procedures and rules .
Europe cannot be kept separate from real life , separate from feelings , separate from human passions .
Europe cannot be a reality and has no possibility of existing unless , for millions of men and women , irrespective of their beliefs , it is something that is alive , something that speaks to them , something that gives them the hope of a better life and a better world .
Europe will either be a great ideal , or it will cease to exist .
When the people say ' no ' , we cannot say that they are wrong ; we have to ask why they said ' no ' .
We all know - and I voted ' yes ' by the way - that the French ' no ' vote and the Dutch ' no ' vote unfortunately represented much more than a rejection of a text , important as it was .
We all know that this ' no ' vote was the most visible manifestation of a deep-seated crisis of trust , which cannot be ignored and which must be resolved .
All those who love Europe must take this ' no ' from two of the founding peoples , two peoples who have always supported Europe , very seriously indeed .
This ' no ' expressed deep-felt anxiety : millions of men and women had begun to lose faith in Europe .
Why ?
Because they had the feeling that Europe was no longer giving them sufficient protection .
Because they had the feeling that Europe had become indifferent to the difficulties they faced in their lives .
Whether or not this feeling is unfair is irrelevant .
I am convinced that millions of men and women , in all our countries , share that feeling .
This ' no ' was a disaster .
It plunged Europe into the most serious crisis of its history .
But that crisis , which could have been the undoing of Europe , could also be good for it by encouraging those who were staunchly committed to the European cause to think about the reasons for the crisis .
Since the creation of the European Coal and Steel Community , what has been achieved in Europe is remarkable .
All of us here are the representatives of people who hated one another , who sought to destroy one another , and some who waged war on one another for centuries .
At the outset , Paul-Henri Spaak , the great European , President of the first European Parliamentary Assembly , uttered the universal and eternal words : ' Let us not forget anything , for that would be a profanation , but we have decided to embark upon a great adventure which , if it succeeds , will allow us to save what we have in common and what we hold most dear ' .
For half a century this great adventure has continued in spite of countless difficulties .
The parliamentary assemblies have played a decisive role .
And allow me to pay tribute to all those who participated in them because they represented the citizens of Europe in all their diversity .
That diversity , I believe , is something that we should not fear .
That diversity is something that we should respect ; it is our greatest asset .
Democracy means debate .
It means a plurality of opinions .
It is the opposite of a system where everyone is forced to think the same thing .
Europe would die if we all had to think in the same way and if those who thought differently were seen as bad Europeans .
There is no such thing as bad Europeans .
There is just Europe , and everyone should be allowed to be part of Europe .
I believe in exchanges , I believe in discussion .
That is why I have always preferred majority rule to unanimity .
And that is no small commitment for a French President .
Unanimity is the system that allows a few to impose their will on everyone else .
Unanimity is the certainty that no great or bold decisions will ever be made , that no risks will ever be taken , because with unanimity we have to fall into step with those who want the least from Europe .
Unanimity means powerlessness .
Unanimity means that it is impossible to act .
It means that it is impossible to go back on what has been decided and that is why I supported the extension of majority voting in the simplified Treaty .
I believe in democracy .
I believe that Europe must be as democratic as possible .
That is why I have always believed that we were doing Europe no favours by rejecting debate , by stifling criticism , by concealing our differences .
I am convinced that Europe needs more debate , more democracy and , at the end of the day , more politics .
Europe has managed to break this deadlock because at the Brussels summit the Heads of State or Government , aware that they had Europe 's fate in their hands , took a political decision .
On that day in Brussels the political will of the different Heads of State or Government swept away all of the obstacles that had up to then seemed insurmountable .
What did politics mean ?
It meant acknowledging the failure of the draft Constitution .
It meant proposing to the French who voted ' no ' to negotiate a simplified Treaty to end the deadlock in Europe and have it ratified in Parliament , as I had stated during my presidential campaign .
The French people authorised me to allow the simplified Treaty to be ratified in Parliament .
( Applause )
Let me add that it is strange to say that the European Parliament is the place where the democratic heart of Europe beats , and yet you say at the same time that parliamentary ratification in France would not be democratic : if Europe is democratic in the European Parliament , France is democratic in the French Parliament .
( Applause )
Politics for the countries that had ratified it , and I want to pay tribute to them and the parliamentarians here who had supported the draft Constitution , meant agreeing to open negotiations on a new , less ambitious text .
We managed to end the deadlock in Europe because the countries that had voted ' no ' made an effort .
I want to pay tribute to those of you here who were in favour of the Constitution and who agreed to discuss a new draft .
Europe has emerged from the crisis because there was goodwill on two fronts .
The simplified Treaty is a political victory for Europe .
It is a victory of the European awareness expressed through politics .
Now - and I accept my responsibilities - it would be a mistake to think that with the simplified Treaty we have solved everything in Europe , that we can rest easy and that there will be no more questions .
The simplified Treaty resolves the institutional crisis , but the simplified Treaty does not resolve either the political crisis or the moral crisis in Europe .
It enables Europe to take decisions and to act . But it does not say to what end and for what purpose .
It does not tell us what Europe will look like tomorrow and how it will help to improve our citizens ' lives .
It does not provide those who had stopped believing in Europe with any reasons to renew their faith in it .
The institutional question has been resolved .
Now we have to resolve the political questions .
We must examine them without fear and debate them without any taboos .
Europe has chosen democracy and in a democracy we must be able to debate anything and everything : budgetary policy , trade policy , monetary policy , industrial policy , fiscal policy , all policies , whatever they are .
Otherwise , there is no point in saying that we want a democratic Europe .
Europe has chosen democracy and in a democracy independence can never be confused with a complete lack of responsibility .
Nobody should be able to cite their own independence as a reason why they should not have to be accountable , explain themselves or be subject to scrutiny .
In a democracy political responsibility is a universal and fundamental principle .
In European democracy we should be able to discuss Europe 's aims and objectives .
I have proposed the creation of a committee of wise men to reflect upon the future .
I also believe that we should be able to discuss together the different potential futures for Europe : there are different paths available to us and I wonder how we are going to be able to choose the right one if we refuse outright to discuss them .
In European democracy we should be able to debate European identity and national identities .
We should be able to discuss how Europe is building its identity and , excuse me , defending it .
We should be able to discuss how Europe protects its national identities , which are one of Europe 's assets .
We should not be afraid of these identities .
Wanting to preserve one 's identity is not a sickness .
It is when identities are under threat , when they feel under attack that hackles rise and they become dangerous and aggressive .
The peoples of Europe are experiencing an extremely deep identity crisis .
It is a crisis that affects both our nations and the idea of civilisation that is shared by all Europeans and that unites Europe .
It is a crisis that is linked to globalisation and the commercialisation of the world .
Launching Europe through economics , through coal and steel , through trade was a stroke of genius by the founding fathers .
But the politics have been too slow in relation to the economy , and slower still in relation to culture .
It was a mistake to have overlooked the cultural Europe .
( Applause )
In a world threatened by standardisation , in a world dominated by technology , where economic values tend to take priority over all others , Europe cannot be Europe in the eyes of all men if it does not defend values , values of civilisation , spiritual values , if it does not do everything in its power to defend cultural diversity .
But what will we defend , as far as diversity is concerned , if we have not preserved our identities ?
Europe must ensure that it is not seen as a threat to identities , but as a form of protection , a way of keeping them alive .
On a moral level , too , human rights are part of the European identity .
Throughout the world every time a human being is oppressed , every time a person is persecuted , every time a child is abused , every time a people is exploited , Europe must stand by them because the Europe of human rights is true to its word .
It is up to Europe to spread human rights to all regions of the world .
( Applause )
Let me add that all those who have in the past refused to defend human rights to get contracts have lost the contracts and have lost in terms of values .
( Applause )
In European democracy the word protection should not be outlawed .
If we do not want our peoples , fed up with being the victims of unfair competition and dumping , one day to call for protectionism and the closure of borders , we must have the courage to debate what should be a genuine Community preference .
We should be able to do as much to protect ourselves as others do .
We should be able to equip ourselves with the same instruments as others have .
If the other regions of the world have the right to protect themselves against dumping , why shouldn 't Europe ?
If all countries have exchange policies , why shouldn 't Europe ?
If other nations can reserve part of their public procurement markets for their SMEs , why shouldn 't Europe ?
If other nations implement industrial policies , why shouldn 't Europe ?
If other nations defend their farmers , why shouldn 't Europe defend its own farmers ?
( Applause )
Europe does not want protectionism but Europe must demand reciprocity Europe does not want protectionism but Europe has the duty to ensure its energy and food independence .
Europe wants to lead by example in the fight against global warming but Europe cannot accept unfair competition from countries that do not impose any ecological constraints on their own companies .
( Applause )
Europe is committed to competition but Europe cannot be alone in the world in making it a creed .
That is why at the Brussels summit it was decided that for Europe competition was a means rather than an end in and of itself .
Europe has opted for a market economy and capitalism but that does not mean absolute laissez-faire and financial capitalism that favours speculators and shareholders to the detriment of entrepreneurs and workers .
( Applause )
European capitalism has always been a capitalism of entrepreneurs , a capitalism of production rather than a capitalism of speculation and market trading .
Yes , I am stating loud and clear that Europe has a role to play in injecting some much-needed ethics into financial capitalism , and what we saw with the crisis in the subprime market - where a few speculators are undermining global competition - is something that Europe cannot accept .
( Applause )
We have different ideas and different points of view on all of these issues , but that does not mean we should not discuss them .
We must debate them until we have succeeded in reaching a compromise that allows us to build a common policy .
All of these issues will be at the heart of the priorities of the French Presidency .
There are many more subjects to debate : the recasting of the common agricultural policy , ecological taxation , renewable energies and energy saving , defence .
How can Europe be independent and have a political influence on the world stage ?
How can Europe be a factor for peace and stability if it is unable to guarantee its own security ?
What does our commitment to Europe mean if we are unable to discuss the establishment of a European defence system and the renewal of the Atlantic Alliance ?
What does our commitment to Europe mean if each and every one of us is unable to make an effort to ensure the defence of all ?
From the ECSC Treaty to the simplified Treaty the people of Europe have built up solidarity .
We can see this in the regional policy , but we should also be able to see it in defence .
We should be able to see it in a European immigration policy .
In a Europe where people can move freely between the Member States , this policy can only be a common immigration policy .
You cannot be a member of the Schengen area and regularise without informing the other countries because regularisation in one country has an impact on all the others in the Schengen area .
( Applause )
When I was elected President of the Republic I set myself the priority of putting France back at the heart of European integration .
I wanted France to overcome its doubts by getting more involved in Europe .
I know full well that France will not be able to get its own way on every issue but I want France to recover its place at the heart of Europe .
I have re-established a dialogue with the Community institutions and I want to thank President Barroso for the relationship of trust that has been established between France and the European Commission .
France 's policy now is to work closely and with complete confidence with the European institutions , that is to say , the European Parliament and the European Commission .
I will do my utmost to see to it that everyone feels that this vision is their own , to see to it that the United Kingdom ratifies the simplified Treaty , because Europe needs the United Kingdom ...
( Applause )
I will do my utmost to engage in dialogue with the countries of the East , countries that often felt justifiably that they were not being listened to sufficiently .
It is not because history has condemned peoples of Europe to join Europe later that they have less rights .
They have the same rights as the founding countries .
That is the European spirit .
( Applause )
That is what I did in proposing the Mediterranean Union .
I do not want anyone to be excluded and I want to build on the work done in Barcelona .
If Barcelona had been enough , we would know that .
We therefore need to be ambitious yet again .
I want France to breathe dynamism into Europe because if things are going well in France , all of Europe can benefit .
Nobody in Europe has any interest in a weak France that is unable to grow .
Nobody in Europe has any interest in a France in decline , a France suffering from an identity crisis or a France that is afraid of the future .
I have undertaken a programme of reforms .
It is not in Europe 's interest for these reforms to fail because they will enable France to put its public finances in order and to fulfil its commitments .
The French people have approved these reforms .
I made my case to them prior to the elections .
That is why I will see to it that these reforms are implemented in full .
Nothing will prevent me from achieving this objective and it is the best thing that France can do for Europe .
Ladies and gentlemen , in this city of Strasbourg , so dear to the people of France and irrevocably linked in the minds of all Europeans to your Assembly , your Parliament , which keeps democratic debate so alive , here at this podium where she spoke so often , I remember Simone Veil , who in 1979 was the first President of the first directly-elected European Parliamentary Assembly .
I would like to pay tribute to her contribution to the European cause and her contribution to the cause of women .
She fought for respect for their rights , for respect for their dignity , and your Parliament has always been faithful to her principles .
Simone Veil said : ' Whatever our differences , I think that we share the same desire to create a community founded on a common inheritance and a shared respect for fundamental human values .
It is in this spirit that I invite you to undertake the tasks that await us , in a spirit of comradeship ' .
I make these words my own .
These words are challenges .
These challenges are the challenges that our citizens expect Europe to take on .
We must not waste any time .
Europe has already wasted so much time in the last ten years .
We must waste no time in ensuring that the people recover their faith in Europe once more .
You can count on France 's unfailing commitment to Europe .
( The House rose and accorded the speaker a standing ovation . )
President Sarkozy , I would like to thank you for these sincere and profoundly European sentiments .
You have again demonstrated your European convictions and your commitment , and that of the French people , to the European cause .
We confidently await the French Presidency , which will take effect at a key moment for the future of the European Union when the countries of Europe will be ratifying the Reform Treaty .
I am convinced that this period will be marked by major advances along the road to a Europe of peace and solidarity .
The European Parliament , as the representative of the citizens of the European Union , will stand alongside you in this enterprise and hopes to cooperate closely with you in order to ensure that this Presidency is successful and therefore beneficial to the people of Europe .
President Sarkozy , Parliament wishes you every success , both for France and for the unification of our European continent .
Thank you .
( The formal sitting was closed at 12.40 p.m. )
1 .
Amendment of Directive 2003 / 87 / EC so as to include aviation activities in the scheme for greenhouse gas emission allowance trading within the Community ( vote )
- Report : Liese
Voting time ( continued )
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
in writing . - ( DE ) Although Bulgaria and Romania have managed to achieve accession to the European Economic Area , Brussels is apparently surprised by the lack of progress on combating organised crime and corruption .
These are widespread problems , however , which are rooted in socio-political developments in post-communist countries .
The general public is irked by the anonymity and indifference of capitalism and resorts instead to familiar and tried and tested networks .
This proves , yet again , that social transformation cannot be imposed from outside : something that the US is trying to achieve with its wars of aggression , while the EU dangles the prospect of ' accession ' .
The fact is that the latter is losing its effectiveness , forfeiting any opportunity to exert influence once countries have joined the ' club ' , which is why the EU must not repeat this mistake with Turkey .
( PL ) Mr President , I should like to refer to Mrs Kudrycka 's report on the conclusion of the Agreement between the European Community and Ukraine on the facilitation of the issuance of short-stay visas .
This is particularly important for relations between Poland and Ukraine , two countries and peoples that have been bound together by historical ties throughout the centuries .
The essential action required to introduce significantly easier visa procedures for our Ukrainian friends should be taken as soon as possible , notably where young people , students , academics and seasonal workers are concerned .
In the longer term , we should aim at the introduction of a visa-free travel regime .
This is particularly important in terms of laying the foundations for Ukraine 's integration into the European Union in the future .
The Union must support the development of democracy in Ukraine , assist in the creation of civil society and facilitate contact between our citizens .
in writing . - ( PT ) This agreement between the European Community and Ukraine on the facilitation of issuance of short-stay visas is to be signed in parallel with the readmission agreement as these are ' mutually conditional ' .
As indicated , these agreements form part of the EU 's fight against ' illegal immigration ' and its instruments .
The report expressly accepts the ' recommendations as to need for providing adequate technical and financial support for Ukraine by the EC and the European Commission in particular , in achieving high level of implementation of readmission agreement ' .
However , we are critical in this respect .
Despite the agreement introducing strict procedural deadlines , setting preferential visa fees , including a full visa fee waiver for certain ' categories of persons ' ( ? ) , and providing for a simplified procedure in a number of cases , this is less than what has been demanded and what is required by thousands of Ukrainian citizens .
What the rapporteurs have failed to realise is that there is a need for the effective implementation of measures aimed at facilitating issuance of visas to broader sections of Ukrainian society , or even a non-discriminatory visa exemption regime such as Ukraine provides for citizens of the various EU countries .
We therefore voted accordingly .
in writing . - ( DE ) For far too long , the EU has given a helping hand to countries around the globe while failing to make these monies conditional on the readmission of illegal immigrants .
This has exacerbated the flood of illegal economic refugees pouring into destination countries without any education or prospects for the future .
This has occurred in tandem with various visa scandals , in which countless people have entered the EU in the guise of tourists and promptly vanished into the EU 's low-wage sector , thus destroying jobs on a massive scale .
It is high time that readmission arrangements were made a fixed element of agreements .
The opportunities to vanish into the anonymity of our conurbations must also be removed at all cost .
The growing trend towards the establishment of visa centres - which are then closed down due to a lack of applications - must also be treated with caution .
This practice must under no circumstances lead to a situation in which visas are issued arbitrarily simply to avoid such closure .
in writing . - ( PT ) This agreement between the European Community and Moldova on the facilitation of issuance of short-stay visas is to be signed in parallel with the readmission agreement as these are ' mutually conditional ' , just the same as with the agreements with Russia and Ukraine .
Despite the agreement introducing strict procedural deadlines , setting preferential visa fees , including a full visa fee waiver for certain ' categories of persons ' ( ? ) ( such as members of official delegations , business people , journalists , participants in scientific , cultural and sporting events , students , participants in exchange programs , close relatives , representatives of civil society , persons visiting for medical reasons ) and providing for a simplified procedure in a number of cases , this is less than what has been demanded and what is required by thousands of Moldovan citizens .
There is a need for the effective implementation of measures aimed at facilitating issuance of visas to broader sections of Moldovan society , or even a non-discriminatory visa exemption regime such as Moldova provides for citizens of the various EU countries .
Furthermore , these agreements fall within the Community policies on immigration and the ' Schengen area ' which includes instruments on the retention of biometric data .
We therefore voted accordingly .
in writing - ( RO ) The Romanian Members of the European Parliament , members of the PSE , will vote against or will refrain from voting in relation to the EU-Moldova Agreement on short-term visas and the Readmission Agreement .
This does not reflect opposition to the substance of the given documents , but to the inexact concepts included therein and which were launched by the Stalinist Soviet regime in order to give credit to the idea of the existence of a Moldavian language , different from the Romanian language .
The reference to the Moldavian language remains null and void for the given Members of the European Parliament .
( PL ) Mr President , I tabled this earlier .
It concerns an explanation of my vote on the report on digital interactive television services by Mr Weber .
I should like to say that there is a very interesting section in that document , maintaining that the public audio-visual media should be strengthened , not weakened .
I voted in favour of the report , because recently the candidate for Prime Minister of my country declared that public television should be weakened .
I am glad that the European Parliament is making a clear statement in this regard , namely that public television and the public audio-visual media should be strengthened .
With all due respect for the subject matter , we would like to point out that this is a report the European Union could have done without .
This European Parliament should devote itself to issues within a smaller area and not give opinions on everything under the sun .
The European Parliament 's Committee on Culture and Education should be closed down because it deals with matters which are outside the scope of cooperation within the EU .
For the most part the Committee produces reports which propose that the Union should go in and regulate areas of detail for which the EU does not have competence .
Within the current EU cooperation framework it is established that the Member States have exclusive responsibility for the organisation of education .
Cultural issues are also a matter for the Member States , and the Union is currently engaged in very limited cooperation relating to various cultural programmes .
For these reasons there is no justification for the existence of the European Parliament 's Committee on Culture and Education .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report .
I support the use of interactive digital TV technology to benefit European citizens in a range of ways .
The report emphasises the importance of the switchover from analogue , which is on track in the UK but lagging in some other EU member states .
in writing . - ( MT ) I would like to take the opportunity offered by this debate to register my disappointment at the way in which digital television is developing in Malta .
Certain basic principles need to be respected .
Firstly , Maltese consumers should have the right to continue watching national stations that are free to view without being charged .
In practice , all digital television service providers should broadcast these stations free of charge .
In addition , anyone who does not buy a digital receiver from these companies should still have the right to receive the signal from these stations .
My second point relates to the interoperability of different platforms in Malta 's case , digital terrestrial and cable .
The lack of interoperability in the Maltese system is leading to less choice for consumers because when they wish to make use of the services of another company , they must install a different receiver .
I hope that the updated policy of the authorities competent in this matter will address these problems .
in writing . - ( PL ) Mr Weber has tabled a very interesting report on what is currently a controversial issue .
In the present digital environment , services , networks and business systems have undergone significant changes , and a wide choice is now available to consumers .
Interoperability has therefore become a fundamental concept for information and telecommunications networks .
I agree that users ' needs should be of paramount importance in market development .
Accordingly , it is important to focus on viewers and on enabling them to make fully informed choices , so that they really are in a position to benefit from the full potential of new technology .
The interoperability debate mainly concerns broadening the choice offered to consumers in the area of interactive television services .
This choice largely involves the services offered by operators rather than the equipment , however , especially as the choice can take various forms , and subscribers are able to choose between different platforms depending on the content and services available .
I agree with the rapporteur that it is advisable to continue promoting the open standards developed by European Union standards bodies in relation to the switchover to digital and the interoperability of services , and to further this action by promoting European digital television standards in other parts of the world .
We do not consider that the Committee on Fisheries ' amendment adds anything positive to the Commission 's proposal , but is instead a step backwards .
We cannot accept any restrictions on transparency , which is something the report in effect entails .
in writing . - ( PT ) The objective of the Commission proposal for a new Council regulation on the collection of data in the fisheries sector is to develop long-term sampling programmes which are well-integrated at regional level and which include ecological , economic , environmental and social data .
The revision of the Regulation on the collection of data is intended as a response to the new demands arising from the need to move towards fisheries management ( geared towards fleets and fishing areas rather than fish stocks ) and towards an ecosystemic approach to fisheries management .
The aim is to ensure an approach which is more in line with the different situations in the fisheries sector which require a range of strategies to combat a common problem .
The aim is also to make processes more transparent , thus guaranteeing better and more profitable treatment and use of fisheries data .
This Parliament report deserves my support .
in writing . - ( PT ) This proposal aims to replace , from 2008 , Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1543 / 2000 establishing a Community framework for the collection and management of data needed to conduct the common fisheries policy .
Certain differences between this proposal and the current Regulation should be highlighted , such as : inclusion of new types of data , use of an approach which is more focused on fleets and on the distinction between different regions ( fishing areas ) and preparation of national three-year programmes .
Among other aspects , the text adopted today clarifies the type of data to which the Commission will have access , insists on ensuring the confidentiality of this data and provides for different levels of penalisation according to the seriousness of the failure to comply with the new regulation by Member States , including making the Community financial contribution conditional on the national programmes to be developed by Member States .
It also calls on the Commission to clearly define what must be understood by ' official request for information ' and ' incomplete national programme ' .
It must be left to each Member State to adopt measures - based on the existence of data which is reliable and as complete as possible for the purpose of fisheries scientific research - to ensure proper management of their marine biological resources .
However , this competence of each Member State is unacceptably called into question by the ' Reform ' Treaty .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this proposal from the Commission for a regulation to establish a community framework for the collection management and use of data in the fisheries sector and support for scientific advice regarding the Common Fisheries Policy .
It is an uncontroversial report that should allow better operation of the CFP over time .
in writing . - It is only right that small groups do not have disproportional influence in this Parliament .
While I respect the right to ensure that diversity of views is respected in debate , this should not extend to the administration of the House and other technical matters .
Thus I welcome this reduction in representation by the non-attached on the Conference of Presidents where until now a handful of Members had a higher level of representation than political groups with more than 200 members .
( DE ) Mr President , I said what I had to say during the explanations of vote , in order to save time during the voting .
I am pleased that Parliament has adopted this report by an overwhelming majority , also because I am aware that there have been very arduous and intensive discussions in the Council working groups .
We are sending out a clear message from the House today .
The report offers the opportunity for us to obtain quality statistics on public health and health and safety at work .
This will be a prerequisite for many of the policies which we will be championing in future .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am speaking partly in my capacity as future draftsman of the opinion on the Community strategy on health and safety at work .
I wish to clarify my position , which is unhesitatingly in favour of the proposed regulation to establish a legal framework for the systematic production of statistics in this area .
I would take this opportunity to emphasise the need to take all initiatives that can help provide a clearer picture of the situation in Europe and in the various Member States , on which basis states can pursue the policies they deem most appropriate .
For this reason , a more Europe-wide approach needs to be adopted towards accidents at work within the European Union , a veritable scourge in certain countries .
The approach must go beyond the current gentlemen 's agreement and provide for data to be gathered systematically at regular , predetermined intervals .
It must also take due account of the studies and investigations carried out by the European Agency for Safety and Health at Work and by the European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions .
Comparable data , combined with an exchange of good practice and the dissemination of results , can in themselves prove useful in encouraging countries to emulate the best of what is being done elsewhere .
in writing . - ( PT ) The Commission is responsible for producing Community statistics by coordinating the necessary harmonisation of the statistical information , while collection of the data is done by Member States on subjects such as definition of variables , breakdown , dates of implementation and frequency , and so on .
Gender should also be introduced as a breakdown to have information regarding possible gender differences .
As regards health and safety at work , studies and surveys of the European Agency for Safety and Health at Work and of the European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions should also be taken into account .
Outside Europe , cooperation with the United Nations should be further enhanced , especially with the International Labour Organisation and World Health Organisation .
Complementary financing will be provided for health and safety at work in the framework of the Community Programme for Employment and Social Solidarity ( PROGRESS ) .
In principle , financial support to help Member States in further building up national capacities to implement improvements and create new tools for statistical data collection should be included .
in writing . - ( NL ) The transmissible diseases that threaten Europe , such as SARS and bird flu , show that far-reaching European measures are necessary to prevent a possible pandemic in Europe .
Unilateral action by the Member States is not enough to divert the threat of such diseases .
A coordinated European plan is necessary , and for this it is essential to determine the level of protection in the Member States .
It is therefore vital to have comparable , up-to-date information at Community level on protection against possible pandemic and widespread diseases .
We must in particular consider the quantity of stocks of antiviral resources and vaccines in the Member States .
I would be happier knowing that there were already stocks of antiviral resources and vaccines at European level .
Without new powers the Commission will be forced to look on helplessly in the event of a pandemic .
in writing . - I voted against the Jordan Cizelj report on the Euratom Supply Agency .
I consider that the Agency should be independent of Euratom as the roles of promoting nuclear energy and controlling it should not in effect be joined .
The nuclear industry does not offer the solution for Europe 's energy needs .
Europe must strive to make more of our renewable energy potential and work to phase out the need for nuclear .
( PL ) Mr President , I should like to explain why I voted as I did regarding this very important resolution .
The European Parliament has become involved in a matter that tends to be disregarded .
Less and less physical activity is being practised in individual Member States of the European Union , and sport is taken ever less seriously , despite its significant social and cultural role .
I therefore voted in favour of this resolution in full awareness of what was involved .
I welcome Parliament 's stance on the subject .

( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I willingly supported the report on the role of sport in education by Mr Schmitt , mainly because sport and physical activity can make an important contribution to combating negative health trends .
I also support the modernisation of activities in the area of physical education , especially those aimed at establishing a balance between physical and intellectual activities in schools .
I am in favour of investment in quality sports facilities and appropriate measures to allow access to sports premises and sports curricula at school to all students including those with disabilities .
In this way we will ensure that every student can participate in a variety of sports .
Further positive steps involve increasing the amount of time spent on physical education in schools and ensuring legal recognition of institutions and organisations that contribute to better integration of sports activities in schools and nurseries .
I would like to thank Mr Schmitt for his well thought-out report .
( NL ) Mr President , I abstained on the Schmitt report on sport in education .
Just for the record , I would like to say on this subject that of course it is not that I am against sport in education , any more than I am against schools offering as many physical education lessons as possible : my view is quite the contrary .
It goes without saying that I think sports teachers should be treated in the same way as other teachers .
I abstained because I think that sport and education , and certainly the teaching of sport in general , must categorically remain within the remit of the Member States alone and that Europe does not have to take control in every area .
What also disturbs me about this report is that the multicultural society and the so-called gender question are dragged in left , right and centre , and that is a little bit too much given the political correctness in which this report is steeped .
Shoemaker , stay at your last , and European Union , for heaven 's sake stick to your areas of competence .
We Swedish Social Democrats chose to abstain in the final vote .
The reason for this is that the report deals with a number of important aspects of sport in education but , at the same time , with matters which are and should remain a national concern .
We chose to vote against the statements in paragraphs 10 , 24 and 47 .
We share the view that physical education is important and that voluntary work is an important part of the sports movement in Europe .
However , whether you should have two , three or four hours of PE per week is not something the EU should get involved with .
Of course , it is also important that the issue of gender equality becomes an integrated part of the curriculum and that PE teachers are trained in the subject .
We also share the opinion that it is a good idea to have sports coeducation , but that is not an EU matter either .
We would like to emphasise , however , that we share the view of the report that sport is important for several reasons .
It can make an important contribution to counteracting negative health trends like obesity .
It can also contribute to added social value for society in general through its educational nature .
in writing . - UKIP approves of greater investment in and participation in sport .
However , we cannot accept that physical education be made compulsory for all and the UK parental opt out abolished by the EU , given that many groups have religious or cultural objections to sport , and also that some disabled children may not be physically able to take part in certain sports even when they would wish to do so .
Obligatory PE is an issue for head teachers and boards of governors , not for the EU .
In any case the EU has no competence on sport .
UKIP welcomes commendation of the hard work of volunteers in sport but believes that a spirit of friendly competition means this must be done at national and not EU level .
in writing . - ( PT ) As stated in the report , full attention must be paid to sport due to its social and cultural aspects and due to the social and educational values that it transmits , such as self-discipline , challenging personal limitations , solidarity , healthy competition , respect for opponents , social inclusion , opposition to any form of discrimination , team spirit and tolerance .
Accordingly , in our multicultural society , sport can and should be an integral part of formal and informal education , given that studies have shown that regular physical activity improves mental and physical wellbeing , while having a beneficial effect on learning abilities .
We therefore agree with the call made to the Member States and the competent authorities to ensure that greater stress is placed on health development in school and preschool teaching programmes by encouraging specific forms of physical activity suitable for these ages and raising awareness within clubs and associations in order to ensure that children can start physical activity at the earliest possible age , for the benefit of their development and health , and hence to guarantee physical education status in accordance with the profile of the institution and the corresponding level of study .
in writing . - I wholeheartedly give my backing to the Schmitt report on the role of sport in education .
The encouragement of sports participation amongst our young people is vital in a number of areas ; sporting activities promote not only the obvious health benefits amongst the population but also contribute to social inclusion objectives , a sense of community and national and European cohesion .
My own country , Scotland , has one of the worst health records in Europe .
However recent Scottish sporting successes , including Glasgow 's success in securing the 2014 Commonwealth Games , have captured the imagination of the population .
It is to be hoped that these successes can be channelled in a positive way and that Scotland can lose its " sick man ” tag and become an example in Europe of how sport can be used for the maximum benefit of the community .
I voted in favour of this report because it deals with a matter that is particularly important for the health of a whole generation of young Europeans , and therefore for their lives as a whole .
Increased marginalisation of physical education within the school curriculum means that the time allocated to physical education in schools in EU Member States is gradually being eroded .
The financing of school sports buildings and facilities is far from adequate .
In addition , essential equipment for the conduct of physical education classes is in poor condition .
There are also concerns regarding the quality of the training undergone by physical education teachers .
The overall picture hardly inspires confidence .
That is why we should support the European Parliament 's initiative aimed at reversing the present situation .
It is to be hoped that the positive effects of this initiative will make themselves felt after just a few years .
Providing for more sport in schools is not just part of the effort to obtain better results in competitions and future Olympic Games .
It is also a way of ensuring that this generation of young Europeans will be notably healthier , fitter and not overweight , as is so often the case today .
I know what I am talking about , because in my country , Poland , the number of children and young people who are obese or overweight is increasing at an alarming rate .
I should like to believe that long-term positive results will emerge from the European Parliament 's effort to draw attention to the inadequacies of the European educational system in this regard , and from its suggestions for remedial measures .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this own-initiative report , encouraging all EU member states to require physical education to be included for all school-aged children .
Encouraging physical activity among young people will help deal with problems of obesity and general lack of fitness , along with all the secondary health problems that arise over time from these consequences of a lack of activity .
in writing . - ( PT ) The role of sport in education is an important issue in several respects .
We can cite , for example , the obesity which is rising across Europe , particularly among young people .
This is an alarming fact and a major public health concern , the effects of which will be felt throughout the life of these people .
We cannot forget in particular that these people will have health problems throughout their life which will have considerable social and economic effects on the organisation and future of our societies .
Another important fact is the evidence that the time allocated to physical education across the EU has been gradually eroded .
It is therefore obvious that the increase in physical inactivity has also led to the most alarming of figures which is that , across the entire EU27 , overweight affects almost one in four children .
I voted in favour of this report which aims to help ensure that positive measures are taken to encourage health in the new generations .
in writing . - ( FR ) The need to encourage the youth of Europe to take up sport has surely never been as relevant as it is today .
The reason is simple : in view of the sedentary lifestyle to which our children are now exposed we need to come up with an alternative to snacking and the games console and we need to do it quickly .
This is why I fully share the message being put across by Mr Schmitt in his own-initiative report calling for more compulsory physical education from primary-school level .
It is a message that strikes home like a double booster injection .
Double because , firstly , school is the natural place for instilling into the youngest members of our society important social values such as honesty , solidarity , team spirit , tolerance and fair play .
These are also values that have to be introduced into the family circle , for this is crucial .
Secondly , in view of the twin threat that we are now facing , namely the public health problem generated by the prevalence of obesity among our young people and the social problem that is typified by an education system based on personalised choice , the European Union and the twenty-seven Member States have to react and rethink the relationship between sport and education .
This battle is far from being won : the average child now watches two hours of TV a day , which is a lot more than the 109 minutes a week that schools set aside for PE lessons .
There are many positive objectives in the report , such as working for public health and against discrimination , and accessibility for disabled persons , but in spite of that there are too many calls and demands for detailed regulations which should not be made at EU level .
I am therefore abstaining in the final vote .
Few question the importance of children receiving physical education at school .
The negative trend of unhealthy lifestyles among young people appears to be increasing from year to year .
Mr Schmitt 's report therefore touches on a pressing and important subject .
The problem with the report , not least with regard to the paragraphs voted on individually , is that Mr Schmitt goes a very long way .
It is difficult to see why the EU in particular should regulate in detail the number of hours of physical education at school , not only for primary school pupils but also for secondary school pupils .
Nor can I see any reason for Brussels to micromanage physical education , with demands for mixed gender groups and special sex education .
The last paragraph , which aims to set up a special system of commendation for various types of voluntary work , looks particularly strange , not because dedicated Europeans do not deserve appreciation , but because it is difficult to see how such a thing would be structured , administered and financed .
There is no doubt that the aim of the report is good .
However , the current formulation has turned out very dubious .
That is why I voted no .
in writing . - As a former teacher of physical education , I will be supporting the Schmitt report because it addresses not only the need to ensure that physical education is taught in schools but that Member States must also ensure adequate training for physical education teachers .
All too often , particularly at primary school level , the PE lesson is conducted by a non-PE specialist normally in a hall that doubles up as a dining room or a theatre , particularly at Christmas time .
If we are to be serious about combating child obesity , if we are serious about improving child health and if we are serious about getting children away from video games and into sport , we must provide better facilities for physical education in all schools and ensure that the teachers have the specialist knowledge to teach the subject .
For far too long PE has been a minor subject , particularly in primary schools , and lessons are often cancelled at the first whiff of rain .
This has led to a generation of children being created that is the most unfit generation ever produced .
Health and physical education is as important as maths and sciences , yet you would not know that if you entered many of our schools .
in writing . - After some consideration and serious doubts with the word " fully ” in paragraph 8 , I have voted in favour of paragraphs 8 and 10 of the Prodi report , as on balance I feel there is a need for an EU framework directive in the area of soil protection to fill in the gaps .
Such a proposal needs to be in " accordance with the principles of better lawmaking ” fully respecting the subsidiarity principle ; so tomorrow , I will support the Gutiérrez-Cortines proposal for a proportionate EU directive which restores subsidiarity , removes duplication of obligations and is overall , a better balance than the Commission 's proposal on soil protection .
With 300 soil types in Europe , only 9 Member States with national legislation in place , and the challenge of climate change before us , there is added value in an even-handed EU approach in addressing the international challenges caused by deforestation and decline in water quality , serious soil erosion , floods and landslides and ensuring safe food production .
in writing . - ( PT ) It is well-known that soil has a basic social function as it is essential for the production of food and other agricultural crops and the storing and transformation of energy and minerals , in addition to functioning as a natural filter for groundwater , the main source of drinking water , the habitat for a variety of organisms living in and on the soil , the platform for human activity and an important element of landscape and cultural heritage .
It is therefore a key component of the earth 's environment .
There are already several Community policies aimed at protecting these essential functions , although not the soil itself .
As the Commission 's impact assessment demonstrates that soil degradation is worsening , concern is increasing about protecting the soil , linked also to concerns about climate change , safeguarding sufficient and clean water , protecting biodiversity and fighting against desertification and deforestation .
More Community legislation specifically aimed at protecting the soil itself should result in the exchange of information and coordination between Member States , without adding any unnecessary administrative burden or calling into question agricultural production and the social function of soil .
in writing . - ( PT ) I regard the Commission 's assessment as important and I agree with the strategy proposed on the protection of soil , a non-renewable resource that provides vital services to human activities and to the survival of ecosystems .
I support the Prodi report and consider that its proposals on better defining the relationship of soil with issues linked to biodiversity , desertification and climate change are particularly important .
in writing . - Amendment 10 : A framework directive is not proportional and does not respect subsidiarity .
The open method of coordination is a better mechanism than a framework directive in this instance .
Soil problems are almost always local and regional .
Amendment 8 : I do not consider that an EU framework directive is fully justified .
I believe that soil protection should remain within the competence of Member States .
in writing . - ( EL ) The Commission 's proposal on soil protection is generalised and vague .
It makes no provision for Community funding or for basic , essential projects for the prevention and replacement of degraded soils .
Particularly in the Mediterranean countries and Greece , the problems are more acute because of the warm , dry climate , geographical relief , strong winds , etc . , which contribute to desertification and soil erosion .
In addition , the coastlines , which are long in relation to these countries ' total area , favour salinification and the redeployment of land use for housing development .
The lack of a soil map and thematic maps results in excessive use of agricultural chemicals .
In practice , there is also an inability to promote crop rotation , because of the misconceived CAP pricing and subsidy system for agricultural produce .
In addition , the lack of any state department to record , prevent and restore pathogenic soils etc. makes this a worrying situation .
The Commission 's proposal seems unable to address these problems , many of which should have been dealt with already .
As for the excuse of the wide variety of soils ( 320 ) , this problem could be resolved if the proposed measures were devised on the basis of the soil pathogens to be prevented or rectified , and not on the basis of particular soil types .
in writing . - I voted for this first reading report on Commission plans to protect soil .
I am in favour of the need to protect soil , but am yet to be convinced that a directive is the right approach , or whether a less prescriptive approach would be more suitable .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report but voted against paragraphs 8 and 10 as I do not accept that there is a need for additional legislation relating to soil protection .
There is a range of legal instruments in place already to ensure the maximum protection possible for soil , and until these pieces of legislation are fully implemented and the effects are fully analysed , I do not believe that further legislation in this area is either necessary or desirable .
in writing . - ( PT ) Protection of the environment is a politically important issue in Europe which has developed rapidly in recent years and in which research continues to be a priority for the Union .
However , the environment cannot be protected in Europe without protecting the soil which is exposed to various degradation processes .
The need for specific protection measures within a new European framework in this area therefore makes total sense .
We recognise that , in the main , soil is in private ownership , but also that soil is a natural resource of public interest and therefore must be preserved for the benefit of future generations .
As protection of the soil is closely linked with the main international environmental challenges , there is a need to consider Community legislation which is specifically designed to protect the soil itself and which can encourage the exchange of information and coordination of good practices among the Member States .
Inserting soil protection in a future climate regime therefore seems to presuppose the recognition of the need for greater knowledge about the role of this resource in the mitigation of and adaptation to climate change .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to express my support for the Prodi report .
Europe does need a common soil strategy .
Soil degradation is continuing across Europe , given that existing legislation is inadequate to combat phenomena such as erosion , the loss of organic material , compaction , salinisation , landslides and contamination .
A plan of action and measures need to be devised at European level , obviously with due account for national circumstances and within a framework of subsidiarity and cooperation with the Member States .
This is crucial above all in terms of identifying areas at risk and drawing up packages of measures .
Moreover , it is vitally important that all 27 Member States should have a minimum level of legislation in this area and that education and awareness-raising campaigns be introduced .
in writing . - ( PL ) Multi-faceted protection of the soil is one of the main challenges for environmental protection at international level .
It also has a tremendous impact on the economies of the Member States .
I wish to express my concern about the consequences of natural degradation of the soil and degradation caused by human activity .
Degradation of the soil is often the result of inappropriate human activity in the areas of agriculture and forestry .
It can also be a consequence of industry , tourism , and urban development .
I should like to point out to the House that compliance with the provisions of the directive will make it possible for degraded land to be reclassified , thus preventing the use of green field sites for industrial and commercial purposes .
The directive will also provide for soil to be classified in terms of its potential for plant and animal production , with particular reference to the production of high quality food .
I should like to highlight the need to develop a European strategy aimed at identifying and resolving issues relating to soil degradation .
Due to the great variety of soil types , a European strategy is required , independently of national action .
Such a European strategy would be based on prevention , and would aim to raise public awareness and to persuade the public of the need for soil protection .
In addition , the strategy would identify risk areas with a view to resolving this problem at European level .
It should be noted that it is important to establish a clear demarcation between this directive and other European legislative standards relating to soil protection in order to avoid regulatory duplication .
Current European legislation does not appear to prevent degradation of the soil .
At the same time , soil protection is closely linked to the main international challenges in the area of protection of the natural environment .
I therefore believe that there is a clear need to develop Community legislation aimed at protecting the soil as such .
in writing . - The EPLP voted against paragraphs 8 and 10 of the Prodi report on Thematic Strategy for Soil Protection as it has not been proven that there is a need for a framework directive for soil protection .
As it currently stands the measures proposed in these paragraphs would be disproportionate as there is not enough flexibility or subsidiarity .
( DE ) Mr President , in my view , the inclusion of aviation activities in the scheme for emission allowance trading is a step towards meeting the conditions of the Kyoto Protocol , that is correct .
However , may I recall what Mr Sarkozy has just said .
He said that Europe must demand reciprocity , and there is none , or far too little , of that here .
Emission trading should not begin before 2012 at the earliest .
As is the case for small cars , exemptions must be in place for small aircraft under 20 tonnes in order to avoid any disproportionality .
A jumbo jet is not the same as a Cessna !
Many points in the report by the Committee on the Environment simply go too far and leave European businesses no room to manoeuvre and no time to implement the measures .
There is massive discord here .
Recalling again the words of the French President , we must think very hard , once more , about how we structure this emission trading scheme .

( FI ) Mr President , I voted in favour of Amendments 77 , 81 and 82 in Mr Liese 's report , so as to ensure that airlines operating in Europe 's peripheral regions would be able to compete fairly with the central European companies .
Unfortunately , however , the majority thought otherwise .
( CS ) Mr President , Parliament decided outside the scope of the Kyoto Protocol to include aviation activities in the scheme for greenhouse gas emission allowance trading .
Although aviation 's share of overall greenhouse gas emissions is only about 3 % , in 15 years the aviation sector 's emissions have doubled .
Today Europe has confirmed yet again its leadership in combating climate change .
However , we need to strike a balance .
It is only right that a proportion of allowances be allocated by auction rather than distributed free of charge , which will promote the development of young societies .
Auction revenues should be used to develop technologies to reduce CO2 emissions in the aviation sector and not for other purposes .
It is well known that another strategy for reducing emissions is the integrated management of flight schedules .
I am strongly in favour of a single starting date for both intercontinental and internal flights .
The Commission has to persuade third countries to join by the end of 2011 .
I consider this a necessary condition for fair competition between all European airlines regardless of the company 's address .
The goal of reducing global warming by two degrees by the year 2020 involves convincing the rest of the world first of all .
The international conference in Bali will soon show how successful we are in this respect .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as regards the purpose of the report , which is to include European aviation activities in the scheme for emission allowance trading , a number of questions arise .
What is beyond question , however , is that we have clear indications that this is not a particularly successful scheme , and although the Commission has data showing that it is not successful , we are now about to include aviation in the scheme as well .
That is my main point of criticism and it prompted me not to vote for the report .
By including European aviation in the scheme , we are approaching this as an isolated solution .
However , that is the very point which ultimately jeopardises the competitiveness of European airline companies and , alongside these companies , the competitiveness of European airports as well .
To my mind , this is not acceptable and we must do all we can to identify global solutions which include other airlines and other airports too .
That is the only way to achieve a solution which is good for the environment but is also good for competition in the European Union .
( FI ) Mr President , I wish to thank my colleague , Mr Liese , for his excellent levels of cooperation .
One concrete issue on which we sought compromise related to the channelling of revenue from auctions .
I would have liked to see all the revenue going to air traffic , but I am grateful that my views were even partly taken into consideration .
I start from the position that aviation is also necessary from the point of view of the environment because , for example , in the MIPS survey its benefits are clearly visible .
Another basic consideration is that the aim must ultimately be emissions-free air traffic .
That is why I am so in favour of channelling revenue into research and development in the area of aviation .
If we really see the dramatic increase in emissions from air traffic as a problem , we need to spend all our available resources on ensuring that research money goes into the development of emissions-free air traffic .
I hope that in the future the Council will bear this in mind .
I also want to say that what Mr Lehtinen just said is my sentiment exactly .
We Swedish Social Democrats have chosen to support Parliament 's report because it is a first step in reducing the impact of aviation on the climate .
However , we consider it regrettable that a majority in Parliament advocate both high emission ceilings and an insignificant amount of auctioning of emission allowances .
In addition , the entry into force has been postponed by a year compared with what was decided on Parliament 's Committee on the Environment .
In time we would prefer to see aviation having a completely separate scheme for trading in emission allowances .
in writing . - The Emission Trading Scheme is the most effective way of dealing with climate change emissions and to facilitate the EU in reaching its target of 20-30 % by 2020 .
We voted today in favour of peripheral regions being taken into account in this Directive and in favour of a deletion of a Commission proposal allowing an airline to demand conversion of its aviation allowances to Kyoto-backed allowances free of charge !
We voted to lower the cap allowance which will be the predicted actual end result in negotiations in future weeks , approximately 85-90 % benchmarked against 2004-06 emissions .
We voted in favour of a review of auctioning in future , if a review is undertaken regarding other sectors .
While we did not vote in favour of auctioning today , auctioning in all sectors could be considered as this would decrease the possibility of windfall profits and help increase competitiveness and innovation .
What is most important is that industry carries its share of emission cutting in an innovative way without laying the entire burden on the flying consumer .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the Liese report on the proposal to amend Directive 2003 / 87 / EC so as to include aviation activities in the scheme for greenhouse gas emission allowance trading as I consider that including the aviation sector in this scheme is vital for mitigating the effects of climate change .
Aviation 's contribution to climate change is substantial and growing rapidly which is why this proposal for a directive represents an important step in meeting the ambitious greenhouse gas emissions reduction targets in the European Union .
However , it is essential to adopt measures so that this directive takes account of the situation in the outermost regions in order to prevent the social and economic impact of the emissions scheme on these regions being too high .
I therefore regret that Amendments 98 = 100 / rev and 97 = 99 / rev were not adopted .
in writing . - ( PT ) We have serious doubts about the general content of the proposals adopted in this European Parliament resolution , which is why we voted against it .
Firstly , we disagree with emission trading which always protects those who have more money to buy emission rights and does not solve the problem of excess CO2 emissions .
Secondly , due account has not been taken of those countries and regions where aviation services are fundamental , such as the outermost regions of the Azores and Madeira .
For example , both flights between these islands and flights between continental Europe and these regions are particularly important for territorial cohesion in the European Union , which is why these flights merit special treatment .
We regret that the inclusion of the outermost regions in the EU territory and of all the flights arriving at or departing from European airports has not been taken into account in the impact assessment for this directive .
This impact will be greater in those regions than in Europe on average , both due to the use of aircraft by their inhabitants and due to the impact of tourism on regional development .
Likewise , no account has been taken of the dramatic consequences for their competitiveness of a tax on flights from which their neighbours are exempt .
I did not support the report that seeks to include CO2 emissions from aviation activities in the European Union 's scheme for emissions trading .
The Kyoto Protocol excluded aviation and while most of the nations of the world do not recognise the Kyoto agreements the European Union now wants to do more than is required under the Protocol .
This idealism is all very well from an intellectual point of view but it will not save the planet , which in any case is not in real danger as such .
However , Europe is in the act of sacrificing all its industries , including aviation , without any significant impact on the climate .
I must protest .
in writing . - ( PL ) Ladies and gentlemen , the Polish Members decided to vote against this report for a very simple reason , namely that not one of our comments was taken into account .
I should like to point out that Polish aviation was very well prepared for reductions of CO2 emissions within the framework of meeting the Kyoto Protocol obligations ( 36 % of 6 % obligations ) and CO2 emissions are not a problem for countries like ours .
The countries of the old Fifteen , however , have so far only met 1.5 % of the 8 % obligations undertaken .
Hence the idea underpinning this proposal for a directive , which would enable the old Fifteen to meet their obligations at the expense of the new Member States .
Is this what the European Union is all about ?
I do not think so , and I call for detailed work and reflection at second reading .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this first reading report on the Commission 's proposal to include the aviation sector in the EU Emissions Trading Scheme , also backing the amendments to reduce authorised emissions from the proposed 100 % level to 90 % .
I also supported Socialist Group amendments to include all flights originating and terminating in the EU , but unfortunately other parties did not back these and they did not pass .
Aviation is an important and fast-growing source of GHG emissions , and taking action to curb those emissions is vital in the fight against climate change .
in writing . - ( PT ) The adoption of measures to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in the European Union and other industrialised countries is under way and this Commission proposal to include aviation in the emission allowance trading scheme is an important element in the set of measures to be adopted internationally .
We cannot deny the significant increase in greenhouse gas emissions in the aviation sector .
Solving the problem by means of emission allowance trading therefore seems to be a useful measure , particularly if correctly conceived and linked with other measures supporting market stability and preventing competition distortions .
The measures adopted today will set a precedent for the continuing international negotiations .
This is why the EU must adopt a firm position with solutions that are actually effective in terms of protecting the environment , whilst defending our industries and our freedoms .
Recognising that this is a difficult task , the rapporteur 's work must be praised , as should everyone for their commitment to achieving compromises which are specifically aimed at mitigating the effects of climate change and balancing social and economic activities in Europe .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to express my support for the Liese report .
I have nevertheless seen fit to back some amendments modifying the initial draft , particularly those relating to 2011 as the date for the scheme 's entry into force .
This is an especially significant point when it comes to avoiding the creation of market distortions within the European Union , albeit only for transitional periods , meaning that some operators would be at an advantage over others .
I have backed certain other amendments too , on matters such as the percentage of allocations to be auctioned , and the use to be made of funds gathered in this way , provided that this does not set a precedent for reducing the financial room for manoeuvre falling within the exclusive prerogative of Member States .
in writing . - I have voted in favour of the Liese report , even though I have doubts about its practicality and its implementation .
I agree that aviation has to be included in any emissions trading schemes , but a balance has to be found between environmental considerations and those of the aviation industry .
In addition , this scheme as proposed is highly contentious outside the European Union with many states threatening court action against the EU , including the USA , India and China because they believe any scheme involving aviation must be agreed internationally before implementation .
It is right that aviation should be involved in ETS . It is wrong to single out aviation as a major CO2 creator without also addressing the maritime industry and the biggest CO2 creator in transport , road transportation .
Some of the suggestions outlined by the Committee on the Environment in its report were frankly extreme .
Parliament has taken a more pragmatic and balanced view .
But still I see problems ahead for this proposal in the months to come , not least on the international stage and not least that we have exempted private jets .
in writing . - ( DA ) I voted in favour of the final version of the Liese report , as it was a small step forwards in comparison to the Commission proposal .
However , the report leaves much to be desired in relation to the steps necessary in order to combat climate change , and therefore demonstrates that the European Parliament is not at the forefront of this battle .
The outermost regions together contribute to combating climate change and regularly demonstrate their commitment to continuing in the same vein by becoming veritable centres of innovation in this area .
I support the objectives being pursued by the inclusion of aviation activities in the scheme for emissions trading .
However , the outermost regions could not support the implementation of the Commission 's proposal as it stands , for otherwise the aviation companies that operate in these areas would have no other option but to pass the new surcharges directly on to ticket prices , to the detriment of overseas passengers and tourists who are already penalised by the high cost of air travel , and to the cost of air freight , which in turn will lead to price rises that will hit consumers and businesses in these outlying regions .
I wish to express my thanks to the rapporteur for having listened to my appeals on this subject , and to Parliament for having finally endorsed the principle of granting special treatment for the outermost regions in this particular matter .
I also welcome the fact that Parliament has accepted the possibility that part of the funds resulting from the emissions-quota bidding scheme might be used to reduce the negative impact of this project on the accessibility and competitiveness of the outermost regions .
in writing . - ( FI ) Mr President , we all know that it is important to ensure that environmental protection is in place and to fight against climate change .
Our actions have to remain within the bounds of common sense , however , and we , as decision-makers , should view things as a whole .
In my opinion , the majority on Parliament 's Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety have not viewed the matter in all of its aspects with regard to this report .
Emissions from aviation account for just 2 % of total emissions and so they should be dealt with in proportion to the whole .
That is to say , even if our entire aviation service were to cease , this would have barely any effect on global warming .
We also have to realise that many airlines have already invested significantly in improving the environmental friendliness of their fleets .
I voted in favour of Amendments 77 , 81 and 82 , to allow air traffic to continue to survive in Europe 's remotest regions .
I do not see the point of having air traffic structured mainly around just a few large airports .
Competitiveness between national airlines should not be short-sightedly impaired to the cost of the cut-price carriers .
I therefore agree with what Mr Lehtinen said in his speech .
That concludes voting time .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 13.15 and resumed at 15.00 )

Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Written declarations ( tabling ) : see Minutes
Application of the Schengen acquis - Application of the Schengen acquis in the Czech Republic , Estonia , Latvia , Lithuania , Hungary , Malta , Poland , Slovenia and Slovakia ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on
the Council Declaration on application of the provisions of the Schengen acquis , and
the report by Carlos Coelho , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the draft Council decision on the full application of the provisions of the Schengen acquis in the Czech Republic , the Republic of Estonia , the Republic of Latvia , the Republic of Lithuania , the Republic of Hungary , the Republic of Malta , the Republic of Poland , the Republic of Slovenia and the Slovak Republic ( 11722 / 2007 - C6-0244 / 2007 - .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am absolutely delighted to be here today before this House , on behalf of the Presidency and the Portuguese Republic , to discuss the imminent enlargement of the Schengen area .
Only a year ago dark clouds were hanging over Europe with the risk of an extremely serious political crisis due to the technical impossibility of bringing the second generation Schengen Information System ( SIS ) into operation in 2007 .
Indefinitely postponing the satisfaction of the reasonable expectations of free movement of citizens from the Member States which joined the European Union in 2004 would not only have been an intolerable demonstration of technological incapacity but also , in particular , a heavy defeat for the European ideal and evidence of the impotence and incompetence of our institutions and Member States .
We could have given these citizens a thousand explanations but all would have sounded like feeble excuses and would have invited a search for the guilty parties , thereby preventing the practical solution of the problem .
Fortunately , we took another route with a speed and cohesion that was truly without precedent .
First of all , we found in Lisbon the appropriate technological response to the technological crisis .
SISone4all was a project conceived in around 30 days with its feasibility study being scrutinised by top European experts within a similar timescale .
In December 2006 the JHA Council was able to green light the start of the process with a schedule of operations worthy of a European version of the film ' Mission Impossible ' and with a minuscule budget , little more than half a million euros .
In March , as promised , the software application - a clone of the Portuguese N.SIS ( National SIS ) - was ready and was delivered to the new project partners .
The C.SIS ( Central SIS ) also underwent a major upgrade thanks to the total commitment of the French Republic , which we must thank .
The German Presidency drove forward the appropriate legal measures with impeccable timing .
On 31 August we managed to finish installing the applications and migrating the data which was a difficult and complex process .
The next day , the security forces of the new Member States gained access to the new tools which they then started to use with great success .
It only remained to check whether all the other many measures needed for admission into the Schengen area had been adopted with equal success , such as those relating to land and sea borders , police cooperation , data protection and issue of visas .
Fortunately , these have been adopted .
Last week , on 8 November , the JHA Council learnt that the Member States in question have demonstrated a sufficient degree of preparation in order to satisfactorily apply both the provisions not relating to the SIS and the provisions relating to the Schengen Information System of the Schengen acquis .
I should like to thank , here in this House , everyone who implemented the changes and carried out the assessment programme in recent months .
Particular mention should be made of the important work carried out by the many experts involved in the visits which enabled the transformations achieved in just a few months to be confirmed without a shadow of a doubt .
We now have , at what will be the new external border of our European Union , some of the most sophisticated and modern equipment , organisational solutions which deserve prizes for innovation and appropriate procedures for ensuring a very high level in the fight against crime .
These will be supplemented by special policing measures , already agreed on a bilateral or multilateral level , so that , in the ' day after ' the abolition of controls , there is more freedom but no less security .
I must also stress that the concern for maximum transparency led the Portuguese Presidency to take very successful steps so that the European Parliament could access the information resulting from the enormous effort made .
This House was therefore able to verify the absolute rigour of the impact assessment summary which we also wanted to provide as a separate document .
I must congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Coelho , on his total commitment to meeting the deadlines set and on the excellent quality of his report .
Ladies and gentlemen , this is the method we need to use in order to overcome the future challenge of setting up and managing , in an integrated manner , the SIS II , VIS ( Visa Information System ) and new information systems on travellers which Vice-President Frattini recently announced .
No one should have any illusions as mega-projects of this kind can be huge successes or heavy failures .
Success can only be achieved with strong command structures , determined leadership and very tight schedules .
We do not need a technology tsar but rather a great deal of work in a democratic network involving the Commission , Member States and the European Parliament , as was demonstrated in exemplary fashion in this case .
I should also like to officially thank all those who contributed to this success .
This is the secret of the success of SISone4all and only in this way can we save resources , create synergies between projects and in particular , ladies and gentlemen , meet deadlines .
There is only one requirement to be met before the Council can take a decision , which is planned for December 2007 , on the full application of the provisions of the Schengen acquis in the new Member States .
This requirement is your vote , the vote of the European Parliament .
I hope I can count on its result and be confident in this respect , given the very positive content of the motion for a resolution which is already on the agenda .
Please allow me , finally , to give warm thanks for the very complimentary comments which , through this motion for a resolution , the European Parliament has made to the Presidency and the Portuguese Republic .
On behalf of the men and women who in recent months have dedicated themselves to our task of preparing for this historic decision which will finally bury the Iron Curtain , I must say that we were not inspired only by a desire for victory and to avoid a serious crisis .
We mobilised the best know-how in Europe , we took advantage of the tools of the new digital Europe to quickly discuss our plans and difficulties and we created a fantastic network of experts and a 24 / 7 help desk to find solutions .
All of this was accompanied by close and unprecedented liaison between experts and politicians , the ministers in this area who periodically met in special meetings to direct the process with the total solidarity of the Commission .
I must particularly highlight the role of Vice-President Frattini .
We also never forget , ladies and gentlemen , that Europe has its parliamentary representatives , whose opinion must have a bearing on what we do .
We took due note of your recommendations and we are counting on your representation at the commemorative ceremonies to mark the historic enlargement of the European area of free movement , which will take place on 21 and 22 November .
Thank you , too , ladies and gentlemen , for your contribution to this historic result .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all I would like to congratulate all the Member States on their achievements in making it possible for citizens in Poland , Estonia , Lithuania , Latvia , the Czech Republic , Slovenia , Hungary , Slovakia , Malta and in the current Schengen countries to finally fully benefit from the free movement of persons , which is one of the pillars of the European Union .
This is a real benefit for the citizens of the Member States that joined the EU in 2004 .
It will make travelling quicker and easier .
For all the Member States of the European Union , this shows the benefit of acting together in the European framework .
An area without internal border control is an amazing achievement , without historical precedent .
From 21 December onwards , travel will be possible from , for example , the Iberian Peninsula to the Baltic States and from Greece to Finland without border checks .
This is truly symbolic of a united Europe and a basic right for all European citizens .
As you are all aware , this historic achievement follows much preparation .
Joining the Schengen area is not an easy undertaking .
It is a challenge , and we must strike the right balance between freedom and security .
Lifting internal border controls is also a question of trust between Member States .
It is through a peer evaluation process , the ' Schengen Evaluation ' , that Member States gain confidence in each other 's capacity to guard the external borders on behalf of all the others and issue visas valid for the whole Schengen area .
Member States will also improve police cooperation and security controls within the broader Schengen space , in order to prevent criminals from enjoying free movement and better opportunities to act illegally .
All this would not have been possible without financial solidarity .
The Schengen Facility , providing nearly EUR 1 billion , enabled the new Member States to meet , in particular , the challenge of building up an efficient border control and becoming full partners in the Schengen area .

I would also like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Coelho , and the European Parliament for their positive support in reaching this fundamental achievement , and last , but not least , I congratulate the Portuguese Presidency .
I congratulate you personally , and Ministers of the Interior , Minister Costa and Minister Pereira , on your strategic partnership and clarity of purpose for the successful implementation of the Schengen information system project , known as ' SIS One For All ' .
We have worked hard , together with the former German and the future Slovenian Presidencies , to support our Portuguese colleagues , and we have succeeded .
This shows what can be accomplished if everyone is fully committed to a complex project .
Now , ladies and gentlemen , work is not finished .
Our ultimate goal is to make Schengen Information System II fully operational by December 2008 .
We will again have to work very hard together .
rapporteur . - ( PT ) Mr President , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , the Schengen area is one of the greatest successes in the history of European integration .
Abolishing internal borders and implementing several compensatory measures , such as the reinforcement of controls at the external borders , police and judicial cooperation and the creation of the Schengen Information System , are the best way to enable freedom of movement .
Like the European Union , Schengen has grown .
From the five original Member States , we are now 15 , including two non-Community countries , Iceland and Norway , and with the partial participation of Ireland and the United Kingdom .
We are now facing an historic event : the biggest enlargement in Schengen 's history , with the simultaneous abolition of internal borders with nine Member States : the Czech Republic , Estonia , Hungary , Latvia , Poland , Lithuania , Slovenia , Slovakia and Malta .
This is an event full of significance for Europe , for free movement and for these new Member States and their citizens .
I must start by welcoming and congratulating them .
I want to congratulate them not only on their entry into this area but also , in particular , on the systematic and committed effort that they have made to meet all the requirements laid down by the strict Schengen rules .
The December 2006 reports , already mentioned by Minister Magalhães , highlighted various problems which have in the main been overcome .
The evaluation teams were composed of experts from all the Member States .
They went to the borders and consulates and prepared exhaustive reports containing factual descriptions , assessments and recommendations , many of which required additional measures and follow-up visits due to the problems that still existed in the vast majority of Member States .
I want to congratulate the evaluation team , led by Dr Carlos Moreira , not only for the exacting work carried out in a short space of time , but also because it did not just fulfil its inspection role , it also frequently suggested measures and solutions allowing the problems identified to be solved .
Mr President , the absence of internal borders not only requires better controls at the external borders and a good exchange of information and data through the Schengen Information System ( SIS ) , it is notably an exercise in mutual trust in which everyone must strictly comply with the adopted rules .
Guaranteeing effective control at our borders allows the security of all European citizens to be ensured .
In fact , the security of the Schengen area depends on the rigour and efficiency that each Member State applies to controls at its external borders and also on the quality and rapidity of the exchange of information via the SIS .
Any weakness or incorrect working of any of these elements is liable to jeopardise the security of the Union .
That is why the remaining minor problems must be ironed out .
Although they do not constitute an obstacle to abolishing the internal borders , they must be solved .
That is why the European Parliament , in the political resolution to be adopted , which has been co-signed by five political groups , and in the legislative resolution , asks to be informed in detail within six months about all pending issues .
That is why we also ask that a global evaluation of the functioning of the Schengen area is carried out within two years , involving all the Member States , both new and old .
Finally , I want to thank the Portuguese Presidency for its commitment and spirit of cooperation , in particular the Portuguese Government and the Portuguese Secretary of State , José Magalhães , who is here today , and for the solution found with SISone4all , as already underlined by Vice-President Frattini .
This solution has enabled the new Member States to be connected to the SIS .
If this had not occurred , given the delay with SIS II , it would not have been possible to extend the Schengen area this year .
Minister Magalhães , I am fully aware of your extensive personal commitment and I also want to congratulate Dr Eduarda Peixeiro , to whom much is owed for the solution adopted .
I have two final comments .
The first is to the European Commission .
I would like to remind it once again that the creation of SIS II continues to be a priority for the European Parliament , not necessarily to allow the new Member States to access the system , as this has been solved with SISone4all , but mainly because , within the Community framework , it will enable more efficient use of data , thereby improving security through both the inclusion of biometric data and the interlinking of alerts .
My second comment is to the Council .
I must express my regret that at the start of this consultation process it did not respect the principle of reasonable cooperation with Parliament as it refused to send the evaluation reports prepared by the experts , on security grounds .
Although a compromise was found to resolve the situation temporarily , a long-term solution must be sought .
It is absurd to deny Parliament material with which it exercises its legislative competences .
Mr President , we have taken another step towards European integration .
It is up to all of us to make sure that this step results in more freedom and greater security .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the European People 's Party and European Democrats Group I would like to welcome the introduction of the Schengen system , and to use the occasion on behalf of the nine new Member States to thank both the German and Portuguese Presidencies , the Council , the Commission and especially Mr Coelho for the enormous amount of work needed to achieve this .
I must also mention the efforts of the new Member States , since their work has enabled us to be at this point today .
The free movement of people is one of the four freedoms of the Union .
We are now extending this achievement , this new area of freedom to many millions of new Union citizens .
This is a joint act by all of us : we Europeans have created this together , and we should be proud of it .
Ladies and gentlemen of the House , I come from a town on the border of Austria and Hungary .
For many decades my town , Sopron , was separated from its immediate environment and from Austria by an iron curtain .
I have brought in a piece of this iron curtain to Parliament - as I have many other times .
It was this iron curtain that made it impossible to exercise freedom in Europe .
With the introduction of the Schengen system , we are eliminating the last remnants of it .
This piece of iron should remind us that our recent past did not have freedom , and that we should never allow freedom to be taken away from us .
With freedom comes responsibility .
The new Member States are taking on the responsibility of guarding the common European external borders rigorously , since the security of all of us depends on this .
Furthermore , we must not allow ourselves to undermine widespread social support for the right to move freely .
For this reason every citizen of the Union must comply with the laws of the Union ; as Commissioner Frattini said just now , freedom of movement does not mean freedom of crime without borders .
Freedom must not and cannot be abused , because that endangers freedom itself and the right to move freely .
Nor can we allow certain forces to revitalise the principle of collective guilt , which brings bad memories , so as to undermine the right to move freely .
We cannot allow the perpetrators of crimes to go unpunished .
For this very reason , I would like to express my thanks again that the Schengen system can be extended to these nine new Member States .
This is an historical event .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , on behalf of my group I , too , would like to congratulate the citizens of the nine new Member States on the present that the Portuguese Presidency will be giving them on 21 and 22 December .
I am in complete agreement with the Minister and the Presidency , who are indeed dismantling the last remains of the Iron Curtain .
The free movement of citizens without internal borders is a very positive thing and one of the most important freedoms of the European Union , and I welcome the fact that the inhabitants of the nine new Member States will now be able to enjoy it .
The Schengen Agreement , however , concerns more than just the removal of internal borders .
It also means that the external borders of the Union must now be monitored by these new countries , in the interest of all the other Member States .
It is very important that the expansion of the Schengen area does not jeopardise our security .
Mr Frattini and the Minister have both said the same .
Efficient and effective border controls are therefore essential .
The assessment of the Council and the Commission show that the nine countries are in principle ready to take on this task , but that improvements could be made in a number of areas , for example as regards staffing and airport infrastructure , and our curiosity has been aroused as to the evaluations and monitoring that will appear as a result .
We hope , too , that Parliament will be swiftly informed about this .
Schengen of course relates to much more than border controls .
It implies greater police and judicial cooperation between Schengen countries .
We are glad that in the case of these nine Member States the Portuguese Presidency has found a solution with a sort of SIS 1 + , although we maintain that progress must be made as soon as possible on SIS II .
I am happy with Mr Frattini 's promise to have it by December 2008 , and naturally we will hold him to that .
We understand that Bulgaria and Romania still have to wait a number of years , but we also hope that these countries will continue to work hard , with our help , so that in a few years they can also join the Schengen area .
The same applies to Cyprus .
It is a shame that the problem that has been holding the country back for so long is now also preventing it from joining the Schengen area .
That is another argument for working together to find a solution to the problem that has affected this country for too long already .
In other areas , too , for example in relations with Turkey , this question leads to problems .
Naturally a solution is also necessary for the people of Cyprus themselves .
Finally , I want to refer again to yesterday 's discussion .
It has rightly been indicated that the enlargement of the Schengen area and the entire Schengen system requires mutual solidarity between the Member States .
As I have already said , controlling the external borders is a task that affects all our security and in which the nine countries concerned are now involved .
We will now speak to them about this .
That security and the need for cooperation are themselves potential future problems , as regards internal migration for example .
We must also agree that we will not try to solve the problems unilaterally , but that we will seek to cooperate , with all the countries that belong to the Schengen area working together to solve the problems that arise in the future .
As I said , we must ensure that what is currently happening in Italy does not happen , i.e. that one country tries to solve on its own what is in fact a shared problem .
Mr President , I would also like to join the congratulators .
I congratulate the new Schengen members for having succeeded in the feat of satisfying the requirements of the Schengen rules in such a short space of time .
I would also like to congratulate Portugal , which is a double congratulation .
Portugal was the first to come up with the proposal of " SIS I for All ” .
Now , under its Presidency , Portugal has had the ability and energy to drive through the evaluation process .
We have heard here what an historic step forward this is .
To reunite Europe also in this form , with free movement , is an achievement which cannot be overestimated .
The road has been difficult .
In particular , the problem with SIS II , which has been delayed for reasons which are unacceptable and have been much criticised by Parliament .
As we have heard , we need SIS II in order to strengthen security within the new enlarged area .
Parliament has also been critical of not immediately having had full transparency and access to the evaluation documents .
I would like to give special thanks to my friend and colleague Mr Coelho .
Without his efforts we would not have been able to complete our parliamentary scrutiny .
Finally , I would like to recall that many of the new Member States have long historical ties to their European neighbours .
We must now ensure that the Schengen enlargement does not lead to a Schengen iron curtain against these .
These , our neighbours , must also have access to the knowledge we have here if they are to be able to follow in our footsteps and build up a society governed by the rule of law , democracy and a market economy .
Once again , congratulations to all three parties that have succeeded here .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - Mr President , I would like to join with my colleagues in congratulating the Portuguese Presidency on being able to create an agreement and understanding with regard to the enlargement of Schengen , and indeed it is historic .
It ranks there alongside the enlargement of the European Union and it is one that we should welcome .
There are concerns , however , as rightly mentioned by other colleagues , with regard to our external borders and what we can do and how we can deal with them , about the issue of solidarity and about showing solidarity with other Member States .
In particular , from my own position coming from Ireland , because of the common travel area which exists between Ireland and Britain , there are certain difficulties with regard to Ireland becoming part of the Schengen Agreement , for no other reason , maybe , except the most important one of all : that it would reintroduce a border between the north and south of Ireland .
So there is a difficulty there but we do not want to see hindered the progress that is being made .
Now , with your permission , I would like to continue in Irish .
( GA ) The EU will continue to grapple with the problems of drug imports into the EU and illicit trafficking in children , as well as addressing itself to common policy on migration , common asylum policy , EU-wide police cooperation , and the fight against organised crime .
Europol is doing a wonderful job in tackling international crime in Europe .
And together we can actually achieve the required double result of free movement of people and security and certainty for all countries .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , first of all , on behalf of my group , I would like to congratulate the new Member States , including my own state , Latvia , on the occasion of joining the Schengen area .
I also thank Portugal for its SIS I initiative , which has opened the way to free movement for many Europeans .
Many thanks to all the people who were involved in this work and did their best in order to make this Christmas gift possible .
In the mean time , a lot of problems still exist in this field .
What has happened with SIS II ?
When can it start operating ?
We are also worried about the use of sensitive data by SIS II .
The data protection regime applicable to these SIS II rules is unduly complex .
Will we have a political agreement on the third pillar data protection framework decision by the end of this year ?
Will the framework decision solve all the problems ?
Do data protection authorities have adequate resources to enforce data protection rules in respect of SIS II ?
Will all Member States act in good faith when processing Schengen data ?
Why am I posing so many questions now ?
I just want to remind you that the Schengen system is far from complete .
A good job has been done in order to enlarge the Schengen area , but now we have a new task - maybe a more difficult one - to make the area of freedom and liberty a guaranteed area for everyone .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too , on behalf of my Group , believe that today is a very important day because we are extending the possibility of free movement for many Community citizens .
This marks a ground-breaking step forward , about which we are very happy because it guarantees additional freedom of movement .
It is a great achievement , pointing us in the direction of a single European space .
My Group is nevertheless somewhat hesitant about certain other aspects , especially concerning the external dimension of the Schengen area .
We are in fact strengthening the external dimension of the Schengen area , reinforcing and in a sense actually militarising our external borders .
We have grave doubts about this : while guaranteeing ever greater freedom of movement for Community citizens belonging to the Schengen area , we are at the same time impeding access for non-Community citizens .
For this reason we are not happy with the entire process .
Furthermore , we have our doubts about the implementation of SIS II : we are very concerned , and believe that in certain cases these exchanges of information do not afford proper protection for sensitive data .
We therefore think that a very tangible step forward has been taken today in the building of the European Union , yet at the same time we have sent out a very negative signal about the form and substance of this European Union .

on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , I would like to speak on behalf of my colleague Mr Blokland .

In previous weeks it has become clear in the media that since the accession of Romania to the European Union , 500 000 Romanians have already moved to Italy .
There is therefore a great deal of free movement of people within the European Union even without the application of the Schengen acquis .
I am therefore very concerned about the controls on undesirable persons crossing our internal borders .
Italy 's decision to turn away European citizens is an extreme measure that clearly shows that open borders can also have negative consequences .
Specific controls will therefore be necessary .
That is possible at the borders , but controls can also be carried out at airports and railway stations .
For this reason it is necessary for a functional SIS to be operational in the short term .
Can the Commission , in its Schengen assessment , also focus on the free movement of people from countries that belong to the Union but not to the Schengen area ?
on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , we too are pleased that the Iron Curtain which the Communists drew across Europe for more than half a century , with such contempt for human dignity , is finally down .
I say this as an Austrian , for whom access to our neighbours , the Czechs , Slovaks , Hungarians and Slovenians , is now open again , just as it was a hundred years ago .
May I nonetheless voice a point of criticism : on a decision of such gravity , the fact that the Schengen Information System is functioning properly is by no means enough .
In my view , the new guardians of the external borders must actually have the capacities to perform their role .
If we consider that some EU countries in East Central Europe were still major transit countries in 2006 and that the figures for the apprehension of illegal immigrants were far higher at the EU 's previous Schengen borders in Austria and Germany than at the EU 's external borders , we cannot afford to ignore this concern .
Nonetheless , it is a very good thing that the Iron Curtain has finally been consigned to history .
( SK ) I believe that the new Member States , including the Slovak Republic , are all well prepared to join the Schengen area .
The Slovak Republic has fulfilled the individual criteria in the area of Schengen cooperation and has therefore fulfilled all the basic conditions , so that Slovak citizens will be able to enjoy the removal of internal border controls on the ground from December 2007 and from March 2008 in the air as well .
The Slovak Republic implemented the Schengen acquis in regard to the Schengen Information System by 1 September 2007 and police information is now flowing through the system in both directions .
We have built a network of points of contact to facilitate the exchange of data from police information systems .
Our border protection and control are now in compliance with requirements of the Schengen border code .
The shortcomings identified in personal data protection and at Bratislava airport have been remedied .
After three and a half years of EU membership , there are no longer any obstacles to Slovak citizens at last getting the right to which they are entitled under the EC Treaty , the right to the free movement of persons .
I trust that the European Union will soon grant our citizens another right to which they are entitled , which is the right to work without restrictions in other EU countries and that European Union will no longer give priority to workers from third countries but will instead prioritise EU citizens from the Eastern Europe .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I myself represent Lower Bavaria , which borders on the Czech Republic , here in the European Parliament .
When I was even younger than I am today , this area really was the end of the world .
Looking at the gallery , I see so many young people in the audience , and I think we can remind ourselves that it is an historic day when these borders finally fall and we are united in Europe .
For that reason , yes , it is a cause for celebration !
As a political representative , may I say in all honesty that many people were not convinced that this would work as well as it has , or that our East European friends , one for all , would implement SIS in this way .
May I express my congratulations and respect for that achievement .
I would also like to thank Carlos Coelho .
The fact that the European Parliament is playing such a major role when it comes to Schengen is due to our rapporteur .
I would like to emphasise that point as well .
However , politicians always have to think of tomorrow and what will be facing us then .
Here , I would like to remind everyone of what the Executive Director of Frontex , Ilkka Laitinen , said at the last meeting of the Justice and Home Affairs ( JHA ) Council : he said that migration flows are already demonstrably changing , away from the southern border across the Mediterranean and towards the eastern border .
That is something we need to prepare for today .
We must also work through the problems identified in the evaluation reports .
That is why the evaluation clause proposed by Parliament is so important .
We need SIS II and may I appeal to the Vice-President of the Commission not to cease applying pressure here , for it is important that Member States resist any temptation to sit back and say , that is it , we have done it .
We need the same level of commitment from them when it comes to the implementation of SIS II as well .
Once we have open borders for citizens , we will also have open borders for criminals , and when we have open borders for criminals , we need open borders for our police as well .
For that reason , there must be no slackening of commitment now when it comes to the Prüm Treaty ; we need closer cooperation here too .
As my fifth point , may I say that there is a need for a strengthening of Frontex .
I would like to see Frontex taking on responsibility for the evaluation of standards at the external borders in future .
We will be celebrating in December , and I hope that what will come afterwards will not be a hangover but the positive memory of the celebration itself and the reasons for it .
( SK ) Excuse me , Mr Chairman , excuse me , but I have been informed that the English interpreter said the Czech Republic instead of the Slovak Republic .
I would like to appeal to our interpreters to get used to the fact that Czechoslovakia has been divided into two sovereign states , which also means that in the context of my speech , I meant that it was the Slovak Republic that was fulfilling the conditions .
Thank you , Mrs Belohorská .
We are aware of what happened , and you know that we were in fact exceptional witnesses to the situation .
In any case we have taken due note of this , and if any corrections are necessary they will be made in due course .
To tell you the truth , I am not altogether sure who you mean , who mentioned Czechoslovakia .
I do not think it came from the Presidency .
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
Today 's decision is truly symbolic , and it can be experienced most keenly by those of us who grew up behind the barbed-wire fence , who were able to cross the border to the West every three years , and who today can remember the stomach-churning moment of crossing the border .
Hungary implemented the necessary legislation by 2004 , the time of the accession .
Since then , it has developed its system of instruments necessary for Schengen protection .
The inspections have classified the preparations as excellent , both for the land and air borders .
In addition , Hungary will take responsibility for 15 % of the eastern border .
We would like to thank the Member States who have shown us solidarity , and especially the Portuguese Presidency , for this opportunity that is full of responsibility .
We would also like to thank the Council for their flexibility , which has enabled us to solve the problem we had with Croatia , and which has also made it possible to resolve the situation of Hungarians living abroad through bilateral agreements , in accordance with their wishes and the approval of neighbouring countries .
Thank you everyone !
Thank you for the floor , Mr President .
Mr President , with the accession of nine new Member States to the Schengen area , which is a true and final falling of the historical Iron Curtain , the EU has truly given the opportunity to their European citizens to travel and fraternise in a reciprocal manner .
Last autumn I drew the attention of the Estonian public to the threat that the accession of the new Member States might be delayed until the beginning of 2009 .
I am glad that the European Commission has found the means to speed up the process and I hope that it has not affected the pertinence of the system .
But , besides the positive products of this accession , the EU must be up to the challenge of managing the possible threats that might result from such a vast administrative unit .
The SIS is a necessary safeguard to secure the normal functioning of the Schengen area and it should definitely be left open to future complements .
Now the practice might induce some new issues .
Working off the threats and maintaining a flexible nature is essential for the SIS to address the challenges that this enlargement brings about .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the spirit of the Schengen Treaty is about safeguarding the security of European citizens .
To this end , it is undoubtedly better to have a few queues at borders and in airports rather than allowing free entry not only to decent people but also to the most hardened criminals , whom we do not want in our countries .
We wish to see border checks , for example on Romanian Roma , with compulsory detection of biometric data including digital fingerprints .
We must know who we are allowing into our country , as well as the exact date of entry , so as to be able for example to apply scrupulously the European Directive enabling us - as pointed out just a moment ago - to expel after three months anyone who lacks the funds to support themselves .
Romano Prodi 's Commission made commitments to the new Member States without giving any consideration at all to emergencies , of which there have been several since then .
They are now giving rise to appalling security problems , and the European Union must think not only about European citizens ' rights , but also about their security .
Security is an inalienable right , a natural right .
Action is now required , and Commissioner Frattini is quite rightly sending out well-balanced , positive signals in this regard , but we should not forget that Schengen must also concern itself with checks at the European Union 's external borders , and must do so ever more efficiently .
We have nothing against any ethnic group or population group , still less against our brothers in Eastern Europe ; however , we do not want criminals moving around freely in our land .
Padania is a land of honest , hard-working people .
Its doors are open only to those who come to work , who behave well and - as befits the European Union 's area of justice and freedom - who abide by the rules , namely the rules of honesty and law and order .
( CS ) The history of the enlargement of the Schengen area is marked by double standards .
In 1995 the three new Schengen states only had to fulfil a few formalities .
In 2004 , however , the new Member States were subjected to a series of humiliating controls and assessments lasting three and a half years .
There were objections from Germany and Austria in particular , which maintained that enlarging the existing Schengen Information System to include the new countries was not possible .
In the end this problem was overcome thanks to the Portuguese Presidency , which is to be highly commended for having been able to overrule these voices .
SISone4all now fulfils all the requirements .
The new Members are now ready to ensure adequate security of the Schengen area .
There are a few issues that have yet to be resolved , such as data protection , perhaps even protection of the new Member States against the transport of toxic substances , such as in the case of Germany and the Czech Republic .
I believe , however , that all these issues will be successfully dealt with and that Europe will not in the process become some sort of enclosed fortress .
I hope that Europe will continue to be open to collaboration with other nations of Central , Eastern and South-Eastern Europe .
Without Eastern Europe and the Balkans , Europe is not and will never be complete .
( NL ) Mr President , like the European Ministers of Home Affairs this Parliament is now giving the green light to the extension of the Schengen system to the Member States that joined in 2004.It will be a relief to many .
However , I am somewhat less euphoric about Schengen itself : the fact is that the European policy of open borders also noticeably strengthens the scope of international organised crime .
As a result , Schengen has a spill-over effect .
The system of open borders has always demanded a further transfer of competences and ever-closer police cooperation , which will eventually result in a full-blown European police force , prosecutors and criminal law , with their positive but also their negative aspects .
However , the policy of open borders renders the individual Member States powerless in the face of the regularisation programmes for illegal migrants adopted in certain countries - I am thinking of Spain and Italy in particular - which always attract more migrants to Europe 's poorly protected borders .
The famous European solidarity is completely lacking here and this has to be said .
( PL ) Mr President , the decision on the Schengen issue was mission impossible , as Mr Magalhães stated .
It proves that if there really is a will to do so , it can be possible to interconnect in practice the areas of freedom for the citizens of Europe , including the freedom to travel , whilst simultaneously reinforcing security for those same citizens , that is to say , internal security .
Preparations for this decision have lasted at least 10 years , and have been very intense in the last two of these .
In its present form , the Schengen project is quite different from what it was in the mid-1980s .
The main difference is that it is now fully enshrined in the Community 's legal and organisational order .
In other words , as far as the new countries are concerned , the question is not if but when we will begin to benefit fully from the Schengen area .
At this juncture one is inclined to indulge in historical and symbolic reminiscences .
After the Second World War the issue of borders and their control resulted in bloody dividing lines being drawn across the map of Europe .
Crossing a border often meant risking one 's life .
As things now stand we can state that part of our post-war legacy has gone forever .
The new countries have come through the preparatory stage with flying colours .
It is abundantly obvious that many of the solutions adopted by Poland and other new Member States can and do serve as examples for current members of the Schengen area .
The wind of change from the new countries will be an inspiration for the old Union , not a threat .
It will also help to increase mutual trust .
The Schengen enlargement process also constitutes a challenge and hard work for us in Parliament .
On a personal level , I was honoured to be able to work with such a distinguished rapporteur as Mr Coelho , with my colleagues from the group , and with the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs .
I would like to thank the Portuguese Presidency for its tremendous determination .
Thanks are also due to Mr Frattini for his favourable attitude and commitment to this splendid achievement , which is without precedent in the course of history .
( DE ) Mr President , extending the Schengen area to include nine new Member States is an historic step which completes the enlargement of the European Union and dismantles those borders where once the Iron Curtain separated our nations .
There were those who believed , in advance of the process , that it was too early to do this , but we can now allay those fears .
The most recent evaluation has shown that the new Members are implementing the Schengen acquis to everyone 's satisfaction .
Let us be honest : border controls and the traffic jams which they produced have only ever made a limited contribution to our countries ' security .
Real cross-border organised crime can only be combated effectively through intensive cooperation by our police and security agencies .
This cooperation must be improved in future , and everyone is invited to play a role here .
After all , among the old Member States , Germany is one of the countries whose borders have been most affected by the removal of controls .
I would therefore like to welcome the citizens of our neighbour countries to our common area of free movement .
May I say that people in our own countries - in Germany , Austria , Italy , France and Spain - will benefit from the newly acquired freedom as well , whether during their vacations or a visit to friends .
On 21 December , Europe will move a step closer together .
This is good for its people , and it is good for Europe .
( PT ) Once again , many thanks to Mr Coelho , our President-in-Office and Commissioner Frattini .
( PL ) Mr President , Poland is to join the Schengen area on 21 December of this year along with other new Member Sates .
This will represent a further significant step towards full membership of the European Union .
We would therefore like to say how much we welcome this development .
The next stage will be joining the euro zone .
Joining the Schengen area does not amount to turning our backs on our Eastern neighbours .
We shall try to facilitate entry into Poland for their citizens within the framework of the Schengen commitments .
Allow me to emphasise , however , that we shall only do so in accordance with our commitments as members of the Schengen area .
( HU ) Thank you for the floor , Mr President .
The new Europe is now coming into our reach , in that the dividing lines that were drawn up so skilfully in the past have ceased to exist , and this will have a bigger impact than anything else on the everyday lives of all of us who live in the area .
I would like to congratulate and thank the Portuguese Presidency for creating the opportunity and the technical framework for the events of today .
We would like to thank Commissioner Frattini for the help that these Member States have received .
Last , but not least , I would like to thank my colleague , Mr Coelho , for his sense of vocation in dealing with this matter .
We can now feel the advantages of enlargement as a physical reality , and also the symbolic and practical importance of being able , for example , to cross the bridges of the Danube without checks , or rowing across the Danube , which was an inconceivable dream for our parents .
The precious desires of generations are coming true .
In this way , history now admits that our young heroes of 1956 were right .
At the same time , we must do everything to extend this zone as soon as possible to Bulgaria and Romania , who acceded recently .
In this latter case - for example in the case of Transylvania - the Romanian-Hungarian border will be so important , and it can only be compared to what must have been felt when the Franco-German border was dissolved , by the people living there .
At the same time , we cannot forget that checks will be even more stringent at the external borders of the Schengen zone .
For this reason , the ethnic groups living outside our borders , the Hungarians living in Vojvodina and Subcarpathia , will be at a disadvantage : our close contact with them is a condition for their staying there and a constitutional obligation for us .
The external borders cannot turn into a new iron curtain for these communities .
It is only in this way , paying attention to those who remain outside , that the celebrations for opening up the borders can be complete for us .
Thank you for the floor .
( PL ) Mr President , along with previous speakers I would like to thank the Portuguese Presidency for its very determined work on enlarging the Schengen system .
I welcome the fact that one of the last remaining differences of treatment between citizens of the old and the new Union will disappear on 21 December of this year .
In particular , as a Pole I am proud that my country is responsible for the control of more than 1 200 kilometres of the Union 's external land border , and that the FRONTEX agency is located in Warsaw .
At the same time I should like to emphasise that the Schengen system is not intended to isolate the Union from its neighbours .
It does not aim to create a so-called fortress Europe .
I think we should take this opportunity to send out a signal from the House to our neighbours beyond the Union 's borders , including the citizens of Russia , Ukraine and Belarus , making it clear that the strengthened Union border is certainly not a wall to defend ourselves against them .
We must let it be known that it is simply a feature of our security as a Union , and that we shall not cease being good neighbours .
( HU ) The entry of nine Member States is a significant step forward in the field of integration , both for the European Union and for the Member States concerned .
There will finally be a tangible benefit for citizens from membership of the European Union .
Thanks for this are due to the Portuguese Presidency , which has done everything for us to join at the planned date , in 2007 , even though there were attempts to prevent this .
The Member States concerned are also due recognition for making great efforts to fulfil the stringent criteria and conditions .
It is very important that no new iron curtain should fall between the countries that have just joined and their neighbouring countries .
The agreements on easing visa procedures and local border traffic might be a great help in this , but the ultimate goal in any case is to achieve visa exemption .
A specific , realistic timetable is needed for this , to enable the creation of visa exemption as soon as possible .
Thank you .
Welcome
We are pleased to welcome an EFTA delegation to our gallery today , led by Mrs Katrín Júlíusdóttir , with members from Iceland , Norway and Liechtenstein , along with some observers from Switzerland .
The delegation is visiting the House as part of the 29th session of the European Economic Area Joint Parliamentary Committee , which will be meeting here in Strasbourg on 14 and 15 November .
I wish our colleagues every success with the EEA Agreement , and with the future prospects of the area , energy issues and climate change , as well as their talks with Commissioner Borg on EU maritime policy , which are on the agenda of the discussions .
I am also very pleased they have decided to pay a visit to the European Parliament during our part-session .
I thank you all and welcome you here today .
( Applause )
Application of the Schengen acquis - Application of the Schengen acquis in the Czech Republic , Estonia , Latvia , Lithuania , Hungary , Malta , Poland , Slovenia and Slovakia ( continuation of debate )
The next item is the debate on the Council Declaration on application of the provisions of the Schengen acquis , and on the report by Carlos Coelho on the application of the Schengen acquis in the Czech Republic , Estonia , Latvia , Lithuania , Hungary , Malta , Poland , Slovenia and Slovakia .
( PL ) Mr President , I should like to begin by thanking the Portuguese Government for the technical solution it proposed regarding the transitional period .
This will allow the new Member States to join SIS before the end of the current year , in advance of the new system being confirmed and implemented by the Commission .
I am pleased for my fellow citizens who will be travelling back to Poland for Christmas .
This time they will be spared having to spend long hours queuing waiting to cross the border on the way home .
All this has only become possible , however , because following the initial difficulties experienced , each and every one of the countries involved has set to and tackled the problems arising in connection with implementation of the SIS system , adapting it to local conditions .
( SK ) I would also like to take this opportunity to express my appreciation to the Portuguese Presidency for its initiative and for finding a solution by proposing SISone4all , which enabled nine new Member States to join the Schengen area .
The historic significance of this step for the citizens of those countries cannot be doubted .
Not only does it make the principle of free movement of people a reality , it also represents a historic step towards the reunification of Europe .
I would also like to thank the rapporteur , Carlos Coelho , for his excellent work and for a remarkable grasp of all the issues .
Thanks are also due to Commissioner Frattini for his great commitment and all the help with fulfilling the Schengen criteria .
It was stressed a few times in the report that joining the Schengen area was a matter of mutual trust and I believe that trust is also the underlying theme of our present debate .
It is quite clear that border security is not just an issue of technology but also of mutual trust .
However , this works both ways .
More technologically advanced systems would also undoubtedly help individual Member States to trust the countries protecting the security of the Union 's external borders .
We must therefore ask why and how much longer we have to wait for SIS II , which will increase security and facilitate both judicial and police cooperation between Member States in this area .
Prolonging the existence of temporary solutions is both costly and inadequate compensation for the non-existence of SIS II .
I also want to support the amendment tabled on the fulfilment of the Schengen criteria , which states that Parliament should be informed within six months of the assessment of the situation in the Member States .
We should not see a repeat of the situation when the Commission did not want to provide the Parliament with information that was vital for its decision-making .
Mr President , the joy of the magnificent Christmas present among the 21st century new European citizens is understandable .
The expansion of the Schengen area - this special Portuguese flavour - is a historic event of great psychological and symbolic magnitude , lifting not only the borders and divisions in Europe .
Yet , whilst for us it is now possible to travel from the Baltic Vilnius to the Atlantic Lisbon , a new European curtain is being pulled in front of Ukraine , Russia , Moldova and Belarus , a financial and bureaucratic one in place of that very old iron .
Not so long ago , our neighbours could travel visa-free to many new Schengen countries , but now they must pay between EUR 35 and 60 .
This is a quarter or even a third of a monthly salary in some of these countries .
We do not need the fortress of Europe while the Schengen acquis , with some improvements , is the key to a stronger and more inclusive Europe .
( LT ) I cannot help welcoming and rejoicing at the eminent enlargement of the Schengen area , which is due to take place at the end of this year .
The concepts of ' Schengen ' and ' roaming ' are the notions best understood by EU citizens .
They can see them actually working ; everyone has been influenced by them in one way or another .
For most Europeans they are closely associated with the notion of a united Europe .
The accession of nine new Member States is a historical step not just for Lithuania , but for Europe as a whole .
For Lithuania it spells another sequential step towards deeper European integration .
The preparation has required a lot of work and effort .
I am glad that the experts have assessed these efforts and found them to be acceptable and that all nine candidates will be able to join , having successfully ' passed the test ' .
I would like to thank the presiding country , Portugal , for having come up with the solution regarding the Schengen Information System , which has prevented our countries from wasting several years .

( PL ) Mr President , it emerges from the report by Mr Coelho that nine new Member States are properly prepared for their land borders to be opened on 21 December this year and for their air borders to be opened on 30 March 2008 .
Despite earlier concerns , all these countries have managed to catch up and establish an information system allowing data to be exchanged between organisations responsible for protection of the Union 's external borders .
Consequently , the principle of the free movement of persons will be implemented approximately three years after these countries acceded to the Union .
I would remind the House that this is one of the four key principles governing the operation of the European Union .
It was also a good thing that the Council of the European Union responded to the European Parliament 's hopes , taking the formal decision to open the borders during the night between 20 and 21 December of this year .
This will be a very special Christmas present for the many thousands of Europeans travelling between the old and the new Member States during the Christmas and New Year holiday period .

( MT ) I would like to start by joining my fellow Members in thanking and expressing my best wishes to Mr Coelho for the useful work that he has done .
Mr President , the enlargement of the Schengen area is not just another historical step in Europe 's development ; more than that , it is a major acquisition for European citizens , as it gives them new rights .
Mr President , we sometimes forget that there was once a time when , wherever you went in Europe , immigration officials would stamp your passport .
In order to leave your country and enter it again you had to fill in an embarkation form to advise authorities where you were going and how long you would be away .
On arrival you again passed through immigration control , waited in the queue and were then quizzed : why have you come , what are you going to do , how long are you staying ?
They almost treated you with suspicion rather than welcoming you , which annoyed many people .
On returning to your country you went through the same thing , with controls in the country of departure and controls when you returned to your own country .
We should not forget as well that until a short while ago customs officials checked your baggage , asking you what you had bought , how much you had spent , as if you had some form of contraband .
Mr President , this is not 50 years ago ; this is just a short time ago .
Now , finally , the controls are going to end once and for all .
This means that a country is in the Schengen area .
When you travel within the Schengen area , you are as free as you are within your own country ; you leave your country , you arrive in another , and you return without controls , without stamps , without borders , without questions .
The sense of freedom brought by the freedom of movement without controls is a major acquisition that we really appreciate as one of the greatest successes of the European Union .
More and more , for those of us who come from islands , Schengen unites us , builds a bridge between the periphery and the centre ; for us , Schengen means a sense of liberty , it means a sense of liberation .
- ( SK ) The creation of the Schengen area , which does away with controls at the internal borders between all the participating states and thus makes free movement of persons a reality throughout the EU territory , can rightly be considered to be one of the EU 's greatest achievements .
The citizens of the countries joining that area in December will welcome our decision as one that is in the interests of the people , making their right to free movement a reality .
However , the enlargement of the Schengen area also requires the introduction of some compensatory measures , including the introduction of effective controls at the external borders , better cooperation between the administration , police , customs and judicial authorities , a common visa policy and the creation of the Schengen Information System .
The Slovak Government has , according to all the assessments , completed the preparatory phase very successfully and I am honoured to be able to declare in the European Parliament today that the Slovak Republic is fully prepared to join the Schengen area .
( LT ) Today we are about to finalise the discussion on the application of the Schengen aquis provisions in the new Member States .
I welcome the fact that all the hard work put in by those countries about to join the Schengen area , together with the efforts of the existing Member States and the Commission , has led to victory .
The creation of the Schengen area is one of the EU 's biggest projects .
In order to facilitate its implementation after the expansion in 2004 , when we were having difficulties with the realisation of SIS II , the Member States demonstrated true solidarity ; Portugal proposed the SISone4all version , enabling the borders to be opened between the 15 existing Member States and the nine new ones before next Christmas .
This means increased freedom of movement within Europe , and it is also a rational decision , preventing new Member States from incurring losses because of the delay in setting a date for the application of SIS II .
SISone4all , which is due to operate for nearly a year , will facilitate the movement of persons while at the same time having a beneficial impact on the countries ' economic growth .
( ET ) Ladies and gentlemen , the enlargement of Schengen is an event for all 500 million Europeans and , in fact , for the whole world .
By removing controls on its internal borders , the European Union is putting an end to an age which was characterised by division and opposition - East and West .
I spent my childhood and teenage years in the Soviet Union .
I remember the anxiety engendered by the knowledge that the land and sky were closed off , that the soldiers of the army of occupation were protecting the iron curtain .
The accession to Schengen marks the final liberation from the past .
The disappearance of borders is a powerful symbol for 75 million Europeans .
The nine countries acceding to Schengen are ready to take on the changes in data exchange which go hand in hand with the privilege of free movement .
My home country , Estonia , protects one of our external borders .
I am nevertheless disappointed that this historic occasion has been split into two smaller events for no convincing reason because air frontiers will not , of course , disappear for eastern Europeans until the end of next March .
( MT ) I wish to share some ideas regarding Schengen and the way in which I see it .
For me , it is not just a matter of what is in the Treaty and what it will provide or the rules that are applied ; I see it as part of a process , part of an important process to include diverse European States - in this case two EFTA states - and help them to feel more integrated and move closer to each other .
Although we have this independent and sovereign quality , we should on the other hand be proud that we are part of something whole .
In this case , entry and exit through common borders - because they are going to become common borders - are part of a process like that of the Euro , part of a process through which my country became part of Europe .
We should all be proud that we form part of such a wise continent that also exports the values that it believes in .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Mr President , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that there is total consensus in this House that the imminent enlargement is not only historic but also highly symbolic .
However , this consensus is not only institutional but , much more importantly , it is also social as it is what our citizens rightly want .
It is right that the EU 's bodies should listen to its citizens and respond in timely fashion to their aspirations .
This is what we have done .
I am very grateful for the positive comments which have highly praised the work carried out not only by the Portuguese Presidency but also by all those who contributed at just the right time so that the many pieces of this complex puzzle could be readied and slotted together just as they should .
Just one year ago we were facing a very different situation and it is not only a technological feat , which is in itself very important , but also a political feat that our institutions have achieved for our citizens , which reinforces the credibility of these institutions .
Secondly , I must stress that the new external borders are a great Christmas present for our citizens and will be so for many Christmases to come .
However , they also provide a new way of managing external relations as we do not want to create a second generation Iron Curtain for our neighbours .
What we have is the start of an electronic border , vigorous in its interception of criminals and flexible , like everything electronic , in allowing citizens in good faith to pass rapidly through , whoever they may be and wherever they may be coming from .
This is the model that Europe is presenting to the world and this is the commitment to which we are bound .
Thirdly , this work and this achievement are based on meticulous preparation which has left the partner states in the SISone4all project very well provided with equipment and a police preparation logic which we must link with new measures , such as the reinforcement of Frontex recently announced by the Commission and our new model of integrated border management .
This is therefore one more piece in a complex policy that must be pursued and developed .
Fourthly , I should like to underline that one of the secrets to the success of this project is being able to duly combine security and freedom , freedom of movement , much more freedom of movement , with appropriate data protection .
The two things are inseparable .
This is the way forward for Europe and it is fortunately also an important point of consensus between the Commission , the Council and the European Parliament .
There is no other way forward , only this one .
This rule is valid for SISone4all and will also be valid for SIS II , for the second generation Schengen Information System .
This is obvious in the legislation approved with the seal of the European Parliament and is apparent from the suggestions made in the report prepared by Mr Coelho .
I must also say that this applies to the issue of managing confidentiality and transparency .
Confidentiality and transparency can be balanced and an optimum balance must be achieved so that all decision-makers have the necessary information to make decisions in full knowledge of the facts .
This has been achieved in this process and is surely a point which bodes well for future successes in an excellent relationship between the Commission and the Council on this essential point .
Finally , I must also once again stress the importance of the method that we have chosen .
We have not run away from bad news or problems .
In 2006 we realised that there was a serious problem and we took note of this serious problem .
We did not adopt a ' blame-shame ' attitude but instead tried to find positive solutions to the problems by ensuring exemplary cooperation among the institutions .
I have no criticisms to make of the Commission 's behaviour throughout the process and I consider that the Commission should have no criticisms to make of the Council 's behaviour , as managed by the previous German , current Portuguese and future Slovenian Presidencies and other future presidencies .
It is this kind of cooperation that I consider necessary to solve European problems .
To conclude , we must relish the victory and prepare for the future .
I should therefore like to invite the representatives of this House to attend the commemoration , which will be held on 21 and 22 November .
This will be a symbolic journey through sites that were previously symbols of closure and that will , from 21 December , be symbols of the freedom that is the air and oxygen breathing life and happiness into Europe .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you very much .
I too am extremely satisfied with the outcome of this debate .
The result which is within our reach today clearly shows that the countries about to join Schengen on 21 and 22 December , and their citizens , really do deserve this Christmas present , as it were .
They deserve it because , whereas we have worked together over the past 12 to 15 months to overcome certain technical difficulties - and the Portuguese Presidency cannot be praised highly enough - they have played their part too .
They have overcome difficulties and shortcomings - in airports , at border posts and in staff training - which just 12 , 13 or 14 months ago seemed hard to overcome .
That is why they really do deserve what has charmingly been called a Christmas present , and I can say so having visited a number of border posts in person , together with many colleagues - Ministers of the Interior - who showed me the enormous progress made between one visit and the next .
I believe that this development is of huge political importance for Europe and has a major social impact , in other words on the citizens .
It is of huge political importance because , from 21 December onwards , each Member State will regard another Member State 's external borders as its own .
I , as an Italian , will regard the far-off border between Poland and Ukraine as my own .
That will be my country 's border : such is the political impact of this decision that Europe has managed to take within what is a very reasonable period of time .
Then there is the social impact , in other words the impact on our citizens ' daily lives which , if I may say so , even goes beyond the symbolic effect of no longer having to queue up at border posts .
It means that every law-abiding European citizen will feel at home in any other country of the European Union .
It means freedom of movement and not having to show one 's passport ; it does not merely mean not having to queue up for border checks , but rather feeling that European citizenship has become a reality .
Many of you have raised the issue of security , and I entirely agree with what Mr Magalhães has just said .
Security and freedom must obviously go hand-in-hand .
The more we promote the expansion of this right , this great freedom , the more we must do to prevent criminals from making the most of this great freedom to step up their own dealings and unlawful activities .
That is why this Europe , this large Schengen area , will not be a fortress but certainly will protect EU citizens from criminal comings and goings .
Furthermore , it is obvious for this reason that the Schengen system - currently the ' one for all ' Schengen system and soon to be Schengen II - must be equipped with the best technology .
Criminals tend to evade controls , of course , and we must have the technological instruments to prevent that from happening , such as the use of biometrics , showing full respect for everyone 's freedom but in order - as it were - to ward off temptation .
One last word : I was struck by what has been said about Europe 's neighbours .
Clearly , an enlarged Schengen area must not engender the risk of shutting out those countries which now adjoin the expanded Schengen borders .
As you know , we have to use this Schengen system to monitor and administer 80 000 km of EU external borders , and Frontex will play an ever greater role here .
Just think what an enormous task that is , but we have to perform it .
Well , this must not happen to the detriment of our neighbours , of the relationships some have mentioned : the Russian Federation , Ukraine , Moldova and the Western Balkans .
We have therefore embarked on a new approach , and I would once again ask you , the European Parliament , now that you are giving the final green light to this action , to confirm your support for the policy which I proposed to the Council and which the Council of Ministers has endorsed .
It is a new-style visa policy , aimed at facilitating the movement of honest people , accompanied by measures on document security , personal identification and the use of biometrics , but which offers citizens now living extremely close to but not within this European area a tangible opportunity to go occasionally to the theatre in Vienna or to see the Coliseum in Rome or to visit Lisbon , without the enormous difficulty and expense currently involved in obtaining a visa .
The new approach is as follows . Let us make visa policy an instrument of our neighbourhood policy , and let us do so at the same time as enlarging the Schengen area .
This , in my opinion , would hopefully be another political , purely political , step ; it is neither a bureaucratic nor a narrowly legal matter .
It is a political message that we can send to other states and their citizens , who are watching us from Europe 's neighbourhood but do not need to look on in envy because we are free to move around while they cannot even attend a university course in a European city .
In order to ensure that no such envy exists and that Europe is loved by its neighbours , let us accompany the enlargement of Schengen with a policy of friendship , using visas and greater freedom of movement as a strategic instrument .
To conclude the debate , I have received motions for a resolutionfrom five political groups pursuant to Rule 103 ( 2 ) .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( HU ) We can still remember the fear we felt when we crossed the iron curtain of the time with valid passports in our pockets .
The passport was valid in vain , and we got all the stamps in it in vain , because something could always happen at the border .
Or , if not , we were afraid of it because crossing the border was an extraordinary event in Europe .
Since the iron curtain came down , border traffic has become simpler , but the checks have remained , and the borders can still only be crossed at a few designated places , which primarily made life more difficult for the people living there .
Now that has ended too , and the borders - as Hungarian democrats have wanted for many decades - have ' turned into thin air ' .
From now on we shall also find it natural that the people who live near the border can go across into another country just as naturally as from , let 's say , Budapest to Budakeszi by car , by the number 22 bus or on foot using footpaths .

Complete freedom of movement without checks is particularly important for people belonging to the same nation who live on both sides of the border .
Recently we have not adopted much legislation that is more important than this , and I am proud that I can be part of this wonderful process !
EUROMED ( debate )
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on preparations for the Euromed Ministerial Conference on Migration .
Before handing over to the Council and then the Commission I would ask Members to adhere strictly to their speaking time , for the small leeway that we had has now been used up .
It is true that the previous debate was an important one .
In theory , if everyone observes their speaking time we shall be fine .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Mr President , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , the first Euromed Ministerial Conference on Migration will be held in Santa Eulália , in the Algarve , Portugal , between 18 and 19 November .
Said like this , it seems the most banal of statements , but it is not .
We have managed to organise this high-level ministerial conference after this was defined as a priority by our Heads of State and Government in November 2005 .
That was nearly two years ago , on the occasion of the 10th anniversary of the Barcelona Process Summit , when the growing importance of migration issues within our Euro-Mediterranean Partnership was recognised .
Subsequently , as some of you will certainly remember , we had occasion in Rabat , Tripoli to reaffirm our common political agenda .
We did this realistically and lucidly , in the Council 's opinion .
There are now , on both sides of the Mediterranean region , sizeable migrant communities which play a very important role in our societies .
We have a duty to give new impetus to the Partnership which can take advantage of the existence of these vigorous communities .
The complexity and significance of migration issues mean that everyone needs to tackle these , both countries of origin and countries of transit and destination .
At this first conference in the Algarve , the Council feels that the debate should be focused on the most pressing issues and only on these , with a step-by-step approach to these issues .
The main items on the agenda will be the priority areas agreed at the Ministerial Meeting in Tampere , namely immigration and development , legal migration and the fight against illegal migration .
These areas cover such important subjects as the framework for migrants ' remittances , the new challenge of micro-credit , the opportunities that we are creating in the European Union and on both sides of the Mediterranean for legal migration , the essential issue of document security raised earlier in another respect by Vice-President Frattini - security of travel documents is crucial for allowing migratory flows to develop under secure conditions - and the very important issue of return conditions , where applicable .
I believe that the preparatory work carried out in recent weeks can result in a positive conclusion which bodes well for the debate to be held in the Algarve .
There is a clear determination on both sides to find positive solutions and concrete measures and to agree and implement these measures .
In this respect , the Council informs the European Parliament of its conviction that the conference will reach agreement on concrete measures that will enable us to take our Partnership forward .
We hope that these efforts will result in a final statement which , due to the careful process of preparation , will receive ministerial approval in the Algarve .
This statement must unequivocally define the main priorities and will also determine the specific projects to be implemented in the short term .
We therefore consider that this initiative is developing in a positive framework and will prove to be inspiring and a significant moment in our Euro-Mediterranean Partnership .
This is the Council 's duty and also the result that we want , and it is fully within our reach .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , improving migration management in the Mediterranean region will certainly be one of the priorities for the EU and its Euromed partners .
Too many people are drowning , and we are not benefiting sufficiently from the potential that well-managed migration can bring .
At the summit in 2005 , which was just mentioned , the Euromed Heads of State and Government adopted a work programme that set goals for cooperation on migration , social integration , justice and security .
Now , thanks to the excellent initiative taken by the Portuguese Presidency , ministers responsible for migration will have the opportunity to take the next steps in making the cooperation more concrete .
It promises to be a big milestone .
I welcome the Presidency 's emphasis on concrete operational outcomes from the conference , because our citizens want to see very concrete results .
The three themes for this meeting are well balanced and fully in line with the global approach .
First of all , legal migration : we live in a world of increasing mobility , and well-managed migration is in the interests of all partners .
The European Union needs migration in full respect of the law .
The need for workers in many Member States of the EU is already evident , for example , in agriculture , health care and tourism .
However , the European Union needs to be able to manage and integrate these migrants .
We need to match skills better than in the past and we have to prepare migrants for their life in the EU and their eventual return if their migration is temporary or circular in nature .
No migratory strategy is possible unless a European policy towards integrating migrants who live and work in the EU is in full respect of the law .
We will be discussing how to use the European Integration Fund that , for the first time , is available in the EU , thanks to a proposal made a year and a half ago by the Commission and endorsed by the Council and this Parliament .
We need to make Europe more attractive to legal migrants .
Our recent proposal for a European ' Blue Card ' for highly skilled migrants is the first example and relevant to the Euromed context .
Next year 's legislative initiatives for unskilled and seasonal migrants and remunerated trainees will follow .
The proposals to launch discussions on these matters with our Euromed partners seem to me logical and timely .
The second point is migration and development .
In order to be successful in managing migration , we must also address the main roots of migration , such as economic disparity , lack of career opportunities , instability , poor governance etc .
Good cooperation with partner countries and detailed knowledge of the situation on the ground in terms of labour needs , skilled shortages and capacity-building requirements are essential to this effort .
That is why ministers will discuss with the Commission the concrete proposals on migrant remittances and how they could be made more productive for development - a debate that is to be welcomed .
The third area of discussion is illegal migration , because to be comprehensive we must also tackle illegal migration and protect European external borders .
Our Euromed partners are countries of destination , transit and origin .
We should aim to establish cooperation to prevent people drowning at sea .
At the Euromed Conference we will be talking with ministers about cooperation and a possible new role for Frontex in search and rescue activities , not only in patrolling and the return of illegal migrants .
In doing so , we need to ensure that we respect our obligations when it comes to international protection and human rights .
We would support a development whereby Frontex becomes a tool of support for third countries in their efforts to better manage migration and control their borders by fully respecting international obligations .
We are looking forward to this ministerial meeting .
Migration is a subject of vital interest to us all , and that raises strong passions at Member State and Community level .
It is no different in our partner countries .
However , working together is the only way to move forward .
I would say cooperation alone is no longer sufficient .
We need partnership based on shared goals and on equality of all partners .
We need political packages , including measures to improve both the movement of honest people and respect of national and European laws , and to increase local growth rates in the origin countries .
Finally , I believe that the ministers will be successful in identifying concrete areas for cooperation .
The Commission stands ready to support the implementation process , including in financial terms .
We are committed to supporting such actions through the MEDA Programme , as well as the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument and the new thematic programmes .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , I certainly welcome this meeting with the Mediterranean partners .
I would , however , have preferred the Ministers for Foreign Affairs to be present , as at the Europe-Africa meeting in Rabat .
Why ?
I wanted them here to emphasise the fact that immigration must be a major issue in our relations with the countries of the southern Mediterranean .
These are neighbouring countries with vast income differences .
Many of their nationals are now working to the north of the Mediterranean and their transfer constitute an essential development issue , as has already been said .
These countries are experiencing considerable growth of their population , a population now seeking a better life in Europe .
We are suffering the effects of illegal immigration from these countries , which in turn are also countries of transit for sub-Saharan emigrants .
This means that the integration of residents , the connection between immigration and development and illegal immigration are of vital importance .
Thus the ministerial meeting in the Algarve has plenty of work to do .
We discussed immigration in the House recently : I am referring to the Klich and Moreno reports .
I trust that due consideration will be given to them in the discussions .
I would just like to make a few comments in this respect .
The first is the need to ensure that the southern countries cooperate closely with us to control migratory flows and to encourage them with what I would call ' positive conditionality ' .
The phenomenon of immigration is much easier to control where there is political will to do so .
Results are achieved if a neighbour really wishes to cooperate .
Secondly , illegal immigration is still very much a current issue .
We must prevent illegal immigrants arriving by sea ; these immigrants are also risking their lives .
There are even children , victims of the activities of those who deal unscrupulously in human lives .
The Mediterranean countries must be asked to sign and ratify the two Protocols to the UN Convention against Transnational Organised Crime in relation to trafficking in persons .
Thirdly , I must reiterate the need to draw up readmission agreements .
This has been done with Russia , Ukraine and Moldova , so why has it not yet been done with Morocco after so many years ?
What is happening with Algeria ?
I wish the Euromed Conference every success , Mr President .
I hope that the participants secure specific commitments and solid agreements that will actually be implemented and not end up as a mere juxtaposition of mutual wishes not subsequently followed up in practice .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Monsieur le Président , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , scientists claim that almost two million years ago climate change led to the first large-scale migration from Africa to Europe .
In our age , although climate change may have something to do with it , poverty and a dearth of freedom and opportunities are still the main reasons why large numbers of emigrants risk their lives for a better deal on our continent .
The challenge we face as Europeans is to make immigration a genuine part of development for both countries of origin and countries of destination , and have development make its contribution to reducing illegal immigration .
This is why we must work alongside countries of origin and transit towards true mobility for a workforce with rights and obligations , not a workforce of slaves .
I therefore wish to reiterate that we need dialogue , cooperation and solidarity to build a cohabitation space between the north and south of the Mediterranean .
Therefore we wholeheartedly welcome this Euromed Summit in accordance with the Ministerial Conferences in Rabat and Tripoli .
Dialogue between countries of origin and transit and European states receiving immigrants must be institutionalised in order to provide a cornerstone for a genuine association based on development .
Ladies and gentlemen , I wish to take a look at a number of areas that could be examined during the summit .
Immigrants must enter Europe and work there in full respect of the law .
This means that initiatives such as the Blue Card directive constitute a necessary step , but this is not sufficient .
It must be enhanced by a directive applicable to less highly skilled immigrants and accompanied by measures to increase circular migration , genuine circular migration that prevents a brain drain and allows returning emigrants to carry through vital projects in their own countries , with the proper social and economic conditions to do so .
The Euromed space must be an area of prosperity , freedom and development .
We must continue to explore , as Spain is now doing with a number of these countries , the possibility of hiring and training workers at origin by creating workshop schools and vocational training facilities there .
Ladies and gentlemen , let us send a clear message through information campaigns on the chance of emigrating and working legally in Europe , and a warning as to the futile risks of illegal emigration to prevent thousands of young people from falling into the hands of mafias and risking their lives in ramshackle boats or canoes .
Finally , I wish to ask for particular attention to be paid at the summit to the most vulnerable emigrants , women and children , especially unaccompanied children .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , these matters will be discussed at a meeting to be held here in Parliament from 6 to 8 December at the initiative of the ALDE Group and in conjunction with the transnational Radicals .
I think we need a new way forward here .
Perhaps I am being presumptuous but I appeal to you personally , ladies and gentlemen of the presidency-in-office , Commissioner Frattini and even you , Mr President , not to let your institutions take their eyes off the ball .
The issue under discussion , neighbourhood policy , this laudable new initiative , will undoubtedly become bogged down in bureaucracy like so many others : Lisbon , but also Barcelona and all the rest .
President Prodi said a good deal when unveiling the neighbourhood policy ; he talked about everything apart from the institutions .
No , the problem lies elsewhere !
You , Mr Frattini , said that we need to do more in our area of work .
That is not the traditional problem ; we are sufficiently up to speed .
On the other side of the Mediterranean , however , there is a need for entrepreneurship , of the kind Israel has devoted to its desert areas over a lengthy period .
My time is nearly up , so I would really urge you to note the date of this meeting , and to bear in mind that the problem , the sticking-point , is partnership ; the challenge is membership .
Europe itself would not have come into being if it had been confined to partnership , as some wanted at the time .
The problem is that our Europe has limits .
Sultan Hassan II pointed out the solution in 1987 ; let us now pursue it in the face of Europe 's blindness .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , as everyone has said , including those speaking this morning , migration is a priority for the European Union and for Euromed relations .
It is a major issue for those people who are often forced to leave a homeland that has been devastated by poverty , desertification , floods , war and so on .
Will the Euromed Ministerial Conference be equal to the task ?
Nothing could be less sure .
The preparatory documents are hopelessly lacking in substance .
This is hardly surprising since we know that none of the organisations on the ground - including those that are actually confronted every day with the situation facing migrants who are either in transit , aimlessly wandering or at risk of their life afloat on the Mediterranean - not a single one of them has been involved in the preparations , not even the HCR .
Preconclusions mean turning a blind eye to the right of asylum , to the illegal detention of migrants and the respect for their rights , whether they happen to be legitimate or not , to the unacceptable violence to which they are subjected , especially women migrants , to the rights of minors and to the criminalisation of giving aid to migrants and migrant families .
This blindness is total when it comes to meeting the Union 's international commitments and the agreements that have to implemented or ratified : it is the Geneva Convention for some , and for others , which means all the countries of the European Union , it is the Convention on the Protection of the Rights of Migrant Workers and their Families .
Where do we really hope we are going with such a Euro-Mediterranean policy , with such a clear absence of demands when it comes to nations ' shared rights and obligations ?
Where is the risk ?
The risk is that of having a smoke-screen of handpicked legal migrations behind which we find sustained and massive rights ' violations for all the others .
If it is trying to spare the more sensitive souls by giving up on a really ambitious policy then the conference is doing its best to be a real waste of time .
From the word go it would provide pre-justification for the proliferation of bilateral agreements of the Italy-Libya kind , signed on the sly , which violate the principle of the withholding of removal and do so with complete impunity .
It is not too late to act .
Invite the HCR , invite a representative from the NGOs , start out again with the initial document put forward by the countries of the southern Mediterranean , which is much more ambitious , and the conference may just turn out to be a positive and significant milestone .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the forthcoming Euromed Ministerial Conference is without doubt important , complex and a matter of urgency in view of the tragedies we are witnessing in our seas on a daily basis .
I nevertheless think it is a shame that there has been no involvement of NGOs , which in fact have a great deal of experience with migration issues , including for example projects such as micro-finance .
Last weekend a meeting of parliamentarians , displaced persons , refugees and NGOs took place in Volterra , where we launched a Charter on the right of asylum and refugees , a topic which I believe is missing from the Ministerial Conference .
On that occasion we drew a clear distinction between refugees and migrants , asserting the rights of both groups : the former sanctioned by the Geneva Convention of 1951 and the latter by the International Convention on the rights of migrant workers and their families , which I think has been ratified by just five of the 37 countries participating in the Barcelona Process .
I therefore hope that the Commission and the Council will endeavour to ascertain what the obstacles are and urge ratification .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Thank you , Mr President .
Mr Magalhães stated that the Euromed meeting on 18 and 19 November would be the first meeting by Euromed on immigration .
Illegal immigration to Europe is indeed a massive problem for many European countries , posing particular problems for those countries with coastlines within easy reach of North Africa .
Great Britain has its particular problems with immigration , too .
Illegal - and legal - immigration to Britain is now uncontrolled , unlimited and indiscriminate , in the true meaning of that word .
Britain has a massive problem with illegal immigration , but currently the biggest problem is caused by legal immigration from the European Union .
The rate of immigration to Britain , as far as anybody can tell , is running at about 500 000-600 000 people per annum , with a net change to population of about 200 000 people per annum , adding one million people to the population every five years .
Britain is one of the most densely populated countries in the world , and England , taken on its own , is right at the top of the league of densely populated countries .
Immigration to Britain on this level is simply unsustainable .
It is putting unbearable strains on infrastructure and public services .
It would be possible to control immigration into Britain by taking some very basic measures .
None of these measures would be possible while we are a member of the EU : they would all be illegal .
The solution for Britain , if it wants to control its immigration , is simply to leave the European Union .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to take a few moments to express my support , our support , for Commissioner Frattini and to say emphatically to him that the attacks made on him in connection with the issue of Romanies in Italy are absolutely intolerable .
We all know the values that the Commissioner is defending , the values associated with the defence of human rights , the values that are those of the European Union , and on these values , Commissioner , you are irreproachable .
To return to Euromed , I welcome the convening of the Euro-Mediterranean Ministerial Conference on migration , which is to be held in the Algarve , for it will be the first of its kind , the first to be uniquely devoted to the question of migratory movements in the Euro-Mediterranean area .
The subject of migratory movements is a key issue that must be placed at the centre of our dialogue , our partnership and our cooperation with the countries of the Euro-Mediterranean region , continuing on from the conferences of Rabat and Tripoli .
This is an area in which the Member States cannot act alone .
We need support and cooperation from our partner nations , which are themselves often source countries or transit countries , if our migration policy is to be made more effective .
We need to work with them to reach a consensus on the returns policy , to increase the number of agreements on readmission and together to implement a policy of intelligent codevelopment so that nationals from these countries are able to remain in their homeland and contribute towards its growth .
The question of migratory movements has a security dimension , but it also has a human dimension that should not be ignored .
This is why I would like to see respect for fundamental human rights made one of the themes of the conference .
I hope that this meeting will provide an opportunity for open and realistic exchanges , so that together we can find the most appropriate solutions for everyone concerned .
( FR ) Mr President , Minister , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am also pleased that the subject of immigration has been chosen for the next meeting of the Foreign Affairs Ministers of the Euromed zone .
I believe that until now we have failed to put in place a European policy on immigration .
We know that this is a difficult question because it affects the sovereignty of Member States and they are keen to see a very strict application of the principle of subsidiarity in this area .
We also know that the subject of immigration , or migration , is a contentious issue in our dealings with partner countries to the south , who often reproach us for tackling this problem purely as a security matter .
I thank Commissioner Frattini for having adopted a much more global approach to this question , which includes the economic and social dimensions associated with migratory movements .
Legal immigration and illegal immigration are two sides of the same coin and it is not possible to combat illegal immigration without at the same time establishing channels for legalised immigration into Europe .
I therefore welcome the Blue Card scheme , which is the European counterpart of the American Green Card scheme , and am pleased that the legal immigration channels being recommended by the Council evidently take into account Europe 's economic requirements as well as meeting the real needs of the countries of the South .
As regards the issuing of visas I believe that the Union should make this a more straightforward process , especially for students , researchers and those involved in civil society .
I think that readmission agreements , especially with Algeria and Morocco , should ensure that any returns procedure should be strictly controlled by mechanisms that guarantee the rights of migrants .
Finally , in view of the new wave of migration currently confronting us from sub-Saharan Africa , I firmly support the idea that Europe must not use the Barcelona Process to shift responsibility for managing migratory movements back to the frontiers of the Mediterranean zone because it is incapable of dealing with this matter at its own borders .
( DE ) Mr President , migration is one of the priority topics in the European Union .
The Euromed region is , in that respect , a strategically important region for us .
The Euromed ministerial conference on migration will be the first of its kind to focus solely on this issue and include the Euromed partners .
It is therefore all the more regrettable that no consultation with civil society organisations was held in advance of the conference .
It is equally regrettable that the aspect of asylum was excluded from the agenda for the ministerial conference , especially bearing in mind the hopeless situation of refugees in many parts of the southern and eastern Mediterranean due to the lack of appropriate legislation to protect them .
None of these countries , as we know , has any asylum laws .
Only a few of them recognise the UN High Commissioner for Refugees .
Libya , Syria , Lebanon and Jordan have not ratified the Geneva Convention relating to the Status of Refugees .
It is also to be regretted that the members of the Barcelona Process talk about the rights of migrants but are silent when it comes to the rights of illegal migrants .
The fact is that illegal migrants also have rights , especially when it comes to the enforceability of wages , access to education for their children , or basic medical care , especially for women migrants , where the relevant protective provisions apply .
If we want cooperation in our efforts to combat illegal migration , we must not deny or neglect one aspect : respect for the rights of migrants and refugees .
SK ) In preparing for the Euromed Ministerial Conference , which is to take place on 18 and 19 November , it is important for the Union to note that the Euromed parliamentary meeting is the only forum in which Members of the European Parliament represent the EU alongside members of national parliaments from the southern Mediterranean region , including Israel and Palestine .
I am pleased to be able to participate in the work of Euromed 's policy section , which , I believe , has a key role to play in the context of the Barcelona Process .
The topic of this meeting could not have been chosen better .
The problem of migration presents many challenges , be it development , in that migrants need information on the option of micro-credit and other types of loans , aspects of legal migration to the EU , but also the burning issue of illegal migration , which requires an urgent solution .
I welcome the fact that the EU has been deepening its relations with some of the Mediterranean countries , which are showing political will and taking steps to change .
Indeed , association agreements have already been signed with some of them .
As far as illegal migration is concerned , it is necessary to find a solution to the difficult situation caused by the arrival of thousands of unwelcome migrants , who have a serious impact on the security situation in Malta and Italy in particular , but also in some other EU Member States .
My own country has also been experiencing an influx of both legal and illegal migrants .
I am in favour of the European Union welcoming skilled migrants , whose skills , as Commissioner Frattini said , are needed and can contribute to agriculture , health care and tourism in the EU , but they must be already qualified when they are being allowed in ; unskilled migrants should not as a rule be accepted and I believe that the Blue Card scheme will also help to solve this problem .
( DE ) Madam President , Vice-President of the Commission , Mr President-in-Office , the issue of migration demonstrates very clearly to us how close Africa is to Europe .
What happens in Africa affects Europe directly .
Migration flows from the crisis areas to the south of the Mediterranean terminate in the Mediterranean countries of Southern Europe , which means , of course , that they directly affect Europe as a whole .
Africa is a continent with a wealth of talented people .
We ourselves , and Africa , must be clever and use this potential in and for Africa .
This partnership which we are striving for with Africa offers a huge opportunity .
The offer which we aim to extend from the European Union is very challenging .
It ranges from help towards self-help in the fields of security , trade and good governance to stabilisation programmes , including assistance to combat crime , the creation of training places and jobs , the offer of microcredits , and information campaigns about the opportunities for legal forms of migration and all the consequences of illegal migration and measures to combat it .
However , the European Union , at the next Summit , must also make demands .
One of these demands must be for readmission agreements with all countries in the southern Mediterranean before we launch all our action programmes , because all these aspects interact with each other and because what we want is a partnership .
I agree with Commissioner Frattini when he says that what we are talking about now is partnership and no longer about cooperation ; it is about partnership and the offer of complex packages .
The European Parliament is ready for this , the Commission supports it and so does Parliament , and Africa must be invited to use these offers in the interests of stabilising North Africa and also in the interests of the security of EU citizens .
( CS ) The Commission and Parliament have already given the green light to the proactive and , more importantly , common immigration policy , however unpopular it might be .
For a wealthy , ageing Europe , immigration is indeed a reality .
We know that illegal immigration can decrease the GDP of several countries by up to 20 % , whilst their economic growth is limited by the reduction in the number of skilled workers .
The time has come to reinforce international coordination and agree on reasonable common rules .
I trust that next week in the Algarve , the Euromed Ministerial Conference will proceed in this direction , and that it will not only debate but agree on joint steps for successful migration management and propose measures to alleviate the impact on countries of transit .
We need to agree on international obligations with third countries to protect the lives of migrants who take the risk of fleeing by sea .
As a transit region , the Mediterranean countries experience a disproportionate influx of immigrants travelling to the EU and thus require specific measures .
The forthcoming conference can be assured that Parliament takes this issue very seriously .
Our common priorities are to ensure decent detention areas for immigrants from third countries and to combat the factors that cause mass migration .
We have to protect the lives and dignity of migrants .
I would also encourage Euromed to make it clear that the Blue Card for the regulation of qualified immigrants is not a threat to Europeans ; on the contrary , it is an opportunity offered to us by globalisation .
The trade unions ' resistance to the Blue Card is an irresponsible , populist gesture , bordering on xenophobia .
It is not legal , but illegal , migration that is the cause of dumping on the European labour market .
Commissioner Frattini wants Europe to attract a skilled workforce .
We will have to woo them here from the US , where the annual influx is 55 % , compared with the meagre 5 % influx into Europe today .
I am convinced that this is the right strategy and that it is line with the EU 's position in the global context .
Legal and illegal migration are connected .
The success of a coherent , safe and common migration policy will be a test of the EU 's maturity .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Madam President , Mr Vice-President , ladies and gentlemen , the Council will take from this debate the firm belief that the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership must be developed and solidified and that it is right to hold the Ministerial Conference in Santa Eulália .
This cooperation , this Partnership - which is the new word and concept - must be based on concrete projects in order to ensure success .
There are many good reasons for this and many dramatic situations , very expressively evoked by Members of this House , which require us to change the status quo .
This will only happen if we can take a long-term view and act quickly .
We have an overall vision , a global approach , action plans and ambitious legislative proposals as mentioned here today by Vice-President Frattini .
We must take concrete steps in relation to projects , particularly in the three areas mentioned .
Firstly , in the area of migration and development , we must take steps to develop specific actions .
This is what the Ministerial Conference plans to do in the area of transfer of remittances and micro-credit .
That is why we are going to have to bring together all the actors ( which is not a decision that the Members , the Commission or the Council can take ) such as banks , the World Bank , the European Investment Bank , immigrants ' associations and civil society , in order to find specific ways of encouraging the use of financial services and reinforcing their efficiency , particularly through alternative methods for transferring money and the use of new technologies which can also really help to achieve our objectives .
We will certainly have no difficulty in setting up a Euro-Mediterranean website with full information on remittances , including the costs in order to stimulate competition and reduce these costs , which is a central objective that unites us with our partners .
As regards legal migration , we need specific initiatives in this area too .
We should like to set up a working group with representatives from the Euromed partners and other social partners in order to study in greater depth the labour situation and the needs of labour markets , to develop training actions for migrant workers before they migrate , to study the possibility of making the European Union portal accessible to all Euromed partners in the area of migration and employment , and to create job search management and information centres in the Euromed countries , naturally in accordance with national competences in this area .
We also need specific projects in the area of illegal migration .
Bearing in mind that many Euromed partners are also countries of destination and transit for migratory flows , it is important that we reinforce institutional competence in the area of the fight against illegal migration .
We must therefore also develop specific actions such as the following : firstly , we should develop document security because only this can allow the correct identification of persons and flows , more confidence and greater ease of movement ; secondly , we should develop the access of Euromed partners to Frontex training courses so that they can boost their know-how on fighting illegal migration , in accordance with all the international instruments by which we are bound , in particular the instruments on maritime search and rescue .
This could be an initial concrete step towards participation in joint actions under the coordination of Frontex .
We also need initiatives in the area of voluntary return and readmission .
An open discussion on this issue would be useful in order to consider information campaigns , identification processes , assisted voluntary return processes and the negotiation of readmission agreements with countries of origin .
These and many other points will be tackled in Santa Eulália in the Algarve .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , there may be many different opinions but one thing is absolutely certain , and I am leaving this debate with this impression : there is no alternative to this path of dialogue and effective partnership .
This is the only way to change the status quo and we are all absolutely agreed on the fact that it is essential to change the status quo .
Santa Eulália could be a very important step in this respect .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this debate has brought forth many practical suggestions as well as some interesting thoughts .
I believe that one strategic policy issue is how to progress from cooperation to a genuine partnership , so as ultimately to achieve membership of a real Euro-Mediterranean common area .
Mr Pannella 's idea is of great interest , and clearly such a strategy requires long-term thinking on our part .
Only once there is a true Euro-Mediterranean single area will there be a joint sense of belonging that prompts us to work towards the shared goal now being established .
We first had to obtain the consensus of all 27 Member States ; now we are consulting with our partners on the southern shore .
The way forward has been mapped out .
The second very practical idea , which I shall definitely take up at the Euromed meeting , is an appeal to all participants at that meeting to ensure that their respective countries ratify the existing international conventions .
Before dreaming up any new rules , let us bear in mind that very few countries have ratified and implemented some extremely important international conventions .
I am thinking , among others , about the Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings .
If there is one subject on which a convention must be ratified immediately , it is the international trafficking and trade in human beings .
The third idea comes from Mr Gaubert , to whom I am particularly grateful for emphasising the humanitarian dimension of this major debate .
We are not talking here about laws or bureaucratic matters ; we are talking about women , men and children who - as others have said - are risking and often losing their lives .
It is therefore a matter of solidarity .
I believe that showing solidarity towards people who are suffering is the keystone in building a relationship genuinely based on equal rights for our partners .
The fourth idea which I shall take away from this debate is how to move on , to put it a little bluntly , from final documents to tangible action .
We have drawn up numerous documents and , if the truth be told , we have mounted some significant practical initiatives .
We must now build on these practical activities , for example by deciding how best to use development aid funds .
Obviously , if we in the European Union have funds available to assist local development , we must also have the capacity to understand how best to spend them .
As someone said , we must for example have ways of giving positive incentives to those partners , those countries which actively cooperate in our joint strategy .
Given that there is a common strategy , known since Barcelona as the Euro-Mediterranean strategy , and given that some countries are implementing it to a greater extent than others , I think those countries should be given an incentive , some positive recognition .
This , in my opinion , is for example a meaningful way of eradicating corruption .
Corruption is one of the root causes of illegal immigration .
If there were less corruption in countries of origin , and if there were less corruption in transit countries , then many traffickers in human beings would be stopped en route to Europe and there would be more cooperation ; but that is only one example .
Finally , there is the question of taking a credible , firm stance on unlawful conduct .
Mr Magalhães emphasised this point and I fully agree : we have no credibility unless we demonstrate that unlawful conduct can be neither rewarded nor tolerated .
We must be crystal clear about this .
Some have touched on the subject of readmission agreements in this context .
Readmission agreements lend credibility to our policy because people who fail to abide by our laws must be repatriated , with all due respect for their individual rights .
However , there is a political point here : states of origin which take back their fellow citizens cannot function as the European Union 's border guards .
I am putting this a little bluntly : they are not prepared to cooperate with us solely on security grounds .
For that reason , one topic I shall raise at this conference is how our policy on visas and the movement of persons can be used as a political incentive for those countries , for example in terms of greater mobility for students and business people .
Let us use Europe 's visa policy to facilitate such freedom of movement , thereby sending out a positive political signal to the states with which we are seeking readmission agreements .
We did so with the Western Balkans , and in my opinion the time has now come to envisage the same general approach for the Mediterranean .
The debate is closed .
Regulations governing political parties at European level and the rules regarding their funding ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Leinen , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on the regulations governing political parties at European level and the rules regarding their funding - C6-0202 / 2007 - .

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as you know , on 27 June this year the Commission presented a proposal , based on Article 191 of the EC Treaty , which aims to improve and adapt Regulation ( EC ) No 2004 / 2003 on the status and funding of political parties at European level .
This proposal was followed by a report which evaluated the application of the Regulation .
The corresponding resolution was adopted by the European Parliament on 23 March 2006 .
The Commission 's proposal introduces a new element : the possibility of funding European political foundations bearing in mind that these have an important role to play in underpinning and promoting the activities and objectives of the political parties at European level .
Since the political foundations are closely affiliated with the European political parties , it is proposed that they must submit their application for funding through the political party at European level with which they are linked , under the same legal basis as applies to the latter 's funding , in other words under Article 191 of the EC Treaty .
I know that the political parties represented in this House are forming or have already formed foundations at European level .
The Council looks favourably on the possibility of providing Community financial support for the activities of these foundations under very clear rules which will allow , among other aspects , a clear distinction to be made between the areas of intervention of the parties which must be complementary and not overlapping .
The second main aim of the Commission 's proposal is to revise the financial provisions which govern the funding of political parties at European level in light of the experience acquired in the meantime .
To this end , the Commission proposes , among other measures , two derogations from the no-profit rule laid down in Article 109 of the Financial Regulation .
The first measure involves the possibility of carrying over up to 25 % of annual total income from one year to the first quarter of the following year to enable the parties to better respond to changing political circumstances and priorities .
The second measure aims to allow political parties at European level to build financial reserves by saving income generated by the parties themselves in excess of a new reduced minimum co-funding level of 15 % .
I must also highlight that it is proposed to establish clearly that appropriations received from the EU budget may also be used for the financing of campaigns conducted by the political parties at European level in the context of European Parliament elections , provided that this does not constitute a direct or indirect financing of national political parties or their candidates .
In the Council , the proposal was initially assessed three times by the General Affairs Group , in September and October of this year , and was generally favourably received by the delegations .
However , some delegations expressed concerns about the proposed legal basis and the derogations from budgetary discipline .
An opinion was requested on these issues from the Legal Service of the Council .
The latter considered that the derogations from the no-profit rule laid down in Article 109 ( 2 ) of Council Regulation No 1605 / 2002 could only be enshrined in a separate regulation based on Article 279 of the EC Treaty and intended to introduce these derogations into the Financial Regulation itself by amending it .
This opinion led to the proposal being split into two legal acts and the consultation of the European Parliament and the Court of Auditors .
On 17 October 2007 , therefore recently , Coreper II debated for the first time a compromise text presented by the Portuguese Presidency and the opinion of the Legal Service of the Council .
A week later , on 24 October 2007 , Coreper II reached agreement on two points : firstly , the splitting of the proposal into two legal acts , one regulation based on Article 279 of the EC Treaty containing the provisions amending the Financial Regulation and one regulation containing the other provisions of the proposal based on Article 191 of the EC Treaty , and secondly , consultation of the European Parliament and the Court of Auditors on the amendment of Article 109 of Regulation No 1605 / 2002 in accordance with Article 279 of the EC Treaty .
This consultation occurred immediately .
The two compromise texts resulting from the split were assessed by the General Affairs Group on 9 November 2007 , therefore very recently .
As a result , I am very pleased to announce that the General Affairs Group , which met last Friday , has confirmed the existence of broad agreement among the national delegations on the issues covered by the two regulations resulting from the split .
In essence , I would repeat that there is no significant disagreement between the three institutions .
The Commission , Parliament and the Council all agree on the essentials with regard to European political foundations and the amendment of the provisions governing the functioning of European political parties .
The legal basis issue was , and is , strictly a legal issue and it was not , and is not , the Council 's intention to prevent agreement between the three institutions .
I can confirm , on behalf of the Council , that we want the two regulations resulting from the split to be adopted by the end of this year so that they can enter into force on 1 January 2008 .
To this end , I propose that Parliament postpones the vote on your opinion planned for this week so that , by means of the appropriate contacts , we can reach agreement at first reading on the regulation based on Article 191 of the EC Treaty , under the codecision procedure .
In that event , a Parliament opinion on the amendment of the Financial Regulation should be adopted as soon as possible .
We have also asked the Court of Auditors to act promptly .
We have little time but , in our opinion , there is enough time to adopt the two regulations under the conditions required by Parliament , the Commission and the Council .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , from the period of reflection we learnt that there is a clear demand and opportunity for measures to reinforce and expand the political dialogue .
I have always said that if we want to create a European public sphere , then we also need to create more of a European political culture , and this particular issue is absolutely crucial to doing so .
Certainly , there is no single magic solution to bridge the gap between European politics and our citizens and there is no simple way to meet the democratic aspirations of citizens and their desire to be more actively involved .
These aspirations must be promoted by a very wide range of initiatives with common purposes to ensure the broadest possible participation of citizens , including , not least , young people , and , I would add women , in the democratic life of the Union .
The activities of European political parties , together with the creation of European political foundations , is part and parcel of building this real European public sphere , where different opinions can challenge each other and the citizens can better understand the challenges at stake and make informed choices .
Political debate and political controversy are part of democracy and we hope that this will also help to increase the turnout for the European Parliament elections .
I am happy to say that the Commission and Parliament have always agreed on this issue .
The Commission was able to respond quickly to Parliament 's request and our proposal was also strongly supported by Parliament 's Committee on Constitutional Affairs .
On 25 October , I stated before this House my concerns that Coreper had decide to follow a route which departed from that of the Commission and Parliament , and these concerns were shared by Members , including President Pöttering and Mr Leinen .
But I also expressed my hope that the key objective of the Council , Parliament and the Commission would continue to be the same : the approval of the substance of our proposal before the end of this year .
Three weeks later , and having heard what the Presidency stated , I can only welcome the recent developments and express my satisfaction that we are on a common route again .
The Council has been listening and the working group last Friday unanimously confirmed the full substance of our proposal .
This means that we can now move on .
But , even though the agreement reached in Council is an important step forward and very positive news , this is not yet the end of the process .
We need to finalise the details in order to allow for a speedy adoption and entry into force of this regulation .
Even if the splitting of our proposal does not ultimately affect its substance , it entails a separate , more complicated legislative procedure and an opinion from the Court of Auditors , which , I hope , will be delivered in time .
The schedule is very challenging and tight .
I would like to thank Mr Leinen for his committed work on this file , and all the other Members involved .
I also want to thank President Pöttering , the Conference of Presidents and the political groups , who played an important role in preparing the ground for an agreement on this issue .
So , Madam President , President of the Council , Mr Leinen ,
( PT ) We can move forward together .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , Madam Vice-President of the Commission , President-in-Office , colleagues , ladies and gentlemen , the new Lisbon Treaty is the guiding vision for parliamentary democracy at EU level .
For parliamentary democracy , you need political parties .
You need political parties to represent the interests of society and offer citizens a variety of candidates and manifestos to choose from at elections .
In all our 27 Member States , we have parties which stand in the national elections ; what we need to do now is to enable these European parties to perform their democratic work at the European level as well .
We want to ensure that in advance of the European elections too , there is a range of active political families for our citizens to choose from , which are capable of mobilising the electorate and telling voters where they are planning to take them .
We want citizens to be able to decide on the nature of the Europe that they are voting for and give them a real choice .
The first Regulation on the statute and financing of European political parties , which we adopted back in 2004 , was a resounding success .
We now have ten political families which have registered , and this demonstrates the breadth of the political spectrum in the European Union .
This revision of the Regulation is now designed to inject some flexibility into these democratic structures and expand them at the same time .
In most of our countries , we have not only political parties but also political foundations .
These are vehicles for deeper analyses of social trends and are also a forum for debate which extends beyond the party membership .
These foundations have proved their worth in many countries .
They do good work and so it is all the more necessary to create the opportunity to conduct this debate , this discourse , about Europe at European level too , across national borders .
I therefore welcome the fact that this instrument , which is additional to the political parties themselves , has also received Council 's blessing .
Ladies and gentlemen , no political party 's agenda is built around the financial year .
It responds to political events , and so political parties must be treated differently from other associations .
That is the purpose of this new Regulation : to inject some flexibility into financial management .
We have three objectives here : firstly , we want the possibility of extending the financial year by three months on the expenditure side to enable parties to respond to political events .
Secondly , we do not want parties to have to spend all their cash at the end of the year .
We would like them to be able to use their own resources , membership contributions and donations to accumulate reserves which can be spent in response to key events in politics and especially , of course , on the European elections .
Finally , in order to assist the smaller political families in particular but also to get the European political foundations up and running , we need different arrangements regarding the proportion of grants and own resources .
We envisage setting own resources at 15 % and subsidies at 85 % in the new Regulation .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Council has decided to divide the legal basis .
We argued that this was not necessary .
Unfortunately , this will result in a loss of transparency , because citizens will now need to look in two places for the legal basis for this new Regulation .
However , we do not wish to prolong the disagreement over legal issues .
That would simply drag out the process and distract attention from the real objective of this Regulation .
In the interests of the European political parties and their preparations for the 2009 European election campaign , we ought to concentrate on issues of substance and conclude this matter before the end of the year .
I am very pleased to hear that the substance of this Regulation has met with widespread agreement .
I think we should now do everything possible in order to wrap up this important piece of legislation under the Portuguese Presidency so that we have a legal basis for political foundations and a basis for more flexible financial management in the 2008 budget year .
Transitional arrangements for this will be required from the Council , as we originally proposed in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs .
Madam Vice-President of the Commission , I would like to thank you for taking the initiative on behalf of the Commission .
I am grateful , too , to the Portuguese Presidency for its genuine commitment to this issue , and to Mr Leitão , with whom I did a great deal of work .
I would also like to thank the Committee on Budgets and the Committee on Budgetary Control , Mrs Guy-Quint and Mrs Mathieu , for their valuable input in their reports , which introduces more transparency and more control over the allocation of these resources .
We are well on track , and I hope we will get a result by the end of the year .
Madam President , Minister , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in presenting my opinion on budgetary control I highlighted the four requirements that seem essential to me : improving the control mechanisms and thereby increasing the powers of the internal and external auditors and of the authorising officer ; setting up a complementary checking procedure ; making a clear separation between the financial resources of the political parties and those of the foundations ; and finally , clarifying the rules on the funding of campaigns for European elections .
I am glad that the Council is accepting the famous 25 % rule that Ingeborg Gräßle proposed last year , which the Council had rejected .
We fully understand that the agreement given this year contained a significantly derogatory element that related to this report .
However , a certain hesitancy as to the legal basis of the report leads us to doubt the outcome of the vote at the conclusion of this sitting , which is regrettable .
Parliament was very quick in drawing up this report and in delivering the opinions .
It would be a pity if the Council 's decision to split the report into two parts means that we lose time .
We would therefore like to see it adopted quickly before the end of the year . Thank you .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , first of all , may I express my sincere congratulations and thanks to Mr Jo Leinen , the rapporteur , for doing a very good job .
This report is one which my Group can fully support and we also endorse the amendments .
The report turns political parties at European level , and the new instrument of political foundations , into effective tools to increase participation by Europe 's citizens and boost Europe 's democratic legitimacy .
The referenda in France and the Netherlands showed that it is important to rebuild the trust of citizens , including via the political parties and the foundations .
It is also true that the financial rules need to be adapted to the rapidly changing needs of the political parties .
Transparency , of course , must be safeguarded as well .
That is why the European Parliament will be providing information on the funding disbursed to parties and foundations every financial year , and this will be available on our website .
Another good innovation is that the role of political parties in the context of the European elections is finally recognised .
Only if Europe 's parties can be actively involved in elections to the European Parliament will they become genuine players of the European polis and contribute to the formation of a European consciousness , thereby helping to overcome the democratic deficit which exists .
Another important component is the promotion of political foundations .
Their work in the field of political information and education complements what the political parties do .
These foundations have a special role to play in deepening the educational process and enhancing knowledge about the European Union , thus reducing the distance between citizens and the European Union .
I am convinced that foundations can boost the active participation of citizens in European political life , and they can also play an important role in the training of tomorrow 's politicians .
The legalistic thinking of the Council is rather hard to fathom , but as Helmut Kohl always said , the most important thing is the outcome .
That is why I am in favour of this report , and I would like to thank everyone concerned for their commitment and cooperation .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Madam President , my Group supports this proposal , and thinks this is a practical set of adjustments to the current legislation and that it is actually useful that European political parties should have the ability to do research and so on through their foundations and have the flexibility to carry money over from one year to the next and so on .
There was the issue of the legal base : Parliament and the Commission agreed , and the Council disagreed with us on that .
But it is the substance that is more important than the legal base , and I dare even say that it is better to have legal certainty than to face a challenge later on this matter in the courts .
So we are happy with that and we are happy to seek first-reading agreements with the Council by postponing the vote .
Let me just add though that , for the reasons the rapporteur himself said , the European political parties are important because they express the political choices we face as a European Union .
The media too often focuses only on the Council , and especially the European Council , as if it is some sort of gladiatorial combat between countries .
Did Britain win today or did the French ?
Did the Germans make a deal with the Italians ?
Yet when those very same subjects come to this Parliament , you rarely see all the Members from one country voting one way and all the Members of another country voting another way , because we are making political choices - policy choices .
Do we want higher environmental standards but at greater cost , or not ?
There will be people in every country on both sides of the argument , and the same with most of the choices we face .
Political groups and political parties highlight the fact that it is political , policy choices we are making in our Union , not a combat between one national viewpoint and another national viewpoint .
That is why they need to be strengthened in their work ; that will help citizens have a grasp for the sort of issues that we are dealing with ; that will make our Union work better .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , I should like to thank the Council Presidency for the progress that it is making in approaching an agreement at first reading .
I trust that the Court of Auditors will be able to stir itself with unexpected alacrity to bring its opinion before us .
Fertile political thought is a necessary ingredient of a pluralistic , lively parliamentary democracy and this will be encouraged and stimulated by the measure before us to establish party-political foundations .
It will encourage party politics to grow at European level and nascent European political parties to grow in self-confidence and to get stuck into campaigns in a purposeful way .
I have to say that we have been pirouetting around the problem of political parties for several years because , of course , they are prospective rivals and competitors for the old national political parties , which , I sometimes think , will be the final citadel defended in the interests of national sovereignty .
So we should proceed fast to develop platforms at European level to support and promote post-national politics which truly reflect the paradigms of the 21st century .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , I welcome the work currently under way on sensible regulation of the funding of political parties at European level .
It is very necessary and I commend Mr Leinen on his report .
We are also confronted with a broader problem , however .
This concerns the consequences of the funding of political parties on the quality of democracy both at Union level and at the level of individual Member States .
For legal reasons , the party I represent was denied budget funding for some time during an election period .
I know how very difficult it is to face a political opposition that has money when you have none .
One of the largest political parties in Poland almost ceased to exist recently , threatened by the withdrawal of subsidies due to minor financial errors .
Money is important , but it should not be the only factor determining the nature of the political scene , as is sometimes the case .
Clearly , this is a matter for a separate debate that should be held in this House .
After all , democracy cannot be dependent on funding alone .
on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , the citizens ' interest in the EU is still modest , to say the least , and this is due , among other things , to its intransparent structures , incomprehensible decisions , and a lack of media interest .
Europe 's existing political parties have made little impact in terms of reducing this deficit , and it is not at all clear that they are actually a suitable vehicle by which to fulfil the citizens ' desire for more codetermination .
That , in my view , can only be achieved through more direct democracy .
Repackaging the cosmetically enhanced EU Constitution as incomprehensibly as possible after a deal done behind closed doors and avoiding referenda is also certainly detrimental to the envisaged and much-vaunted objective of generating enthusiasm for the EU among the citizens .
In light of these circumstances , European parties and their associated foundations are highly unlike to boost EU-phoria among citizens , but if they manage to improve debate at European level and communication with citizens , and represent their interests , too , we will at least have achieved something .
However , their financing must be clear and transparent and , in my view , this must include auditing by independent bodies .

Madam President , let us be clear about Mr Leinen 's report : it is not about democracy , it is about propaganda , it is about using the taxes collected from our reluctant citizens to drive forward a European project about which they are increasingly uneasy .
The Danes voted against Maastricht , the Irish voted against Nice , the Swedes against the euro , the French and Dutch against the Constitution , yet their taxes will be used to promote integration .
Today in this Chamber , President Sarkozy spoke of European democracy , but across our diverse Member States the common public opinion necessary for representative democracy does not exist .
Democracy at European level is a fraud and a delusion .
By reserving funding for pan-European parties , Mr Leinen explicitly excludes Euro-sceptic parties which do not seek pan-European status , so taxpayers ' money will be channelled to integrationist parties and denied to others .
In a Europe that talks about democracy , this is a crime against the people .
( ES ) Madam President , today the President of France spoke to the House about the need for dialogue and debate .
I think that is what we all learnt during the period of reflection , as Vice-President Wallström said .
For dialogue and debate , however , we need instruments , and some of the most important and indeed essential instruments - although not the only instruments - are political parties .
European political parties , like national political parties , shape the will of a people .
That must also be their role in the representative institutions in Europe .
Talking about political parties at European level without talking about funding would be pointless .
We must look at how those political parties , so necessary for shaping the people 's will , are funded .
I think that the most important issue in relation to political parties at European level - and also at national level , but it is the European level that is of interest to us here - is that financing ought to be responsible , clear and transparent .
That is what is important to the taxpayers : that their money is well spent and that there are institutions that take responsibility for the way in which their money is used .
I believe that the people of Europe , although they may have some doubts or hesitations over the direction Europe ought to take , have no doubt that their future lies in Europe .
Here in Parliament , I always hear even those who are most opposed to European ideas claiming that they are European and are not against Europe .
To go back to what I was saying at the start , and quote Mr Sarkozy once again : debate is necessary , and for there to be debate we must create the instruments needed to organise it .
I therefore welcome the report by Mr Leinen , which takes on board the Commission proposal , and I also thank you , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , my good friend Mr Lobo Antunes , for your proposal to us .
The European People 's Party will not discuss the basis here .
If the regulation needs to be divided in two to find a solution that is acceptable to all , then so be it .
You can count on our support .
- ( EL ) Madam President , I am glad that another fellow Member will be listening to the discussion , particularly on this issue , in our beautiful language .
It seems to me that we could use political parties here , which are valuable tools .
Alas , we are keeping these valuable tools hidden away in our institutional cupboard where they are in danger of getting rusty .
Most if not all of us are agreed on the democratic role that political parties should play in Europe , but I think we should also agree that they have not been playing this role as yet .
This is because today 's parties , as several speakers have said , are not really political parties .
They are loose confederations of parties , as Dimitris Tsatsos , my teacher and rapporteur at the time , said in his report as long ago as 1996 .
We have no real political parties , and this discussion is a good opportunity for us to see if we can establish real political parties at EU level .
I have two comments on specific topics in the report under discussion .
The report makes two significant advances .
As we have said , it does not solve all the political problems , but there are two major advances .
One is that now we recognise how the political institutions operate , an element of thought comes into our discussion .
A vital element of ideological ferment has been introduced .
One of the very problems of democracy in the EU is precisely that we do not engage in rigorous and serious political thought , and these institutes can supply this need .
The second major advance is transparency .
This is especially evident in the transparency rules laid down for the parties themselves , but above all , I would say , with the new Article 9 ( b ) on the transparency rules for Parliament itself .
Let me conclude with a brief comment on the issue of the fragmentation of the legal basis .
I understand that there are technical problems here .
Personally , I regret this fragmentation .
The point is , if we all agree that from an economic point of view independence and transparency are integral parts of the political mechanism itself , would a single legal mechanism not be far more powerful ?
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am favourably disposed towards this resolution in that it assists the democratic life of Europe .
The Group of the European Left , which is about to hold its second congress , have always said that globalisation , and also this Europe of ours , has seen a coming-together of markets , business interests and red-tape , while democracy has lagged behind .
That is all well and good for strong powers , but not for those of us who believe in a different type of society catering for the needs of its weakest members .
This was the role of mass parties in the past .
Today there is a fresh challenge , namely to establish parties capable of coping with new levels of conflict and decision-making ; parties which rebuild democratic participation and a democratic role for Parliament , outside the system of broad coalitions and intergovernmental cooperation that stifles democratic debate .
There is of course a need for transparency in the use of funds , but politics cannot be the sole prerogative of the rich .
( ES ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish first of all to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Leinen .
Mr Leinen is one of the fathers of this Regulation and a tireless defender of political parties , with whom I have shared the odd battle to secure agreements , one might say .
Ladies and gentlemen , this proposal could not and cannot be the prisoner of battles between the legal services of the Community institutions .
We must reach an agreement sooner rather than later because , if we fail to do so , the only victims in this conflict will be the political parties , who play a vital role in bringing the EU nearer to the citizens and encouraging them to get involved in politics so that they feel part of a common political project and a political future .
The parties also represent the transnational dimension of the EU 's process of political integration .
This report shows Parliament 's flexibility and operational capacity .
This House cannot be accused of failing to cooperate to reach an agreement at first reading before the end of 2007 .
Ladies and gentlemen , I wish to set out three ideas , three basic improvements to this project , which we welcome and which will ensure the development of the parties and the foundations .
The first is the vital role of European political parties in elections to the European Parliament , reflected in the possibility of using the financial allocation for European election campaigns .
The second is the independent management of European political parties , with the transfer of annual reserves , and the possibility of creating reserves from own resources over several years .
Thirdly and finally , encouraging political foundations on a European scale enhances the activity of the European political parties .
The foundations are a vital instrument for extending the action of the political parties and strengthening links to citizens , and they will play a major role in terms of information , debate and political training .
( FI ) Madam President , our Group is divided on this .
I represent those who do not believe that the Europarties make for greater democracy .
They are parties of parties and with them power gets further away from the people .
They deliver centralised policies decided by the big parties in the big countries .
They can use Europarty funds to spread centralised propaganda in the European elections at national level .
They receive Europarty funds to promote European awareness among the people .
The aim of centralised power is to make people adopt a more sympathetic attitude towards it - to make them submissive .
A new agent of propaganda is now being proposed in the shape of a legal basis for special European foundations , reducing the extent to which the Europarties are self-funded and allowing them to escape compliance with the Financial Regulations to which others are obliged to conform .
Some in our Group say no to all this .
( DA ) Madam President , I am not an anti-federalist .
I believe that federalism is a good form of government in Germany , Canada , Switzerland and the USA . However , it requires a people , and there is still not a European people that is prepared for a European democracy .
Since I was first elected , participation in elections has fallen from 63 % to 46 % most recently .
Next time this figure will probably fall below 40 % .
The European media are very few in number and small .
They live off artificial subsidies .
There are no common parties with members who have signed themselves up , who voluntarily pay their membership fees and who are involved in the creation of election programmes .
The parties are controlled by the national parties and financed by the taxpayers .
They now want more money and the opportunity to use it in national elections .
This distorts equal competition , is unfair and is probably unlawful because it is in breach of the principle of equality .
Party support is being managed by members of the largest parties ; my party has lost its subsidies because an individual signature is required from one of our members , even though not all the members of other parties have signed for their membership individually .
We are being treated differently , yet there is no critical press that raises cases involving discrimination .
I would gladly vote for subsidies for European political parties if the electorate wanted a European democracy .
Begin by giving the elected people 's representatives power over the legislative process , and take the power away from the government officials and lobbyists , so that the electorate can make a difference by turning out on election day and voting for a different party .
Create living parties with direct membership and voluntary membership fees , so that we can then arrange the public aid which the electorate deems reasonable and which is not discriminatory .
Currently , we hardly have the support of the electorate for any further pressure on the citizens ' purse .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner Wallström ended her initial speech in this debate by expressing the wish that we move forward together .
The conclusion that I have drawn from this debate is that we are effectively moving forward together .
This can only be good news for the Council and the Portuguese Presidency and I must thank the Commission and the European Parliament for the fact that we can move forward together based on the proposal which I have presented to you today .
As has already been said , the form is not so important ; what is truly important is the substance .
The substance in this case is to provide the European political parties with additional resources so that they can fully carry out their political activities and exercise their competences and so that they can fully involve all our citizens in this fascinating process of European construction .
That is the real substance , the real reason and the real issue .
As I have said , I can only rejoice that the three institutions have been able to reach agreement on how to move forward in this regard .
I must also say , if you will allow me to be frank , that the fact that we could reach this agreement during the Portuguese Presidency is for me and for the Portuguese Government naturally a key aspect of our Presidency , which is rapidly coming to an end .
I must say three things to you .
Firstly , we hope that we will soon receive the opinion of the Court of Auditors and that we will therefore be able to achieve a rapid conclusion in this respect .
Secondly , it was said here today by a Member that there were some European political parties that would be excluded from the scope of the new regulations : that is not the case as all are eligible .
Finally , I want to very sincerely reiterate our commitment to do everything we can to conclude this process by the end of the year .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , the Council has just stated that there is broad agreement on the content of this Regulation .
On Thursday , prior to the vote on this item , I will propose that the vote be postponed , so that we can get an agreement at first reading before the end of this year , probably at the December part-session .
I have noted the information you have given us , Mr Leinen , and we shall finish our debate with a contribution from Commissioner Wallström .

Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , Mr Lobo Antunes , I definitely think that you should take all the credit that you deserve for hopefully being able to conclude this particular file before the end of the year .
Then I think we should have a glass of wine , or port , to celebrate what the Portuguese Presidency has achieved on this very important file .
If Mr Helmer had remained in plenary , I would have turned to him and said that he is a living proof of how European democracy works because European taxpayers pay his salary to be here to oppose , to be against the European Union and all the rest of us .
We welcome him here , we accept him here because his voice is also necessary in this debate .
So those who oppose also play a very important role in this Chamber in the European political debate .
This is exactly the idea behind giving all the political parties the possibility of forming and contributing to the European political foundation , to have a lively debate where both sides and all the different views can be expressed .
And we do it in an open and transparent way about the criteria , about the rules , about exactly what legal base to apply for all of this .
There are no secrets in this particular proposal .
As the situation is right now , all the 10 currently existing political parties at European level have set up political foundations which represent a very wide range of political views and programmes .
This can only stimulate this lively and diverse debate on European policy issues , and it will contribute to bringing Europe closer to its citizens .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday .
Written declarations ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( HU ) I feel that the Commission 's recommendation is important and shows the way forward .
The European political parties play an important role in politics at European level .
They have a big role not only in European political life but also in the creation of a European public sector in the broadest sense , so I feel that their role and the redefinition of their activities are topical .
It is a central question whether we should support the initiatives of these European political parties in the interests of encouraging citizens to participate consciously in the democratic life of the Union , and in its creation .
I trust that there is demand and an opportunity for measures to reinforce and extend political dialogue : ensuring the most widespread participation possible of citizens in the democratic life of the Union , not least including young people , in order to ensure that everyone is heard .
I would like to mention here that one of the political goals decided for the European Union is still the promotion and advancement of the creation of a European public life .
In order to do this , one of the elements emphasised in the Commission 's document is support for political foundations at European level that provide assistance or support and supplement the activities of groups of political parties that are close to them , through various initiatives such as , for example , organising European seminars , training and conferences .
Finally , European-level foundations like this can ensure an efficient financial framework for cooperation between national political foundations and teachers at European level , including other representatives of youth organisations and civil society .
Question Time ( Commission )
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , euro exchange rate trends do of course affect the relative price of European tourism products for consumers from third countries .
Although the euro exchange rate is not a political instrument , but is formed freely on the foreign exchange market , the consequences of the recent rises in the euro-dollar exchange rate on tourism should be viewed on a differentiated basis .
First of all , fluctuations in the euro exchange rate have very little impact on tourism flows within the European Union .
According to the available data , 70 % of revenue comes from cross-border tourism in the European Union , in other words , from tourists from other EU Member States .
Secondly , we should not be focusing solely on the euro-dollar exchange rate .
Calculations of the effective euro exchange rate show that the overall trend is far less dramatic .
The euro 's rise against the Chinese yuan , for example , was much less pronounced this year , and yet revenue from tourists from non-EU countries barely doubled in the years between 1995 and 2005 , whereas the revenue attributable to tourists from China increased twelve-fold over the same period .
The Commission is aware that price is a key competition factor .
Nonetheless , the Commission 's vision for European tourism in the future , as presented in its recently adopted communication , is based on high quality , not low cost .
We are convinced that even with a strong euro , Europe will still be the world 's number one destination if Europe makes the best possible use of its advantages : its heritage , its beautiful natural environment , its geographical concentration of attractive sites and its reputation for a high level of service .
( ES ) Madam President , the Commissioner 's last statements are at odds with reality .
What is happening at this moment in time is that a large slice of intra-European tourism is heading for countries outside the European zone - the Caribbean , the developing world , the Far East , Africa - largely due to this increase in the value of our European currency .
Moreover , there are plans to introduce new measures that will also work against European tourism , such as compensation to businesses arising from CO2 emissions .
In other words , it would appear that there are many factors jeopardising European tourism , and there does not currently seem to be any indication of a European policy concerning tourism .
This is apparently still an issue for national governments , and I wish to ask the Commissioner whether he feels that the Commission can encourage some kind of European policy to counteract this obvious trend towards a decrease in the competitiveness of European tourism .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) I am afraid that the honourable Member and I may have to agree to disagree .
As you know , just a few days ago a major European tourism conference was held in Portugal and all these issues were discussed in detail there .
The conference brought together 500 leading specialists from all over Europe and I did not have the impression from that conference that the European tourism industry or , indeed , the Member States are worried about Europe losing its lustre as a tourist destination .
The figures we have available do not bear out what the honourable Member has said , namely that we are facing a particularly serious situation .
Let me say again : of course exchange rate fluctuations have an impact on price , but what Europe offers visitors from other countries is not determined primarily by price .
The decision to travel to Europe is not a decision which is influenced mainly by price but by the quality of what Europe has to offer .
Nonetheless , I agree with the honourable Member that we must pay very close attention to the burdens placed on the European tourism industry and ensure that framework conditions are put in place that allow this industry to capitalise in real terms on the massive growth and employment potential that it has to offer .

Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Thank you very much for your question , which gives me an opportunity to highlight the situation in the Maldives .
As President Maumoon Abdul Gayoom stressed at the recent United Nations Summit , the Maldives , which are no more than 1.5 metres above sea level , are threatened by the continuous rise in the level of the oceans as a result of climate warming .
This has forced more than 300 000 refugees to leave the islands .
Therefore , as the honourable Member has quite rightly pointed out , inviting the President of the Maldives gives us an opportunity to highlight the danger that now threatens the people of those islands .
Moreover , the Maldives have always played an active role in international conferences on less-developed countries and small island developing countries .
This diligence was confirmed when the Maldives attended the Third United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries , which was hosted by the European Parliament in 2001 , and again when the Maldives took on the important role of chairing the group of experts at the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change .
As far as the political situation in the Maldives is concerned , and in line with the statement by the Presidency of the Council of the European Union , the Commission welcomes the recent political developments in the Maldives and is pleased with the reforms that have been introduced to date .
The publication of the roadmap for the reform programme in 2006 was indeed good news .
The elections due to be held next year , in 2008 , will be an important step towards greater democracy .
The Commission is ready to lend its support to the reform process , including the provision of special assistance for the 2008 elections .
Of course we remain vigilant when it comes to the issue of human rights .
The Commission has been satisfied with the recent improvements , including the release last year of two important activists : Jennifer Latheef and Mohammed Nasheed .
( NL ) Madam President , Commissioner , I would like to thank you for your reply .
I have heard from the NGOs that attended the European Development Days that they were very satisfied with the initiative , and the resolutions that followed it , so congratulations as far as that goes .
However , I am still not entirely satisfied .
You say that the political situation in the Maldives is improving and that there is a roadmap there , but on the other hand is it not a bit too early - after all , we can describe the President as at least a semi-dictator - to offer him a place at such a forum , at such an important meeting ?
I think that we must be very careful in that respect and must not offer him a platform unless it is absolutely necessary .
As for the other points , I do not of course underestimate the problems facing the Maldives .
I think that they merit a great deal of attention , but once again we must be politically wise .
The rapid growth of urban areas is a continuing trend in developing countries .
In the course of recent years the number of people living in towns and cities has increased considerably .
Of the developing countries , Africa is also the region that has seen greater urban growth than anywhere else in the world .
Its urban population has tripled over the last 25 years and is set to double again by 2030 .
This huge demographic shift has resulted in the rapid spread of shantytowns and unhealthy slums , often on difficult terrain , on the fringes of the cities .
Job insecurity , the informal market for housing and land and the lack of specialist services are all problems that particularly affect the poorest urban dwellers and are indicators of how capable these urban areas are to provide a secure environment for the local population and for growth .
Combating poverty in the context of the Millennium Development Goals is a key objective of the Commission 's development policy and is something that guides the Commission in all its initiatives in this area .
The Commission supports durable urban development through good governance and good urban management .
Aid to urban areas is provided as part of the fight against poverty and improvements to the quality of life of those living in shantytowns are therefore delivered in the context of a global approach that is based on better urban management .
The Commission 's urban strategy seeks to help those living in shantytowns by way of a series of programmes that are implemented in the various geographical areas covered by our development programmes .
This includes Latin America , which has benefited from the URB-AL Programme , and Asia , which has its own Asia Urbs Programme .
( The President asked the speaker to speak more slowly )
It is a long answer , and I am a little afraid that Members will not be patient to listen until the end of my speech , but I will speak more slowly .
( FR ) The Commission provides financial aid for various groups from the African , Caribbean and Pacific states .
This is directed at global initiatives and programmes aimed at improving the shantytowns , namely the ' Cities Alliance ' and the UN programme ' UN-Habitat ' .
The aim of the Cities Alliance is to enhance the impact and the effectiveness of cooperation on urban development by improving the living conditions of the urban poor and developing programmes for improving the shantytowns to urban and national standards .
The Commission became involved in the Cities Alliance in 2007 .
This initiative focuses on poor towns and on the poor people who live in them .
The ultimate goal is to promote sustainable urban development .
The Commission uses the Alliance to encourage an inclusive and participative approach to urban development and to promote its objectives for the improvement of the shantytowns .
In 2007 the Commission approved a grant of EUR 4 million from the ninth European Development Fund to support a regional programme for the modernisation of the shantytowns .
This programme is aimed at improving dialogue , promoting regional , national and local exchanges and sharing experiences on political measures for the improvement of shantytown areas .
The programme provides financial support for regional shantytown improvement plans , feasibility studies and the strengthening of existing facilities and resources .
The Commission has been particularly active in its efforts to improve the conditions of those living in shantytowns , especially as regards the provision of water and sanitation .
Improving access to water and sanitation in urban and semi-urban areas is clearly an integral part of our sectoral policy .
In the specific case of the urban poor , special emphasis is placed on improving the performance of those who operate and provide decentralised and municipal services .
In Africa , where the majority of public and municipal services perform poorly , the general organisation and financial management of this sector needs to be reformed in order to improve the level of supply , especially if this area is to attract investment .
These public services have to be strengthened , especially when it comes to the setting of tariffs , the collection of payments and the operational aspects associated with maintaining the system .
You know that we have also established a Water Facility , which is funded through the ninth European Development Fund and which provides the poor and most vulnerable citizens living in urban and semi-urban areas with access to water and sanitation .
There have been two calls for proposals aimed at providing the poorest and most vulnerable with access to water and sanitation services .
Some 175 projects have been implemented on the basis of a Commission allocation of EUR 416 million for all the ACP regions concerned .
Out of this total there have been 38 projects for actions in urban areas and 29 for actions in semi-urban areas .
Water is the focal point of most of these projects , with this facility being supported by drainage and sanitation services .
A total of some EUR 191.7 million has already been invested in the Water Facility for urban and semi-urban zones .
Because of the impoverished status of a large number of the beneficiaries living in the shantytowns and poorest parts of the zones concerned , most , if not all , of the projects provide some form of benefit to the poor in that tariff adjustments are included as part of the package .
Something else that I might add as I near the end of this long narrative that has been arranged for me is that I met the UN-Habitat Executive Director and had a lengthy conversation with her .
I used this meeting primarily to enlist her support in the preparation of the Development Days due to be held towards the end of next year .
The main topic will be local powers and decentralisation - this being one of the main themes , the second being media and development - and I asked her to join us in preparing this theme because the question of extreme densification in town centres and capital cities is a real development issue .
In this connection , and this is something that I particularly wanted to talk about , there is also the serious problem of land use planning in the developing nations , and this issue should provide us with a new central theme for our development policy .
We are working very hard on this and I will probably be making a statement on this specific subject - namely land use planning in the developing countries - in the near future because it is an issue of real importance .
Take Kinshasa , for example , which is a city of more than six million people .
It is now all too evident that Kinshasa has become unmanageable in terms of security , the provision of services , sanitation projects and so on .
We are therefore very aware of the relevance of the question raised by the honourable Member .
I would like first of all to thank the Commissioner and remark that , although his answer was long , it is not the longest we have received in Question Time , but it has the merit of having provoked several requests for supplementary questions .
What I would like to do is put the three that first came to my attention together , so that would be Ms McGuinness , Mr Mitchell , who asked the original question , and Ms Budreikaitė .
Madam President , with all due respect to Ms McGuinness , I think it is extraordinary that somebody places a question and must wait for somebody else .
I am very sorry .
We started late , so one could have expected that you would have been here earlier .
Madam President , you started late on the screen and then you skipped questions .
Then you allow a seven-minute reply and you go to someone else to ask a supplementary before the original questioner .
It is an absurd procedure , and I protest .
I am very sorry , if Members are not in the Chamber we are obliged to skip their questions .
We will follow the order I suggested .
Madam President , I apologise for the difficulties .
I did take the question for Mr Mitchell because I knew he was on his way down .
Commissioner , in that lengthy answer , I am not sure I heard you once mention the words ' rural ' , ' agriculture ' or ' the need for investment ' , because the problem with slums is that 900 million people are rushing to them for a better life , because there is nothing better in the rural areas .
I think you need to address the issue of investing in agriculture and rural development in the developing world so that we do not create even greater slums .
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) You are probably right , but I just had the opportunity to deal with this issue of rural development only recently .
You will be aware of the fact that the tenth European Development Fund places greater emphasis on rural development and investment in agriculture than the ninth EDF , for example , where the budget allocated for projects on rural development and agriculture represented - if I remember correctly - 9 % of the appropriations .
In the tenth European Development Fund this proportion has risen to just over 12 % .
The EUR 666 million provided under the ninth European Development Fund has now been increased to EUR 1.1 billion in the tenth Fund .
It goes without saying that we are encouraging this development and I agree with you in stating that this is one of the best responses to the problem ; the same goes for land use planning .
Developing agriculture is obviously an effective way to ease congestion in the town centres , to give the poor people who now inhabit the urban centres the chance of a better life and to attract them back to the land .
We also need to have infrastructures that provide improved access and interconnectivity and better social and sanitation services .
We are therefore working on all these issues and I share your viewpoint even though I have not touched on that particular question .
There are other solutions that may be put forward , but you are entirely right and rest assured that we will be placing it high on our list of priorities .
During the European Development Days this question was dealt with in some detail by Kofi Annan , who has set up a foundation to aid rural regions and develop agriculture .
Madam President , can I ask the Commissioner if he is aware that target 11 of the Millennium Development Goals seeks to significantly improve the lives of 100 million people living in slums by 2020 ?
And there are , in fact , something like 900 million people - at least the question said 900 million and I do not think the Commissioner questioned that - living in urban slums ?
The Commissioner will be at the EU-ACP Assembly in Rwanda later this month .
Will he be in a position to give any indication to the Assembly there , or when will he be in a position to give an indication to the Assembly here , of precise statistics on the way to reaching this objective ?
You said that you will come back with a plan , you will come back with a report , but will that report give us precise details on how this objective of taking 100 million people out of slum dwellings will be achieved ?
There will be statistics but these are national figures , when we get them and when the data collection systems are reliable .
In any case , as things stand at present I am unable to guarantee that we will be in possession of the complete set of statistics on this particular subject ; all the more because the definitions vary enormously from country to country .
We are therefore working on this .
Normally when we carry out an assessment and when I present an account of it we are already in possession - I hope - of a certain number of elements that enable us to shed some light on the information you requested .
However , I dare not promise you today that we will have reliable and precise figures in this case .
This is one of the factors that we are currently working on .
We have already trawled through the information held by other international organisations .
The data obtained are usually far from complete and often questionable , because the rudiments that we have and the methods used to quantify these statistics are not always reliable .
( LT ) People have left villages for towns in search for work .
What measures will be taken , what projects are to be implemented in the countries to ensure that not only agricultural areas , not only rural areas would be getting support , so that new workplaces are created in other regions as well ?
I happened to hear that , for example , in Mozambique just 5 % of aid funds are allocated for the development of infrastructure and workplaces .
Do you consider this sufficient ?
Firstly , the action programmes are funded as a rule by the development programmes , not through humanitarian aid .
They are therefore not humanitarian aid programmes .
In some regions we are funding employment-intensive work programmes , especially in post-conflict countries such as Rwanda , Burundi and the DRC .
We are providing finance for a whole series of labour-intensive programmes , including road construction and upgrading , small-scale maintenance projects and so on , that will provide people with work .
This is a starting point .
Secondly , I shall take advantage of your question to point out again - you may like it or you may not , you may have an opinion or not , but as this is an open debate I am going to say it anyway - that what the Commission is trying to do at present by way of the economic partnership agreements that we are currently attempting to conclude with various regions in the developing world is essentially aimed at generating a certain dynamic process and developing a private sector that will be capable of supporting employment , creating wealth and prosperity and , especially , ensuring that the developing countries are gradually able to open up their markets in order to take advantage of the most positive effects - and I know only too well that there are not just positive effects - of globalisation .
Moreover , I am always very surprised to note that in this House , too , there are many who are opposed to the signing of economic partnership agreements .
When you realise that a 1 % increase in trade in Africa is equivalent to two and a half times the entire amount of public aid allocated to development in that continent then you will understand that there will never be sustainable development in the poorest nations unless their economy is more prosperous .
In reply to your question I can assure you that we do have emergency response measures , including those for post-conflict periods , and that we are trying to implement them .
We are in fact funding employment schemes and labour-intensive projects .
These are immediate responses .
These are emergency situations .
Apart from that , the ' aid for trade ' policies are the only ones that can eventually create employment and lasting employment at that .
There is no other miracle cure .
It is not realistic to suggest that we should be financing job creation schemes , for example , and indeed I have already heard such a proposal .
In some countries 60 % or 70 % of the population are below the age of 25 .
You cannot create public works jobs for such a huge mass of people .
The only response to this problem must be economic in nature .
There are therefore two aspects to this question .
The first is agriculture , which is an important element because it creates lasting employment and provides food for the entire family .
It is perhaps true to say that we have not invested enough in the agricultural sector in recent years .
The second element , clearly , is the economy .
It is essential to establish and consolidate integrated regional markets in order to create the conditions in which the local population can take advantage of globalisation and economic growth .

Madam President , I understand Mr Mitchell 's frustration , which is the frustration of many MEPs - that , every month , Commission Question Time is squeezed and begins late .
I had a question on Darfur , and I want to ask you whether , Question Time having started late , at 18.15 , five questions went by in ten minutes , because I arrived in the Chamber just after 18.20 .

If that is the case , is it fair to Members to create a situation where they are running around doing meetings and trying to predict when their question will be raised ?
Can something be done about it , particularly the late starting of Commission Question Time almost every month in Strasbourg ?
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Helping the governments of developing countries and improving transport safety , and that includes road safety , is one of the Commission 's priorities for cooperation on development in the transport sector .
This is reflected in the Commission 's policies .
The need for policies aimed at promoting transport safety is a key aspect of our ongoing sectoral dialogue with partner governments and internal directives now recommend that certain safety measures should be incorporated when drawing up road projects funded by the Commission .
An assessment of Commission interventions in the transport sector of developing countries , which was completed in 2004 , notes that the majority of road projects did take account of safety aspects .
To give some concrete examples , most road construction schemes included road-signs and markings and designated speed limits , and many of the projects also proposed widening the roadside verges so as to permit the safe passage of non-motorised vehicles and pedestrians .
In certain countries the Commission has also funded actions aimed specifically at road safety , such as the drafting of a highway code and the equipping of vehicle test centres , notably in Albania , and the introduction of rules for vehicle safety testing in Mali .
A project currently under way in Cameroon is helping to fund various construction schemes , including the installation of crash barriers to improve safety on the main Douala-Yaoundé road , as well as a road safety awareness campaign .
Clearly we can do more .
Progress depends first and foremost on the commitment displayed by the partner government in highlighting road safety issues , collecting and analysing accident figures , introducing rules and regulations , defining standards and setting-up and strengthening the organisations responsible for the general implementation of road safety policy .
Madam President , as the Commissioner will be aware , the European Transport Safety Council publishes on a regular basis very useful reports in relation to road safety standards statistics and the general performance of various countries .
It shows quite clearly that the countries of Eastern Europe , and , unfortunately , my own country Ireland , lag way down at the bottom of the list .
Would the Commissioner agree that the major problem is that accidents which are designated as accidents are not accidents at all ?
They are , in fact , a result of excessive speed , a result of poor road standards , and a result , in many cases , of excessive alcohol .
We know that there is a common European driving licence coming in 2013 , so I would like to ask the Commissioner whether there is any prospect that this common European driving licence could in fact be front-loaded and be brought on more quickly .
Secondly , would the Commissioner agree that when somebody goes from one Member State to another Member State as a driver and they have a valid driving licence , should they not be obliged to take a theory test in relation to the rules of the road , signage and various other elements within the particular country that they are now residing in ?
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) I do not know if this question was directed at me .
Are you referring to development or is this a more general question , because I do not feel that it was put specifically to me in my capacity as Commissioner for Development ?
As regards the question from Mr Higgins , I thought that I had already replied to it , but it is clear , especially in the context of the road infrastructure projects that we are funding , that there are usually maintenance conditions built-in , but there are other conditions too .
We have funded a highway code , for example , and it goes without saying that what we are doing in Europe can be a source of inspiration for some of the countries we are discussing .
Concerning the question that was addressed more directly to me , I do not feel that I am competent to answer it , but I am happy to pass it on to my colleague , Mr Barrot , if you wish .
That is what I shall do : I shall pass this question on to my colleague .
Like the Commissioner , I had understood that the question was to do with road safety in developing countries , not EU Member States .
Has the Commissioner travelled by road in South Asia where , with deep respect , his reference to the highway code could , in many cases , be considered laughable , because traffic goes very quickly on either side of the road and in both directions at the same time , which obviously leads to road accidents , certainly when there are lorries going around and people driving in rickshaws as well ?
In his discussions with the countries of South Asia , has the Commissioner suggested that the European Union - with all the advice that , perhaps , Mr Higgins could give from the Republic of Ireland and other countries - could assist them in improving their road safety , improving , perhaps , a reference to a highway code that does not exist , and help to reduce mortality on their roads ?
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) I am not opposed to the European Union making a contribution and providing aid .
I have cited as an example the very case you mentioned , namely the highway code .
It is clear that this might be part of a project that the Commission could finance in the context of good governance , strengthening the rule of law and consolidating the capacity of the state authorities , for example .
This is something we are doing .
As far as roads are concerned , it is true that in certain locations , especially where we know that there is a lot of pedestrian traffic , we also try to upgrade the roadside verges and include accident prevention in our road safety projects .
In global terms , and as part of the political dialogue , we include all these questions , but the message that we occasionally send to our partners should state that they too need to address these political issues .
When I hear this type of question I always wonder : ' Are we going to be asked to do everything for them ? ' .
We cannot be called upon to do everything .
We can inspire and suggest , we can provide funding and aid , but we cannot govern in the place of those whose job it is to govern .
It is like picking presents off a Christmas tree .
People expect development cooperation to be able to do anything and everything .
You must also understand that with the budget resources available to me I must focus on the main priorities .
Mr Mitchell quite rightly highlighted the Millennium Development Goals .
They are the main priorities .
We are ready to help and we are providing funding , but the partner countries have to ask for it .
This is one of the conditions .
During the dialogue process we sometimes try to suggest this kind of thing .
Mr Bowis is not here , but I can tell you , for example , that in implementing our development policies I try to instil in our partners an ever greater awareness for the situation of the disabled .
The problems affecting disabled persons are not generally taken into account by the partner countries or by the partner governments .
We therefore have a whole series of parallel initiatives and policies that we are trying to put forward and implement , but do not forget that we can only fund these projects if the partner country makes an approach or places a request .
Given that the European Union funds a large number of road building and road infrastructure projects , this particular aspect - and certainly the issue of road safety - obviously crops up frequently in such debates and discussions .
( LT ) Statistics show that the losses incurred because of accidents and their consequences in EU countries constitute about 2 % of the GDP of the European Union , which means these losses are huge .
Do we have similar figures for the Third World and developing countries ?
Is the percentage higher or lower ?
Apparently , they have fewer cars in these countries , so maybe that percentage is lower .
While fully realising that the Commission cannot do everything for the countries in question , I would like to know if these countries draw from the experience of the European Union , where , during the last five years , the number of accidents has fallen by 50 percent .
Member of the Commission . - The Commission welcomes the meeting of the two leaders on 5 September this year and the agreement on the need for the earliest start of the process leading to a comprehensive settlement of the Cyprus problem .
Our aim is that serious negotiations on a comprehensive settlement under the auspices of the United Nations should begin without unnecessary delay .
The agreement of 8 July 2006 between the leaders of the two communities on the island should prepare the ground for such talks as a means of facilitating the full resumption of these talks for a comprehensive settlement .
On the question of financial aid used by the end of September this year , the total amount contracted under the aid programme for the Turkish Cypriot community came to EUR 24 million - that is , 9 % of the total - and the amount tendered came to EUR 44 million .
A great share of the programme is devoted to infrastructure investments , which require more time to prepare and for which the bulk of payments will take place in the latter part of the programming period , which is due to last until December 2012 .
Notwithstanding the challenges that are posed by the unique political , diplomatic and legal status , the Commission considers that the implementation of the aid programme is broadly on track for the moment .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank the Commissioner and stress that the Commission must urge the parties to negotiate at ministerial level , that is , at the highest level , so as to break the stalemate .
Obviously the elections scheduled for February in Nicosia , on the Greek side , may make it difficult to accelerate matters at the moment , but it is a good idea to begin investing as of now in the post-election period .
Member of the Commission . - I want to thank the honourable Member for this proposal .
In fact , we tried this at the end of 2006 , during the Finnish Presidency of the European Union .
There was a serious diplomatic effort to unblock economic and trade relations in and around Cyprus , which culminated in some meetings in Helsinki , which , however , did not lead to results .
Therefore , I think the lesson we have to learn is that we have to aim for a comprehensive settlement , and we need the United Nations to provide its good services .
From our point of view , the sooner the better and , at the latest , after the presidential elections , so that the year 2008 should be the year of serious negotiations and results concerning a comprehensive settlement for the reunification of Cyprus .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , we have been told that only a small percentage of Union funding is being made available for the northern part of Cyprus .
What is the situation with regard to the obligations which must be fulfilled by the northern part of Cyprus itself ?
Are delays not occurring here as well ?
I also have a supplementary question for our fellow Member here .
The terminology which he has used is not the terminology of bicommunality but that of two separate states , given that reference has been made to ministerial level , presidents and colleagues .
Is this helpful for the debate ?
Member of the Commission . - I think that in fact this question was partly directed to Mr Cappato .
It is clear that the European Commission does not refer to any sort of government concerning the northern part of Cyprus , but at the same time , of course , there are two communities on the island .
There is the Greek Cypriot community and there is the Turkish Cypriot community .
We encourage , and we expect , that the leaders of the two communities will continue their efforts in order to resume negotiations for a comprehensive settlement under the auspices of the United Nations .
Member of the Commission . - The European Union is preparing to assume a greater role in post-status Kosovo .
Ongoing status negotiations notwithstanding , significant preparations are being made for the future International Civilian Office and an ESDP mission of rule of law for Kosovo .
The Commission is financing CSFP joint actions establishing planning teams in Pristina .
These teams have developed the blueprints for the future missions on the basis of the Ahtisaari plan .
However , the final shape of the future international missions will depend on the exact outcome of status negotiations .
The Commission has worked in close cooperation with the two teams in order to ensure a coherent overall EU presence in a post-status Kosovo .
I would also like to use this opportunity to thank the European Parliament for its excellent cooperation in facilitating the financing of these very important missions .
The Commission fully supports the work of the international Troika which is currently leading the negotiations and there is the deadline of 10 December for the Troika activities as confirmed by the contact group ministerial in New York in September .
At this point in time it is too early to speculate when exactly Kosovo 's status will be resolved but it is clear that prolonging the agony will not serve anybody 's purpose .
On our behalf , we are ready to turn every stone and even more in order to achieve a negotiated solution which would be best for everybody .
We ask that from both sides and from our partners in the international community , while at the same time , of course , we are preparing ourselves for better or worse scenarios as regards Kosovo 's status .
( DE ) Many thanks for your good answer , Commissioner .
There are two points which I would like to make .
Firstly , as you know , this House voted by a 75 % majority in favour of internationally monitored independence for Kosovo on the basis of the Ahtisaari plan .
We voted against plans for the division of Kosovo and against any reversion to rule by Belgrade .
I would like to know whether the Commission endorses this position .
Secondly , like you , I was in Belgrade last week , and as you have said , the longer the decision-making process takes , the more destabilising the effect on Serbia will be .
Serbia too needs a swift decision in order to be able to pursue its course towards a future in Europe .

Member of the Commission . - Indeed , as Mr Posselt said , Serbia is a key country and that is the reason why we initialled the stabilisation and association agreement last week with Deputy Prime Minister Đelić , in the presence of President Tadić .
That is the first concrete step of Serbia towards the European Union .
On the condition that Serbia will achieve full cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for former Yugoslavia , then we and the Member States can sign the agreement which will then become the gateway for candidate status for Serbia .
Thus we are ready , once Serbia is ready , to move ahead , and indeed this helps Serbia to leave the nationalist past behind and approach its European future .
( DE ) Commissioner , we all hope that the status issue will indeed be resolved on 10 December .
However , the question is this : what if there is no resolution ?
What are the risks then for the region as a whole , in your view ?
Do we have any way out of that situation or any alternative strategies if there is in fact no agreement on 10 December ?
Member of the Commission . - Accession negotiations with Croatia are at cruising speed for the moment .
As you may recall , the talks began on 3 October 2005 or , to be precise , 4 October , because it was late at night or early in the morning , depending on the definition in Luxembourg .
The screening process was completed one year later , in October 2006 , and all 33 screening reports have been submitted to the Council .
The current state of play is that negotiations have been opened on 14 chapters out of 35 , and closed on two chapters .
We are moving forward at a steady pace .
I would like to add that , on 10 chapters , we have agreed opening benchmarks - or they have been agreed by the Council , to be more precise - which have been communicated to Croatia .
For the moment , we consider only the opening benchmark on justice , freedom and security to be met .
However , we hope that the work being done by Croatia to meet opening benchmarks will allow us to recommend opening negotiations on a further one or two chapters rather soon .
To conclude , what is most important in terms of the next steps is more progress on the most difficult chapters .
This mainly concerns those chapters where opening benchmarks have been set .
Ultimately , the pace of Croatia 's progress towards the European Union will be determined by its own ability to meet all the necessary conditions on the basis of its own merits .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am grateful to the Commissioner for the clarification given .
In my opinion , the progress made is certainly satisfactory , but more could still be done .
As far as I am concerned - and I am a member of the European Union-Croatia Joint Parliamentary Committee - it is the Croatians who are pushing , but they are not getting a positive response from the European Commission .
I would therefore ask the Commission to redouble its efforts in favour of Croatia so that it can join the EU in 2009 .
Member of the Commission . - I agree that there is a need for further action in the first place by Croatia .
Just to illustrate the challenges : the technical negotiations form the superstructure of the negotiations on the acquis communautaire , while the reforms on the ground form the substructure - the foundation - of the negotiations .
In many areas , for Croatia or for Turkey or for any other future candidate country , it is clear that , in order to meet certain opening benchmarks for technical negotiations , we have to first make progress on the reforms on the ground .
The concrete example that I have in mind is shipbuilding and steel .
We will be able to recommend opening a chapter on competition policy and state aid , which is one of the core chapters of EU legislation , once we see that Croatia has convincingly started to implement and achieved results in the structural reforms related to the shipbuilding and steel sectors .
Therefore it is , in the first place , in the hands of the Croatian Government and Parliament to make progress on these reforms and thus facilitate progress in the technical negotiations .
( DE ) It is very likely that on 21 December the Schengen border of Italy and Austria will be extended to include another country , namely Slovenia .
Does this have any relation to the opening of a chapter - on the common area of freedom , security and justice - in accession negotiations ?
Does it really make sense to build major new external borders here which will have to be dismantled only a few years later ?
Member of the Commission . - I think that using common sense , which is also allowed for a Commissioner , your question makes plenty of sense .
At the same time , Slovenia has , after substantial efforts , achieved a situation where it will be part of the Schengen arrangement for the free movement of people and it is a fact of life that Slovenia is a member of the European Union .
Croatia will be a member of the European Union in a few years and , therefore , for this period up to the time when Croatia is able to join the Schengen arrangement , as a member of the European Union , we will have the arrangement to which the honourable Member referred .
But , of course , in the medium to long term , we should have a situation where all the countries of the Western Balkans will be part of the European Union and , one day , also part of the Schengen arrangement for the free movement of people .
That is very important for the Europeanisation of civil society in the Western Balkans in the longer term .
( DE ) Commissioner , I believe that the Sanader Government and the chief negotiator , Mr Drobnjak , are doing first-class work but in my view , there are two problems .
Firstly , I hear , for example , from the Slovakian side that conditions are being set for Croatia which were not set , in this form , for Slovakia .
The second question is this : what is the situation with regard to the Commission 's own capacities to deal with this dossier ?
I have heard that a great many matters are being left to lie because there is not sufficient capacity to process the Croatian dossier .
Is that correct ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - It is true that , very often , children , because of the illegality of their stay , have no possibility to attend a school and are thus deprived of their chances from the start .
As stated in our communication on a European strategy on the rights of the child , a basis in the Treaties is required for action in a specific policy area to safeguard children 's rights , and in the immigration field no such specific base exists .
However , as regards substance , a common standard already exists - at least a minimum standard - as all Member States are bound by international human rights conventions .
In particular , in line with the European Convention on Human Rights , Member States have to grant certain rights regardless of a person 's immigration status , such as emergency medical care or resources to ensure subsistence .
As concerns the Convention on the Rights of the Child , it must be recalled that , besides the specific provisions , it foresees the obligation for the Member States to always take into account the best interests of the child .
At Community level , the Commission proposal for a return directive foresees that , where Member States are subject to obligations derived from international fundamental rights , such as , for example , the right to education or the right to a family unit , no return decision shall be issued .
- ( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , thank you for your brief answer .
My additional question is this : are the obligations of the Member States being observed , and are you bearing in mind that we have not only illegal child immigrants , but also illegal child human traffickers ?
On my island , Chios , which is situated opposite the Asia Minor coast , a 14-year-old human trafficker has been arrested .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the issue you have raised is naturally one of the most sensitive of all .
It does of course deserve European action .
That is why a few months ago , with reference to undeclared work by immigrants on the one hand and , on the other , people who enter the EU and then overstay the residence period , I proposed a directive aimed at penalising employers .
In cases where undeclared employment affects the most vulnerable groups - the case you have brought up - such as children who are recruited illegally and then exploited , I have proposed prison sentences .
Black market exploitation of particularly vulnerable groups , which is the case of children , is the most serious case of all in my opinion .
Not all EU Member States currently have very rigorous penalties for employers who illegally exploit the labour of children or women , and I believe that we need such legislation at European level .
( DE ) Commissioner , where education or training for illegal child immigrants is concerned , we are talking about a highly sensitive issue .
We also know that there is no method which is off limits to human trafficking organisations .
Do you not see a certain risk that children may be sent on ahead so that parents are then able to join them through the process of family reunification , thus simply accelerating illegal immigration ?
As much as I welcome efforts to cushion the effects on children , I do see a risk that this could give further impetus to illegal immigration .
Vice-President of the Commission . - As the honourable Member knows , the Portuguese Presidency included the topic of new technologies and integrated border management for discussion at the informal Council of Interior Ministers on 1 October .
The Presidency presented ideas in relation to increasing security as well as in relation to facilitating travel .
I participated , obviously , in the Council 's discussion .
Europe will need to make effective use of the great opportunities new technologies provide in the area of border control .
Advancements made in biometric technologies will allow for speedier and more reliable identification of travellers .
As a concrete example of steps taken by the Union so far , the introduction of biometric passports and the development of the Visa Information System ( VIS ) and Schengen Information System II ( SIS II ) will pave the way for increased use of biometrics at borders .
We have , of course , been cooperating very closely with Parliament on both these issues .
Transforming border processes cannot happen overnight .
A step-by-step approach is needed , therefore .
It is important to first implement what is already planned before embarking on even more ambitious projects .
But it is necessary to develop and maintain a long-term strategy and vision , accompanied by a thorough cost-benefit analysis .
At the beginning of next year , I will present a communication , not a legislative proposal , outlining how an entry-exit system and a registered travellers programme might look .
The communication will evaluate the different options and their impact , including with regard to data protection and other fundamental rights .
An entry-exit system and a registered travellers programme should be seen together as part of the same package of measures .
Simplifying checks for bona fide travellers allows us to focus resources on high-risk travellers .
Faster border checks for bona fide travellers can offset the impact on border crossing times resulting from an entry-exit system .
When implementing such automated system synergies with the business processes and the equipment for SIS II and VIS , we need to examine carefully whether we are using our existing infrastructure as efficiently as possible .
This communication on the entry-exit system , which I will present in February , will be part of a borders package , which will also include the evaluation report on Frontex , as requested by the Hague Programme , and a communication on a European surveillance system ( EUROSUR ) .
On this basis , I look forward to a truly strategic discussion with Member States and Parliament on the future directions of the Union 's border policy , where new technologies will play a decisive role .
In other words , it will be , in my view , an initial basis for a comprehensive strategic approach and discussion .
Well , I also look forward to such a strategic discussion and I did not have any problems with the first part of your response , Commissioner .
But what worries me is that , at that informal JHA Council in October , you were reported as calling for this entry-exit register which you said was extremely necessary , but you had not done a feasibility study .
The 2005 communication said that it would be a huge organisational step and might therefore be risky and costly to implement .
Are you not pre-empting it ?
The second part of your response was a sales pitch for entry-exit .
We have no idea what the implications are going to be - including for data protection as well as organisation - are they proportional ?
Yet you are already saying that it is extremely necessary .
This seems to me to be putting the cart before the horse , as we say .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , as you know , the European Parliament , in the person of the Chairman of the Committee on Civil Liberties , is of course invited to participate - and does participate - in informal Council meetings .
As far as I am concerned , however , what I said on that occasion was exactly the same as what I am saying to you today .
I specifically said that the impact assessment will be presented and published on the Commission 's website along with the proposal for a communication .
Everyone will be able to see the impact assessment , its various implications and our proposal .
Then a debate will of course be opened up , for the reason that I have given : we are talking about a communication setting out possible ways of working and not a legislative proposal .
I would ask the Commissioner to comment on an EU entry-exit issue : the possibility of Ireland , with the agreement perhaps of Northern Ireland , joining the Schengen area , given what is happening with the UK on its e-Borders initiative .
Perhaps you would just answer that particular issue as there is much comment about it .
Vice-President of the Commission . - The new Treaty , already agreed but not yet signed , does not include any general provision authorising the transmission of personal data of European citizens to third countries .
In fact , Article 15a of the new Treaty guarantees the right , the general right , to the protection of personal data .
Article 24 refers to the application of this general right and the processing of data in the common foreign and security policy area .
This means that the transfer of personal data to third countries is based on the general principles or relevant provisions of Directive 95 / 46 / EC on personal data , particularly Articles 25 and 26 .
This Personal Data Directive remains in force .
According to Article 25 of this particular directive , transfer of personal data is permitted only if the third country ensures an adequate level of protection .
Article 26 of the same directive provides for the strict and explicit conditions under which it is possible to transfer personal data to third countries in other cases .
The framework decision on data protection in the field of judicial and police cooperation will also be another very helpful instrument .
We made a promise .
The promise is to adopt , in agreement with Parliament , a framework decision on personal data protection by December .
I am very confident that we will be able to get this very important political result .
Why ?
Because the Portuguese Presidency seems very determined to reach this goal and there seems to be an overall consensus among Member States .
You perhaps know that we discussed the framework decision on data protection at the last formal Justice and Home Affairs Council .
On this , of course , I warmly wish close cooperation with Parliament , even closer than in the past , during the coming weeks .
I think we have the common goal of getting it adopted before the end of December .
- ( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , you have slalomed your way around the articles of the Treaties with consummate legal skill .
Kindly give me a clearer answer to my question .
Does the Commission agree that the Council decisions in question ignore the clear position of the European Parliament and the relevant resolution ?
Does this not weaken the protection of citizens ' personal data , and is it not an attempt to bypass the control of the European Court of Justice ?
My question is simple .
Does the European Court of Justice , on the basis of the Council 's decisions , have the option of reversing this Council decision , adopted under Article 24 ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , as you are well aware , the overall intention is to guarantee the right to personal data protection .
Article 24 is a derogation , in other words it establishes that a special rule pertains in a given area and for certain types of information and data .
This certainly does not mean , in my opinion , that once the general principle is infringed none of the safeguards apply any longer , because obviously the general principle has not been set aside ; a derogation from normal processing is justified by the fact that we are in the common foreign and security policy area .
However , I repeat that in my view - and at this stage it is solely my personal interpretation , since the Treaty has not yet been signed or ratified - if there are one-off derogations to a general rule , those derogations cannot annul the right ; they can regulate the ways of enjoying that right , which is obviously a different matter .
Commissioner Frattini , you are of course well aware that Members of this Parliament , and especially members of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , are getting more , not less , unhappy about developments in data transfer without adequate data protection and without any codecision or real parliamentary scrutiny , including by national parliaments .
Also , I am afraid there is a little bit of loss of trust , because we are feeling that the Commission and Member States are almost benefiting from loose and lax agreements reached on the transatlantic dimension .
What can you do to reassure us that we are not on a slippery slope , where data transferred for security purposes is really just going to be used for profiling and never really going to benefit from privacy guarantees ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - As you know perfectly well , I have tried to undertake in the past personal initiatives under a political point of view , even though in some cases I was not formally authorised by the Council to do that .
I am talking about putting at your disposal some documents , elements or information , without previous formal consultation with the Council .
I understand perfectly your concerns . But I cannot act alone .
I had to get authorisation in some cases and consensus in some other cases .
I can repeat to you what I said once to the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs .
I am ready to engage with Parliament in a political process of close consultation , although the Treaty is not yet signed or ratified .
I am talking about a political consultation in the sense that we can think about moving ahead as if the Treaty were in force .
That is , frankly speaking , my political and personal position because I am not so sure , and I do not know , whether the Council would be in agreement with such a position .
This principle could apply , for example , to the adoption of a framework decision on data protection which should be adopted , in my view , before December , after close consultation , not only by getting just an opinion by Parliament but by taking into full account amendments , proposals and formal and substantial integration .
Are you sure that the Council will agree on such a position ?
I am not so sure , but I will be insisting on trying to persuade the Council to move ahead in this direction .
We have now gone over by more than the amount of time we were late by when we started .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will receive written answers ( see Annex ) .
That concludes Question Time .
Membership of political groups : see Minutes
Application of Directive 2004 / 38 / EC on the right of citizens of the Union and their families to move and reside freely within the territory of the Member States ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 19.50 and resumed at 21.05 )

Complaint by Boeing ( US ) against Airbus ( EU ) before the WTO ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on the complaint by Boeing ( US ) against Airbus ( EU ) before the WTO .
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it is important to remember that you invited the Commission here today to discuss the dispute between the United States and the European Union on the support provided by the governments concerned for Airbus and Boeing .
Much ink has been spilled over these matters so let us start by recalling the key facts .
What is at issue ?
The US Government claims that money that the European governments have invested in Airbus infringe WTO rules on subsidies .
In October 2004 the United States , unilaterally and without prior notice , withdrew from a bilateral agreement signed with the European Union in 1992 , which explicitly authorised this type of investment , and the US decided to being a case in the WTO .
The European Union noted that the United States preferred litigation over negotiation and for its part asked the WTO to declare illegal the US subsidies granted to Boeing .
Where are we now , three years later ?
Despite several attempts in the last few years to resolve the dispute amicably , the parties ' differences have prevented this from happening .
The United States has denied giving subsidies to Boeing , and has said that prior to any negotiations the European Union would as a precondition have to stop giving Airbus the support previously provided under the system of repayable loans .
You will appreciate that under these conditions it is impossible to establish a fair and balanced basis for a negotiated settlement .
A few weeks ago Boeing publically rejected the latest olive branch , if I can call it that , proffered by Airbus .
That was on 18 October .
We are therefore sceptical whether this dispute can be resolved at the negotiating table any time soon .
This means that we will continue to defend in the WTO European support for Airbus , which has enabled the aviation sector to become more innovative and to improve the safety and efficiency of air travel .
It is important to note that Airbus has paid back 40 % more than it has received from the European governments since 1992 and has actually repaid in excess of EUR 7 billion .
We hope , therefore , that the panel will demonstrate that the quite modest sums that Europe has granted in the form of aid for research and development and repayable loans have not had any impact on Boeing 's ability to compete .
I think you can probably judge for yourselves : Boeing has just announced that its new B787 ' Dreamliner ' has since its launch become the most commercially successful plane in history .
The most successful plane it may be , but it is also perhaps the most heavily subsidised .
Ahead of a WTO hearing in September this year , we provided what I believe was solid evidence of the subsidies the United States gave to Boeing for that aircraft .
We showed in particular that this financial aid totalled $ 24 billion from the federal authorities and certain states , including $ 16 billion from NASA and the Department of Defence in the form of support for research and development in the aviation sector that enabled Boeing to develop state-of-the-art aviation technologies and know-how at no cost .
In addition , illegal , state subsidies designed for the exclusive benefit of Boeing were granted , notably in Washington State , where Boeing received subsidies totalling $ 4 billion , but also in Kansas , through ' Boeing bonds ' , and in Illinois .
The third element is the illegal export subsidies that Boeing continues to receive under the legislation on FSC / ETI ( Foreign Sales Corporation and Extraterritorial Income Exclusion ) , in spite of the fact that the WTO has outlawed them on several occasions .
Once the WTO has come to a decision , probably in 2008 , it is very likely that this will not be the end of the matter .
Both parties will have the option of appealing , which may take us into 2009 .
We are of the opinion that after the WTO has taken a decision in the two cases , it would make sense to discuss with the United States how to manage the resulting implications , but we cannot be sure that that will result in proper negotiations of course .
In conclusion , as far as the Commission is concerned , a negotiated solution would provide the necessary long-term solution the market requires to ensure peaceful and fair competition in the aviation sector in the future .
Failing that , the Commission will continue to defend Europe 's interests resolutely and vigorously in the WTO .
After all , it is not only in the interest of Airbus to be able to compete fairly , but also suppliers , airlines and their customers , who should benefit from healthy competition between the major civil aircraft manufacturers .
The competition between Airbus and Boeing should happen in the marketplace : we expect it to be tough but also fair and reasonable competition .
However , this is not the case if the US competitor attempts to portray some of our Member States as , and I quote , ' unreliable aerospace business partners and a security risk to US military readiness ' , or to instigate legislation in the US Congress to block funds for improvements of US airports to accommodate the A380 .
This sort of campaigning is damaging to trans-Atlantic relations and inappropriate for a company that portrays itself as a global ( and sometimes even European ) player whenever it suits its needs .
However , the message we would like you to take home today is that on an official level both the EU and the US have made an effort - and have , I believe , managed - to ensure that this dispute does not damage the wider EU-US partnership .
We intend to keep it that way and we trust that the US Government will do the same by ensuring that the Airbus / Boeing disputes are not allowed to affect either company 's ability to compete fairly in public procurement competitions .
Notably , there should be no anti-competitive actions in legislation or executive policy that would restrict the ability of EU companies to compete in the current US aerial tanker recapitalisation programme .
We would like to stress the important role the European Parliament and the national parliaments in the relevant countries can play in monitoring the situation .
Your inter-parliamentary contacts will be very precious in bringing this message across the EU and possibly the Atlantic .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am speaking also on behalf of Mrs Tokia Saïfi , who is a member of the Committee on International Trade .
Boeing 's complaint against Airbus in the WTO is making it look like a bad loser .
This is an industrial group that for decades dominated the market ; now , since the start of this decade , since 2003 and 2004 , Airbus has overtaken Boeing .
Who would have imagined that 20 years ago ?
Then at precisely the same time Boeing 's complaint to the WTO appears .
The complaint is nonsensical since the American manufacturer has always benefited from significant military research and development programmes from the Pentagon or NASA .
Many of the technologies were first used in military aircraft and Boeing benefits from free transfer of technology from the military to the civil sector , just as it also benefits from various tax breaks from the US Government .
What does Airbus , the European manufacturer , receive ?
Instead of subsidies , it gets repayable loans , which , as their name suggests , have to be repaid .
Not only are they repayable but , as you said , Commissioner , the sums repaid are far in excess of the original loan since they depend on the number of planes sold , and practically all of Airbus 's aircraft have been successful .
That will surely be the case in the future , too , with orders for the A380 and A350 piling up recently .
In addition , this system operates openly and publicly , with complete transparency .
Airbus does not benefit from any hidden aid .
Commissioner , on my behalf and on behalf of my colleagues in the European Parliament 's aeronautical intergroup , I must tell you that we will be monitoring this issue carefully , very carefully in fact .
We expect you - and you have given us assurances in this respect , Commissioner - to defence vigorously the European manufacturer 's economic interests .
The role of the European Union , like that of the United States , is not to try to go one better in the WTO , but to bring the partners together in bilateral negotiations to resolve their differences .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - As you know , the European Union is currently defending Airbus in a case before the WTO brought by the United States on behalf of Boeing .
I believe it is important at this stage of the dispute for this body to build support for the European Union 's position and against that of the United States .
I should state at the outset that this entire dispute arose because Boeing no longer wished to participate in a mutually-agreed international agreement between the United States and the European Union - an agreement that allowed certain forms of government support to both Airbus and Boeing , the only two producers of large civil aircraft in the world .
As my colleagues know , such agreements are the best foundation upon which relations among nations are based .
It is incumbent on nations to abide by their obligations under these treaties . Airbus has .
The European Union has . Unfortunately , the United States has not .
Airbus and the European Union have constantly abided by the spirit and intent of the 1992 Bilateral Aircraft Agreement .
For 11 years , competition between Airbus and Boeing flourished , resulting in important breakthroughs in commercial aviation technology and design that have led to safer , more efficient and more environmentally-sensitive air travel .
But Boeing decided it no longer wanted to abide by the obligations of this agreement .
Instead , with the assistance of the United States , they attacked Airbus for exacting so-called ' illegal subsidies ' - the very government assistance that Boeing had originally agreed to in the 1992 agreement .
As many of my colleagues are aware , Airbus 's government loan funding is a targeted and non-trade-distorting use of a government 's limited research resources .
It offers governments a fair return and brings to the market innovative products , which benefit everyone .
Simply stated , European government research and development funding is limited , repayable and has no impact on Boeing 's ability to compete .
Meanwhile , because Boeing produces both civil and military aircraft for the United States , technology used in its commercial aircraft today benefits greatly from US government awards to Boeing military research and development contracts .
For example , Boeing 's current knowledge about composites , which is being used extensively in its new 787 Dreamliner , stems - by its own admission - from its work on developing the V-22 , the F-22 , the B-2 and the Joint Strike Fighter .
This federal assistance is supplanted by US state and local government support to Boeing in the form of tax breaks , favourable real estate and local infrastructure improvements intended to secure the company 's presence and job base in selected US cities .
While Boeing opposes the Airbus repayable assistance programme , it has no problem with identical programmes benefiting Boeing in Japan .
I highlight these points not to imply that the assistance received by Boeing ( repayable in Japan but not in the US ) is somehow worse than the repayable European loans received by Airbus .
I mention this assistance that Boeing receives to illustrate the reality that both sides benefit from some form of government assistance , from nations wishing to retain their global leadership roles in aviation .
While Boeing has benefited from government support , it seeks to deny Europe similar benefits .
I believe we should urge the Commission to direct Airbus and Boeing to develop a forward-looking arrangement that provides a stable environment for both sides to compete and develop state-of-the-art aircraft well into the future .
Maybe a six-month moratorium on the WTO case would allow the two companies time to complete a new discipline .
This is the opportunity that is now before us .
We can dwell on the past or look forward to the future .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , to many observers , the WTO dispute between Airbus and Boeing is starting to sound like a never-ending saga .
I am happy that you have at least shown us a light at the end of the tunnel .
In my view , in order to be able to evaluate the current situation and provide a policy recommendation on how we should go forward , it is worth reviewing the background to the dispute once again , together with the economic development of these two aviation giants .
The origins of the current situation lie primarily in the massive increase in international aviation , accompanied by strong competition between aviation companies , since the early 1990s .
May I , at this juncture , expressly pay tribute to the Commission once again for what it has achieved here .
Without the establishment of the common market for the aviation industry in the 1990s and the Europeanisation of agreements with overseas countries , the competitiveness - and thus the success - of Europe 's aircraft companies would have been impossible to achieve .
The competition was tough , however , and some aircraft companies went to the wall .
The demand for ever more economical , safer , larger , faster and more modern aircraft assumed dimensions in the 1990s which ultimately left only two well-performing companies in the running : Airbus and Boeing .
Real alternatives to them now only exist in the regional and business aviation sector .
I am proud that Airbus has managed to reinvent itself as a European company .
For the European economies , aviation is an immensely important factor , without which economic life as a whole would quickly fall apart .
Against this background alone , the developed economies have a massive interest in ensuring that well-performing air transport options are available to them .
The aviation industry was compelled to recognise this , but was unable to keep pace .
Above all , it lacked capital and it lacked the safeguards that would enable it to take on the enormous risks and massive expenditure associated with the development process .
As the dualism between Airbus and Boeing intensified in the industry , competition between the two inevitably increased as well .
During periods of weak demand on the world economy , the price war between Airbus and Boeing has been , and remains , intense .
To ensure that this contest did not spill over into a competition to secure the largest share of State aid , a groundbreaking agreement was forged early on , in 1992 .
In 2004 , when times were hard for Boeing , the US broke that agreement and appealed to the WTO .
The EU did not hesitate for long and sought the same remedy .
Boeing also brought the case before the WTO .
The WTO rules are very simple ; we are familiar with them and they have been debated here in this Chamber .
In my view , both sides now need to get back around the negotiating table .
Both sides need to admit that their aircraft industry needs subsidies .
That is especially true if we want to master the emerging problems of CO2 avoidance , protection against noise pollution and the increase in air traffic .
We are moving into new technological territory here , and the risks for capital providers are immense .
I would like to caution the EU 's representatives against taking Airbus 's current strength as a pretext for tightening the screws on Boeing and the US too zealously .
Less than a year ago , we would have had to hold a very different debate .
That is why both sides now need a viable strategy .
Years of dispute and games of hide-and-seek will not take our technology sites forward .
However , moving forward is essential .
The key word - CO2 - has already been mentioned .
I would ask the Commission not to misunderstand what I am saying .
It is not about letting the US pull the wool over our eyes about hidden military subsidies and ensuing cross-subsidisation .
Let us encourage the Americans to play an honest game .
I am confident that we can then reach a mutually acceptable solution .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , as I take the floor on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group in the case before the World Trade Organisation regarding the complaint by Boeing against Airbus , I should like to draw attention to the fact that the bitter rivalry between the two economic and political power bases located on either side of the Atlantic has been ongoing for many years .
I refer of course to the United States and to the European Union .
It should not come as a surprise to anyone that the debate is moving into ever more modern areas of the economy .
The aeronautical sector is an example of just such an area .
It is in that sector that new materials are developed and tested , along with new technologies for manufacturing them , new building solutions and also new automation , measurement and communication systems .
New techniques for accelerated testing of the devices developed and reliability assessments are being devised too .
It stands to reason that the governments of individual countries and also the European Union should endeavour to support these areas of manufacture , in the hope that it might be possible to exploit the cutting edge solutions discovered across the economy as a whole .
Since both parties to the dispute are therefore directly or indirectly providing financial support for their industries , there can only be one sensible outcome .
The latter has to involve bilateral negotiations and establishing a gradual reduction of the subsidies provided to both parties .
Cases dealt with through arbitration within the WTO framework can last for years and prove very costly .
Indeed , in this instance the final settlement could threaten the very survival of both Boeing and Airbus .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FR ) The explanations provided by the Commission confirm that , as far as the United States is concerned , liberalism is above all a commodity for export .
It is clear that in this area , as in many others , we are often ready to give ourselves enough rope to hang ourselves .
The US and Japanese Governments assist Boeing massively through military orders and public and public-private research .
Thus , as already mentioned here , the Boeing 787 will be the most subsidised civil aircraft in history .
The Commission must unfailingly defend Airbus in the WTO .
That is its duty and the citizens will judge it on the results .
Airbus benefits from the system of repayable loans : it is an appropriate , effective system .
It ensures that Airbus does not fall prey to the dictates of the financial markets .
It ensures that the states do not lose out on the money they invest in the aviation sector .
This system must be complemented by a stronger aviation research sector , which would raise the European effort to the same level as the United States .
This is crucial for our ability to compete both today and tomorrow .
In fact , there would be no aerospace industry without massive public intervention and support .
The incompetence and weakness demonstrated by EADS ' two main private shareholders are proof of this .
The Galileo problems illustrate this clearly , too .
I firmly believe that the only way of guaranteeing the future of Airbus is to make EADS the first European majority public company .
This future proposal was also put forward by numerous trade union activists at the hearing on Airbus organised by my group on 28 March .
We believe that the Airbus management must urgently withdraw the Power 8 plan , whose only purpose is to ensure that Airbus 's industrial model is identical to that of Boeing .
However , that model is causing problems for Boeing , as illustrated by the very serious difficulties it is experiencing with the industrialisation of its 787 Dreamliner .
Europe needs an aerospace industry that is powerful and that generates employment .
To achieve this , it must ensure that the workers have strong powers to intervene in their company 's strategy .
- ( EL ) Madam President , the dispute between Boeing and Airbus brings to light a major difference in commercial policy and has grave economic implications .
Let us , however , not overdramatise the situation .
The dispute is in any case a far cry from the bilateral commercial battles of the past .
What makes it problematic , ladies and gentlemen , is that it arose after the United States had unilaterally taken away the bilateral contractual framework .
This , in turn , provoked a justifiable outcry from the EU about the subsidies of the United States , which was reneging on WTO rules .
Regardless of the validity of the arguments on either side , it is true that the realignment of market shares in favour of Airbus and the consequent loss of Boeing 's competitive advantage were highly politicised .
This caused a defensive knee-jerk reaction from the US administration , which turned to the WTO dispute settlement mechanism .
The EU has rightly sought an agreed solution to prevent the dispute from escalating beyond the limits of negotiation .
However , there has been no response .
I hope there will be , as the gravity of the dispute and its intense politicisation will undoubtedly put the jurisdictional robustness of the WTO system to the test .
In that case , the settlement of the dispute could well be expected to further strengthen the credibility and international leadership qualities of the WTO , which does more than simply balance powers and weigh up interests .
The outcome of the case is expected to have wider repercussions on the economies of the two partners , affecting terms of employment , trade balance and technological development .
We have high hopes of a settlement to this dispute .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I welcome this debate and the Commission 's presence here to discuss the legal dispute between Europe and the United States , which has been running since 2004 , when Washington took a case in the WTO against the European aid granted to Airbus .
Faced with this attack , Europe , and the European Commission in particular , must show determination and conviction in order to defend a sector of undoubted economic importance .
Indeed , the civil aviation sector in Europe , of which Airbus is the jewel in the crown , is the global showcase for European collaboration and European technological expertise .
Now that the US Congress has pledged its full support for Boeing , it is the duty of the European Commission and Europe as a whole to make a political commitment to the Airbus cause .
Just a few weeks before the WTO 's dispute settlement body takes its decision , I believe that it is vital for the European Union to reiterate its support for Airbus .
This issue is much more than a simple conflict between two aviation giants .
It affects our capacity to defend a certain vision of the European commitment to our major projects and our industries .
Our industrial policy must not be limited solely to the Union 's competition policy .
The US complaint in the WTO against the European mechanism of repayable loans for the aviation sector is , in my view , unfounded and surprising .
It is unfounded because , by definition , the repayable loans are repaid .
They are repaid to the extent that the European states have been able to get a return on their investment , and since 1992 Airbus has repaid 40 % more than the sums loaned to it .
The US criticism is also unfounded because the bilateral agreement signed between the European Union and the United States - broken unilaterally by the US in 2004 , as the Commissioner said - authorised direct and indirect public aid to the civil aviation industry .
This complaint is surprising because the United States is accusing Airbus of having been subsidised even though Boeing benefits from a quasi-monopoly of extensive equipment programmes of the US army and NASA and public support for military development programmes .
Therefore , unlike the indirect US aid that is not repaid and is incompatible with the provisions of the SMC Agreement and 1994 GATT , the system of repayable loans could not be considered to be an infringement of WTO rules .
I thus hope that the European Commission defends resolutely this legitimate position .
In this respect , and having regard to the extreme importance of this matter for the future of the European aviation sector , what specific arguments does the Commission intend to put forward to defend Airbus in the WTO ?
I would also like to point out that both the United States and the European Union risk seeing all or part of their public aviation support mechanisms condemned by the WTO .
To avoid this , the parties had raised the possibility of an amicable solution .
Can the European Commission tell us whether it plans to go down that path as mentioned ?
It is crucial to explore all possible solutions because the future of thousands of people , companies and regions throughout Europe depends on this sector and a positive outcome to this conflict .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , Airbus is a European success story and a model of European cooperation .
Airbus provides jobs at six European locations and employs a total of 58 000 workers .
In Hamburg , where I come from , there are 12 000 people working for Airbus .
In the past , Airbus has shown that EU industry , given the right strategy , can compete successfully in the toughest markets with top technology .
In the dispute between the US company Boeing and the European Airbus , each side is accusing the other of paying billions in subsidies and brought complaints before the WTO in 2004 .
This could have negative consequences for transatlantic trade relations , which I would warn against , but it is very important , nonetheless , that the EU makes it clear that the financial support provided for Airbus was in conformity with WTO rules .
Both sides have declared their willingness to find a solution outside the WTO and reach an agreement on a bilateral basis .
Our goal , as politicians , should be to avoid a dispute over subsidies in the aircraft industry .
The economic performance of the two companies must not be jeopardised , and financial support should focus primarily on research .
This must include an increasingly strong emphasis on environmental , social and indeed employment policy aspects .
It is important , for the competitiveness of European industry , to ensure that Airbus also remains competitive .
In the European Parliament , we must stand up for fair competition .
The Commission must act on this , for we all have an interest in ensuring that by 2010 , the EU is the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world .
Economic and employment policy , combined with innovative technology policy , will play an extremely important role in achieving that goal .
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , first of all I think I can speak on behalf of Commissioner Mandelson when I say that we are grateful for your unanimous support for the vigorous and just defence of the European interests in this matter .
Two people asked whether we should try to relaunch amicable negotiations .
I naturally cannot speak for Commissioner Mandelson , but I can say that it takes two to have amicable negotiations in this case .
The European Commission is certainly prepared to negotiate amicably , as long as the negotiations are transparent and we are on an equal footing , because the case introduced and put forward by Commissioner Mandelson is extremely convincing in my opinion .
Several speakers have said the same .
I think I can say that we are in a strong position .
As regards the call for vigilance , the way in which the Commission has spoken and the way in which my colleague Commissioner Mandelson is dealing with the matter clearly indicate that we are extremely vigilant about this issue , for the legitimate reasons that have been expressed with great conviction during this debate .
You can therefore count on the Commission .
I will obviously pass on to Commissioner Mandelson your strong support and your requests for great vigilance and commitment to a topic that directly affects Europe 's economic interests .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( FR ) Boeing and Airbus have been accusing one another of receiving illegal government subsidies for years .
This game of reciprocal complaints being examined by the WTO 's dispute settlement body continues to fuel the row between the two largest aircraft manufacturers in the world .
If confirmed and acknowledged , these accusations of direct subsidies represent serious obstacles to the global economic system and distort the free market with serious damage to the competitive regime laid down by the WTO .
At a time when we are defending a global system free of any obstacles , this trade war is a glitch in global competition , which is supposed to be fair and just .
Only the WTO 's competent body will be able to offer impartial conclusions .
Nonetheless , we know that Boeing wants to position itself as the world leader and this complaint must not turn into an attempt to destabilise Airbus .
This trade dispute is delicate but should not damage trans-Atlantic cooperation at a time when the Doha Round is at a standstill and a favourable outcome is hoped for by the end of the year .
Report on the deliberations of the Committee on Petitions during the year 2006 ( debate )
The next item is the report by Carlos José Iturgaiz Angulo , on behalf of the Committee on Petitions , on the deliberations of the Committee on Petitions during the year 2006 .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the work of the Committee on Petitions is an admirable resource enabling us to gain an in-depth understanding of the problems and complaints of citizens regarding European affairs .
While these cover a wide range of policy areas , they frequently touch up on land-planning and environmental issues .
They essentially involve all Member States and encompass broad sections of civil society , from individual citizens to multinational NGOs .
Your rapporteur rightly , I think , underlines the importance of the work entailed in the 1 000 or more petitions you receive each year .
There are three aspects of the report and the resolution that I should like to mention .
The first of these is a recent development : the visits the Commission makes to places where a particular problem has arisen .
These visits may have considerable media impact and will undoubtedly give your work a higher profile .
In addition to being covered by the press and the media generally , these missions engender very detailed reports which , in my opinion , are of high quality .
I believe these are important records of your activity and certainly deserve wide publicity .
Those of you who managed to hear the radio programmes last week about the activity of the Committee on Petitions will have understood how important it is that you should give those submitting petitions a personal hearing in the presence of all the necessary experts .
This represents a large investment in time and resources , but I am sure it would be worthwhile .
The second point I should like to emphasise has always been a favourite in these debates : the coexistence or even duplication of a petition and complaint , possibly giving rise to a contravention procedure .
The report indicates that in 2006 at least , the Commission once again did not keep Parliament as well informed as the latter would have liked .
You must surely have foreseen that at this point I would answer by referring to our recent communication on the enforcement of Community law , entitled ' A Europe of Results ' .
This communication contains commitments on transparency , the setting of priorities , modernisation , better cooperation with the national authorities and everything you could wish for in these cases of duplication .
That is not all , however .
We have already started work on a document outlining the policy .
The document will put all this to use in the environment sector , which , as I understand from your report , is one of the sectors you are most concerned with .
The third and final point I should like to mention applies more to the future .
Let me assure you once again that we intend there to be the best possible cooperation between the Commission and Parliament .
Such cooperation is mutually beneficial .
Systematic cooperation leads to a better exchange of information and hence an improvement in the level of service offered to our citizens in all sectors .
This is what we all want , so let us try to ensure that the examination of petitions is exemplary .
Once again , I congratulate the rapporteur for raising this issue .
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Madam President , I firstly wish to thank Commissioner Dimas for his comments and reflections , and I would of course also like to thank all those who made this report possible , including the secretariat staff , all my colleagues who took part in the committee 's debates and those who have enhanced this report by tabling amendments to improve it .
I thank you all .
Ladies and gentlemen , I am tabling this report pursuant to Rule 192 of the Rules of Procedure on the deliberations of the Committee on Petitions during the parliamentary year 2006 .
The current report provides an overview of the main elements that characterised the activity of the Committee on Petitions last year .
It points out its achievements , and also indicates certain areas where further progress is needed , since obviously we must continue to improve .
Of all Parliament 's committees , it is the Committee on Petitions that is in closest proximity to the citizens .
Citizens can approach it on either an individual or group basis , and the committee attempts to provide them with the best solutions , ensuring that the petitions are managed in a transparent and effective way and that the citizens obtain comprehensive answers to the issues they raise .
The right of petition , enshrined in the EC Treaty in Articles 21 and 194 , is a significant feature of European citizenship as it enables any European Union citizen and any natural or legal person residing or having a registered office in a Member State to address the European Parliament on matters falling within the EU 's remit .
I therefore wish to point out with some enthusiasm that the statistics once more show a steady flow of petitions .
For example , 1 032 petitions were submitted in 2005 and 1 016 in 2006 .
Approximately one third were declared inadmissible .
It should be pointed out that the main areas of concern for petitioners generally continue to be the environment and the free movement of goods , persons and capital .
The petitions reflect an important image of the application of European legislation and the impact it has on individuals .
Through their petitions , European citizens highlight the shortcomings and difficulties of the transposition and application process : they are in an ideal position to monitor the implementation of EU legislation at national level .
The proportion of inadmissible petitions also indicates a continuous need to raise public awareness and inform European citizens more successfully about EU legislation and policies , and about their legitimate right to petition the European Parliament .
In order to achieve this , a concerted effort is required by this European institution , but it must be accompanied by the efforts on the part of the various national institutions in each Member State .
I also wish to state , in relation to the European Commission , that the Committee on Petitions relies on the Commission 's expertise in investigating the possible infringements of Community legislation that are brought to light in the petitions .
The Commission 's recommendations remain instrumental in defining the most appropriate answer to petitioners ' problems .
Nevertheless , the committee encouraged and continues to encourage the European Commission to avoid standard , occasionally rather general answers based on a strict interpretation of its competences and the information provided by the Member States .
The Committee on Petitions continued to emphasise the importance of ensuring that the assessments of the petitions should put greater emphasis on citizens ' real problems , and to ask the European Commission to carry out independent investigations that could provide for a more coherent approach to specific issues .
I also want to point out that in its dialogue with the European Commission the committee has constantly underlined the important role petitions play in achieving the common goal of bringing Europe closer to the citizens .
It should also be said that the committee and the European Ombudsman had a constructive relationship based on constant dialogue and mutual respect for each other 's competences and prerogatives , and two reports were presented .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , firstly , I would like to complain once again about the fact that this report in particular is being dealt with at such an inconvenient hour in terms of its public resonance .
I have five comments to make in all .
My second point is that we need decisions about Treaty infringement proceedings from the Commission .
It is not enough , Commissioner , to produce a document that is simply designed to record one 's own determination , which is what the interpretation has just said ; rather , it is essential to bring about real improvements .
Your job is to facilitate decisions about Treaty infringement proceedings which you then publish , if necessary with the ensuing judicial decisions or legal rulings .
Thirdly , the Council is becoming more political .
With more qualified majority voting , the Council is taking on more overall responsibility , as co-legislator , for its legislation and thus for the execution of these laws .
We wish to emphasise once again that we would therefore very much welcome much more involvement by the Council in the activities of the Committee on Petitions and , for example , the designation of a senior official to coordinate petition-related matters .
My fifth and final point is this : we do not just want to criticise others . With this report , we want to send out the message that we ourselves , as the European Parliament , need to improve .
You can read about this in paragraphs 25 and 26 .
We need a better process in the European Parliament .
We need appropriate human resources , we need appropriate response times , we need better workflows , we need a more transparent procedure for citizens , and we need a better method of sifting out unimportant and inadmissible petitions at an early stage so that we can focus on those that are admissible and important .
Parliament has taken a significant step forward here by setting up a committee of inquiry , so we are well on track .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Madam President , I do not support Amendment 1 to paragraph 15 , and I am surprised that Mr Atkins has put his name to it .
I believe that it undermines the Committee on Petitions and the work of the Ombudsman , and I would urge Members to oppose it .
The committee plays an important role in bringing the Union closer to the citizen .
Indeed , we have succeeded on many occasions in gaining recompense and fair play , both for individual complainants and for entire communities .
The European Parliament is increasingly seen by citizens as an important platform from which to defend their environment , the quality of their drinking water and their archaeological heritage .
There are weaknesses , however , which have to be addressed in the mechanisms available to the committee and to the Commission in terms of seeking redress and to enforce decisions on governments and local authorities for negligence and , in some cases , deliberate avoidance of the implementation of European law .
There are examples : the M30 motorway project in Madrid , which I , myself , visited on behalf of the committee , where the authorities are still not implementing the agreed actions to remedy their breaches of EU law ; a similar case regarding lettori in Italy , who have been frustrated in their search for fair play for over 20 years ; and the inadequate laws and procedures to protect drinking water and archaeological heritage in Ireland .
I believe that , as a Petitions Committee and as a Union , we owe petitioners at least the implementation of decisions that have been made against governments and local authorities .
Commissioner Wallström today pointed out in this Parliament that the law is only as good as its implementation .
Clearly , there are lots of laws at European level not being properly implemented at national level , and citizens will not have confidence in the European Union until they are .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , first of all I wish to congratulate the rapporteur on an excellent report .
I myself became a member of the Committee on Petitions just over one year ago and during that time I have had first-hand experience of the very valuable work that is done by the committee .
But how often do we as politicians hear of the democratic deficit , and how often are we therefore urged to engage with citizens ?
Well , the Committee on Petitions is a tangible , hands-on , practical way of engaging with European citizens .
There is an essential element of truth in the statement that all politics is local , and while individuals throughout the EU-27 are concerned with the big issues of globalisation , EU enlargement , emigration , energy supply etc . , they are most often concerned with how these issues affect their lives , their families and their communities .
Equally , with European legislation , citizens are concerned with how this impacts on their lives and their communities .
And where they perceive misapplication or unfair application of European legislation , they want a relatively simple , easy and effective way of dealing with that situation .
That is what they look for in the Committee on Petitions .
If their petition is declared admissible , they want it dealt with in an efficient and timely way , and in this I particularly support the rapporteur on paragraphs 9 , 10 and 12 , where he calls on both the Commission and the committee to improve their timeliness .
I also agree with the rapporteur on paragraphs 25 and 26 , where he calls for the need to strengthen the committee secretariat and the need to find the necessary financial resources to continue the development of the e-petition software system .
In my opinion , the Petitions Committee is very much part of the public face of the European institutions : citizens can access the committee and have their case heard , and it is a crucial part of EU citizenship .
But the system must work efficiently .
If it does not , it is the worst of all possible outcomes , because not only do citizens consider that the misapplication or non-application of EU legislation negatively impacts on their lives , but the very system that is there to support them in fact lets them down .
That is why a well-functioning , properly resourced Committee on Petitions , working in good cooperation with the Commission and the Council , is core to supporting and validating the rights of EU citizens .
I fully support the suggestion to enhance the visibility of the Citizens ' Portal in relation to the right to petition .
If citizens know that they have the right to petition and they have the expectation of a fair and timely response , then we are strengthening EU legislation , we are giving it greater legitimacy and transparency and we are strengthening the European Union .
Finally , I would like to say to the Commissioner that we must improve the functioning of the committee , as outlined in this report , and that wonderful phrase ' connecting with citizens ' can become a reality rather than just an aspiration .


on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , I should like to thank sincerely the rapporteur , Mr Iturgaiz , the members of the Committee on Petitions and also its secretariat , headed by Mr Lowe , for the trend-setting work they have undertaken during the past three years of this parliamentary term .
The Committee on Petitions has dealt with all manner of issues that were distressing the citizens of the European Union and were important to them .
These issues included the preamble to the Constitutional Treaty with the reference to God and to Christianity , the bankruptcy of individuals involved with Lloyds and Equitable Life , and the Catholic broadcaster Radio Cope in Barcelona .
The Committee on Petitions also dealt with land use plans for Valencia , excise duty on motor vehicles , the Rospuda Valley by-pass in Poland , infringement of European Union Directives affecting Ireland ( Tara ) , and the Orléans by-pass in France .
In addition , the committee considered the activities of the so-called Jugendamt , the German authorities dealing with young people ; many complaints were lodged against the Jugendamt .
As Mr Iturgaiz stated , the Committee on Petitions is very important to the people of Europe .
It brings the EU institutions closer to the citizens and is crucial in terms of making societies aware of the real nature of these institutions .

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( ES ) Madam President , Mr Iturgaiz , I would like to thank you for this excellent report .
I wish to start by asking the President to pass on the serious concern of all members of the Committee on Petitions about the committee secretariat 's total lack of human resources .
I would also like her to pass on this concern to the EP 's Bureau , which is responsible for providing sufficient resources for this extremely important task of maintaining fluid communication with the EU citizens .
Secondly , I wish to take advantage of the presence of Commissioner Dimas here .
Since many of the petitions relate to the environment and many of them are from Spain , I would like to discuss how they could be better handled .
Firstly , as guardian of the Treaties , the European Commission is obviously not fulfilling its role when it fails to act with sufficient speed in relation to many petitions .
On numerous occasions we are faced with situations where we act in articulo mortis : in other words , by the time we get around to considering infringement proceedings , it is too late .
Then , as some of my colleagues said , we must take a look at the information supplied by the petitioners .
There are far too many cases , notably in Spain , where there has been no clear response to the petition and not even an attempt to take a serious look at the information provided , for example the petitions on opencast mines or ski resorts in the middle of Natura 2000 areas .
On the other hand , the European Commission has taken exemplary action on other petitions , and here we could cite the case of the Rospuda valley in Poland .
Nevertheless , we are concerned , as I have already mentioned , that in many cases the Commission arrives on the scene too late after a flagrant breach of environmental laws .
We have , for example , the case of the 501 highway in the Autonomous Community of Madrid , where infringement proceedings were initiated when the work had already finished .
We are also concerned about the application of the Environmental Impact Assessment Directive and the Strategic Environmental Assessment Directive .
These are not being applied properly in many countries , especially Spain , where the projects are chopped up so that the Directive does not have to be applied .
Lastly , application of the Water Framework Directive remains extremely patchy , and in some cases relating to large properties in Spain where mandatory reports have been issued against the Spanish Government itself , the European Commission refuses to take precautionary action .
Thank you , David .
I assure you that I will convey to the Bureau your request concerning additional human resources for the work of the petitions secretariat .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( ES ) Madam President , it is true that one of the Directives most frequently infringed is the Directive on Environmental Impact Assessment , which is compulsory for all building and planning .
Our problem is simply that we arrive on the scene too long after the petitions have been submitted by citizens , when the irreversible damage has already been done .
In Spain we have seen some extremely negative effects along our entire coastline as a result of very aggressive building projects .
Currently a regasification plant is being built right in the middle of El Ferrol estuary , which is of great Community interest and part of the Natura 2000 network , and no environmental impact assessment has been carried out .
This is the only regasification plant in Spain that will not have an environmental impact assessment , thereby creating a lack of security and infringing clear Directives .
We will each of us have to strive to speed up our responses so that the citizens see that their rights are not being violated .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Madam President , I consider the Committee on Petitions one of the most valuable committees in Parliament , if not the most valuable .
It is the form in which the citizens tell us how the many laws we tinker with in other committees affect them or do not affect them .
Without this feedback we are doomed to work in a vacuum .
But , in terms of doing our work properly , there is something missing in the procedure : the Council and the Permanent Representation of the Member States .
How can we get results for a citizen in dispute with their country without that country being represented in the Petitions Committee ?
The second thing I want to mention is a particular petition .
The people of Ireland came to the Petitions Committee , with three petitions in all , in connection with our most important sensitive archaeological site : Tara , the home of the High Kings and of St Patrick .
The Petitions Committee has responded and has asked for the destruction to stop .
The Commission has brought a case against the Irish authorities and yet , by the time anything happens , there will be a motorway , probably there for already three or four years , and all the destruction will have happened .
The Irish people will not get over their disillusionment .

Madam President , I should like to congratulate my colleague , Mr Iturgaiz Angulo , on his excellent report .
Having been a member of the Committee on Petitions myself since the beginning of this year , I too have to admit that I am becoming a keen supporter of this committee and the importance of its role .
I dare say , however , that many Members in this House are not giving this committee the importance that it deserves , and this should change .
If EU citizenship means anything , surely it must mean that citizens of Europe can stand up for their rights and make their voices heard , regardless of whether they stand up against companies , local or regional authorities , public agencies or even their own national governments .
This right can best be exercised through the use of the petition to the European Parliament - a right that is recognised as a basic right in the Treaty .
Provided that their complaint concerns rights under EU law , people can rely on Europe and on us , as representatives of Europeans , to support them .
The petition is a great tribute , I would say , to Europe and what it stands for , but it is also a great credit to Member States , because Member States themselves signed a Treaty which gave the right to petition , even if the petition can often be used as a tool against Member State authorities themselves .
So I strongly urge EU citizens to stand up for their rights , to use the petition as a tool to defend themselves on EU rights .
Those who will do so will surely find us standing right there behind them .
( PL ) Madam President , the European Parliament received 1 016 petitions in 2006 .
As in 2005 , approximately one third of these petitions were not within the sphere of competence of the European Union and were therefore deemed inadmissible .
This is indicative of the need to ensure that the citizens are properly informed about the remit of the Union and its institutions .
In this connection , I should like to emphasise the enormous contribution made by the Committee on Petitions to the work of the European Parliament in terms of communicating with the citizens and promoting transparency and responsibility in the Union 's decision-making process .
The close cooperation between the Committee on Petitions and the European Ombudsman is also to be commended .
Nonetheless , greater commitment from the Council is urgently needed .
In particular , a senior official should be appointed to coordinate petitions , as many of the latter involve sensitive political issues relating to the transposition of Community provisions into the national legislation of the Member States .
The only way to meet the citizens ' expectations in terms of swift and effective responses to their complaints is by speeding up the process of examining petitions and ensuring cooperation between the various institutions .
In conclusion , I should like to thank the rapporteur for a very well prepared document .
Madam President , I too wish to congratulate the rapporteur on his excellent report .
At the same time I wish to congratulate the chairman of the Committee on Petitions , its members and secretariat for the splendid work they are carrying out .
The Committee on Petitions , despite the fact that on occasion its attendance by MEPs is rather slim , is , I believe , one of the most important committees which links the ordinary citizen of Europe with the EU institutional order .
It provides the mechanism through which our constituents can feel closer to the EU , and it greatly facilitates a feeling among citizens that the EU institutions are not faceless and blameless bureaucrats , but that they also can be held to account , and responsibilities can be asked for and criticisms directed at those that do not do their job as well as they should .
Importantly , this report shows that the continued dialogue of the Committee on Petitions with the Ombudsman and the Commission has been a most useful exercise , but , sadly , the cooperation with the Member States and the Council leaves a lot to be desired , and this is an area where significant improvement is needed urgently .
( PL ) Madam President , the contribution made by the Committee on Petitions to communication between the European Parliament and the citizens of the Member States is invaluable and responds to society 's expectations .
It is a fact that every year approximately 1 000 petitions are received , some 2 500 documents , and that as many documents again are sent out annually .
Clearly , therefore , such direct contact with the European Parliament is necessary for the citizens of our countries and encourages them to hope that their problems can be resolved .
Of course , this does not mean that the authors of these petitions are always right .
They encompass differences of opinions and interests .
Nonetheless , the very fact that the Committee on Petitions examines the petitions makes it possible to appreciate the problems that are of concern to society .
It also provides an opportunity to improve legislation that is not always unambiguous or transparent , to eliminate legal loopholes and to prevent infringement or incorrect transposition of Community legislation .
I would like to thank the Committee on Petitions for the outcome of its useful work .
Madam President , I am here and am delighted to be so , because I think that the work that the Committee on Petitions does - and I want to congratulate the rapporteur on the work in terms of his report - is very different to any other committee and , indeed , any other report you will find .
We are , I suppose , as members of the committee , and to use that well-worn phrase which I do not like , ' close to the citizen ' .
I think that is very important .
They ring our office , they know our assistants , they ask for help , and we do that .
We give them help and bring their petitions to Parliament .
We also deal with a wide range of issues , and that requires Members to educate themselves on all of those issues that come before us , from environment matters to financial services to whatever it is .
We are the committee that most frequently meets , greets and deals with ' real people ' - and , again , that is a phrase I do not like to use , but it is a very important one when we speak here in this Chamber so late in the evening .
But the truth is that we rely greatly on the Commission to come back to us with answers , and sometimes the quality , and indeed quantity , of the responses at meetings is poor , I have to say ; not always , but in some cases it is not timely and we could do our business a little bit better .
I would support all of the efforts and the mentions made in the report that we do just that .
I believe , though , that it takes a particular individual to come to the Committee on Petitions of Parliament .
There are many citizens who would like to do it , but would not be able to , so we are dealing with people with great determination and obviously people who are angry as well about what is happening in their Member State and they want action .
I will give you an example of a landfill dump called Whiteriver in my own country , in Co . Louth .
It is on our agenda at some time in the future , but even the threat of the Committee on Petitions dealing with this issue has resulted in positive action on the ground .
So , sometimes , we have an effect and we may not even know about it before the petition comes to Parliament .
I want to mention particularly last year 's Equitable Life , which was a child , if you like , of the committee 's work .
Again , in relation to Equitable Life , it was very important for us not to promise more to people than we could actually deliver .
What the people wanted from us was obviously some measure of redress in terms of compensation for their losses .
We could not do that and we were very strict in saying that , but I think it was important that we pointed out where the responsibility lay - and it lay with the UK Government .
I think it is also important that we keep the pressure on those with the responsibility , again the UK authorities , in relation to Equitable Life , to get them to take action .
A lot of our work is political and it is about pressure points and we have to be determined in order to get results .
I would say this and I have said it to my colleagues in the PPE-DE Group : I think we need a quality-control measure on the work of the committee so that we can do our work better , that we ask petitioners after we have gone through the process what they thought of us in terms of the work we did .
I think we should not be afraid of that .
Lastly can I say , because I say it every time I get a chance , European City Guides needs to be addressed , and I hope it will be .

Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I would like to thank all the speakers in this very interesting debate for their positive contributions .
I agree with most of the speakers , especially Ms McGuinness , Mr Tomaszewska and Mr Matsakis , who said that this committee is one of the most important committees and that it connects European citizens with the European Union 's institutions .
I fully agree and I am willing to cooperate as much as possible in order to respond to the concerns of European citizens .
I would like to answer two main questions : how to conciliate the precautionary principle with the need to have evidence before attacking a Member State .
I am aware of the issues raised by Mr Hammerstein and I would like to say that legal enforcement action can only challenge decisions formally taken by Member States in breach of European Union law .
The Commission cannot initiate legal proceedings on a judgment of intent .
Therefore , until a decision is formally taken , there is no room for legal action .
Regarding the issue of the speed of action , the Commission needs to respect the procedural requirements of the Treaty and to make sure that it has developed the right arguments and compiled the necessary evidence where court action is needed .
This can take time .
Nevertheless , in December 2006 , the Commission - myself , actually - for the first time obtained an interim order from the European Court of Justice in the environment domain , suspending illegal hunting rules in Italy before the main legal action was heard .
On 18 April 2007 , we obtained our first interim order in relation to an infrastructural project .
Each case needs to be evaluated on its own merits , even if recent initiatives from the Commission , supported by the European Parliament , such as those relating to illegal hunting in Italy , which I have previously referred to , or to the Rospuda Valley , illustrate the interest of using this procedure in order to protect the environment .
It should not be used as a routine mechanism .
This mechanism should only be used for high-profile cases where the adoption of interim measures can have a pedagogical effect .
In conclusion , I would like to thank the rapporteur once again for his very informative report , which I sincerely hope will contribute to raising the visibility of the work of the Committee on Petitions , and I assure you , once again , of the Commission 's firm commitment to collaboration with you all .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The regional impact of earthquakes ( debate )
The next item is the report by Nikolaos Vakalis , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Development , on the regional impact of earthquakes .

Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I requested this report after I made the following discovery : although earthquakes in the 20th century have killed 1.5 million people worldwide and injured many more ; although earthquakes are the second most deadly natural disaster in the world ; and although in 2002-2007 , earthquakes were the fourth most frequent natural disaster in the Member States and the candidate countries , we in the EU responded to the problem only occasionally and peripherally , and only in the context of other natural disasters .


I now feel vindicated and satisfied that my report has been approved by the Committee on Regional Development and enjoys the support of all the political groups .
The European Parliament 's message is clear : in future we , the EU , must not and cannot deal with the problem of earthquakes intermittently and peripherally ; we must focus on it as a distinct , separate problem and examine all of its individual aspects and components .
In particular , the report asks the Commission to waste no time in preparing a communication containing an earthquake risk assessment and an examination of prevention , management , relief and restoration measures .
In other words , the communication has to be equivalent to that on floods .
The European Parliament expects the Commission to examine , at least within the scope of such a communication , a number of proposals contained in the report .
Firstly , the adoption of earthquake protection measures should in future be an essential requirement for the funding of infrastructure from the Structural Funds , especially in view of the fact that earthquakes threaten the overall economic and social cohesion of the regions affected .
Earthquakes are , above all , a threat to life and limb , infrastructure , employment , the environment , cultural heritage and tourism .
Secondly , we should promote the construction of new buildings , as well as the conservation and upgrading of old buildings and structures , which include monuments that are not compliant with earthquake specifications .
Thirdly , the European Commission should ensure that more funds are allocated to public information and the training of professionals dealing with earthquakes .
Fourthly , a European strategy for earthquake research should be developed .
Account should be taken of not only the social but also the economic benefits that such action entails .
Fifthly , a technical protocol should be drawn up on joint action by the EU in the event of serious seismic disasters , with particular emphasis on the crucial infrastructures of transport , energy , telecommunications and health .
Lastly , the Barnier proposal should be revived .
There should also be a follow-up to the Sarkozy-Karamanlis proposal for a European civil protection force , through a legislative - I stress the word , legislative - proposal by the Commission .
Madam President , Commissioner , the report to be approved tomorrow by this Parliament makes specific proposals .
We - both the Commission and the Member States - wish to respond to them immediately and take action in accordance with each party 's responsibilities .
Let me conclude by thanking the shadow rapporteurs for their excellent cooperation , and also my fellow Members in all political groups who have improved my original proposal through their interventions and amendments .

Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission , and I personally , wish to thank the rapporteur , Mr Vakalis , for this extremely informative and valuable report .
Earthquakes are not easy to deal with .
There needs to be adequate preparation and sufficient measures must be taken in advance so that we can cope with the most serious effects .
2007 was an important year for developing ways of dealing with natural disasters at EU level .
Not only did we have the largest single mobilisation of the EU civil protection mechanism to fight the Greek forest fires , but two new legislative measures on civil protection were adopted : the financial instrument for civil protection , and a revised European civil protection mechanism .
In addition , as announced in September and following the European Parliament 's resolution on forest fires and floods , the Commission is to launch a special initiative to strengthen the EU 's capacity to deal with disasters .
A rapid and effective response to emergencies is obviously of crucial importance , particularly for risks such as earthquakes , which are practically impossible to foresee .
However , even when unforeseen events occur , an effective response can and must be supplemented by suitable preventive measures , such as early warning , to limit potential damage and enable the situation to be brought under control .
For these reasons , in 2008 the Commission will develop a complete initiative to improve disaster prevention generally .
After response and prevention , the third stage in the management of disasters such as earthquakes is restoration .
In this context , I welcome Parliament 's call for the Council to promote the proposal on the Solidarity Fund .
The financial instrument for civil protection provides a long-term funding framework for civil protection such as earthquake response operations .
The new regulation has almost doubled the funds available .
The Commission also has special plans for dealing with earthquake-related issues and , thanks to the capital allocated by the European Parliament to the EU budget in 2006 , the Commission is already supporting the STEP project .
This project is being implemented through a partnership between Italy , Portugal and Germany and aims to develop a mobile assessment and administration unit for earthquake management .
The Commission endorses the appeal by the rapporteur , Mr Vakalis , for better coordination .
The events of last summer have shown that although the EU civil protection response was impressive , there is still room for improvement .
On the basis of the recommendations of the Barnier report , the Commission is now developing ready-formed civil protection units composed of disaster response experts that can be mobilised instantly .
Lastly , the rapporteur , Mr Vakalis , underlines the importance of cooperation with third countries .
The civil protection mechanism allows cooperation with third countries and with the Euromed programme in the prevention , mitigation and management of natural and man-made disasters and is another good example of cooperation in this sector .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , Commissioner , I would first of all like to congratulate Mr Vakalis on his report .
As a Greek , he has tackled a subject that also affects his own region and citizens .
He completed his own-initiative report in a very short time and I give it my full support .
I would very much like to look at disaster control and disaster prevention in a broader context , namely climate change .
Rainfall , serious rainfall , floods , rising sea levels , etc. are going to become more and more prevalent .
In that respect , people naturally look to the European Union .
From 31 October to 2 November I participated in a debate in the United Nations in New York with representatives of many continents and regions .
They also look to Europe and ask us to do our best as regards prevention , prevention programmes and disaster prevention , and want us to bring our expertise into play .
I think that we do indeed need to offer this , alongside innovation and solidarity , on a global scale .
My country , the Netherlands , also partially lies below sea level and has special expertise that we can use in this area .
I am therefore pleased that we can set a good example with the various funds in the European Union .
I would like to reiterate my support for what was said in the debate with the Commission this morning : our Solidarity Fund must be more flexible .
We have a very good Fund , a very good example , but the European Council still has reservations about it .
Finally , Madam President , Mr Vakalis ' report has a specifically European dimension .
Disasters are frequently multinational , they do not stop at borders , and I would thus call on the Commission to put forward initiatives with a view to protecting and supporting our citizens .
on behalf of the PSE group . - ( RO ) Madam President , Mr. Rapporteur , dear colleagues , the report on the regional impact of earthquakes was not an easy undertaking , especially because it came as earthquakes do : very quickly and unexpectedly .
For this reason , I would like to congratulate our colleague Mr. Vakalis for the way in which he managed to be a captain on this ship .
Since earthquakes have no ideological connotations , we have had no clashes of opinions among groups .
Our only mission was to find pragmatic formulas to fill a gap in legislation and to create efficient response mechanisms at a European level .
I would like to say that , according to Mr. Vakalis ' initial intuition , during the research period for this report we discovered that , at the level of the European Union , we have serious gaps regarding earthquake protection .
We have no unitary mechanism for intervention in case of an earthquake .
Hazard maps are lacking in many European countries and regions .
We have no relevant national laws in many countries .
We invest very little in research .
We have no European research agenda in the field of seismic risk .
Seismic risk protection in insurance policies , for instance , is lacking or is insignificant .
We have no education campaign for the population , although we have a Eurocod 8 , which contains instructions for earthquake protection .
Nevertheless , it does not apply to urban planning regulations for new constructions .
In a word , we also proposed other things .
Mr. Vakalis has mentioned some of them .
Those of us who come from the Party of European Socialists reiterated the support for establishing a European civil protection force , inviting the Commission to make a proposal for this purpose .
We proposed a European centralized instrument for preventing and managing earthquake crises .
We insisted on advanced research and a programme financed at the European level .
To all this , Mr. Vakalis operated like a perfect catalyst , he prepared excellent syntheses for compromise amendments when we threatened to draw up a report the size of a dictionary .
For this reason , I believe the report is a result of excellent team work and I congratulate Mr. Vakalis and all the colleagues who participated in this report .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , congratulations to Mr Vakalis for his excellent work .
This report highlights the fact that , although earthquakes can have a devastating economic and social impact in seismic-stricken regions , not enough attention has been paid to them by the EU .
The rapporteur advocates - and rightly so - that a series of regulatory and financial measures are urgently needed in order to remedy this unhappy state of affairs .
Such measures should aim at minimalisation of damage caused as well as facilitating speedy and effective response and compensation to affected individuals and communities .
Mr Vakalis states that an area which should be given special attention is that of research .
I agree .
Not necessarily of course research in predicting earthquakes , a practice which has been proven to have limitations , but research in the way we construct our buildings .
Attention to more stable , robust and lightweight materials is an example .
Safety features to prevent electrocution and electric fires being caused after a tremor are another area where research can help prevent loss of life .
Research into telecommunications systems that do not get so easily jumped in the panic that follows an earthquake and research into specialised equipment for detecting and extracting victims from collapsed buildings are other areas where research can be most helpful and very rewarding .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that the motion for a resolution on the regional impact of earthquakes addresses for the first time , in a logical and coherent fashion , the issue of seismic vulnerability in parts of the Union and consequently the remit of civil protection services .
I therefore say to the rapporteur : praise where praise is due !
I am fascinated by , and directly involved in , this matter , living as I do in the European region at greatest risk of seismic and volcanic activity : Sicily , at the foot of Mount Etna .
I had the honour of serving as the Italian Government 's commissioner for emergencies recently during a serious eruption of that volcano .
I am therefore familiar with the problem at close quarters , and I also know how behind the times Italy is when it comes to risk forecasting and prevention , and not just seismic risk of course .
Europe , too , lags a long way behind on this front , however .
I have , for example , been calling on Parliament and the Commission for years to establish a European Civil Protection Agency responsible for coordinating the Member States ' emergency management services and drawing up a uniform policy on prevention , forecasting and training for staff and volunteers .
Today 's resolution appears to go in that direction at long last .
If the truth be told , the European Union as a whole still lacks a culture of civil protection , which often remains nothing more than the subject of round tables and electoral promises , even though what is at stake is the right of each and every one of us to safety .
Before asking local actors , provinces , municipalities and regions for concrete examples , Europe should demonstrate that it wishes to turn the page at last , and I believe that this resolution could constitute the first proper step in that direction .
Mr President , earthquakes are inevitable , but protective shielding measures can be taken to minimise death and destruction and to allow people to enjoy greater safety .
The rapporteur proposes a number of valid measures , which I shall not reiterate .
However , I must in addition emphasise the need for pre-earthquake inspection and the reinforcement of structures where there is a problem , in both public and private buildings such as factories , colleges , recreation centres : I mean places where people gather in large numbers .
At the same time , we must protect and extend open spaces to accommodate the population after a catastrophic earthquake because the profitability of land has encouraged building development .
As regards new construction , the quality of materials and the reliability of builders ' must be verified , as human lives are sometimes disregarded in the interests of greater profit , as we know from earthquakes in Greece .
Special protection measures must first be applied in areas of higher seismic risk .
These are essentially densely built-up areas that are deprived socially , economically and in terms of housing .
It is right that there should be Community aid for restoration .
This is the people 's money .
The government will also have to adhere to procedures adapted to the soil and housing conditions of the area in order to provide the greatest possible earthquake protection and improvement of residential buildings .

Mr President , I would like to congratulate my fellow Member , Mr Vakalis , and thank the Commissioner , Mr Dimas , for the hope he is giving us for the future .
You can escape from fire , Mr President , and if you can swim , you can get away from floods .
In an earthquake , you can only hope to have God on your side .
Since this concerns our metaphysical aims and hopes , it would be good to have the EU on our side .
Sometimes , unfortunately , we do not , because we have seen the Solidarity Fund activated for only one earthquake incident , whereas in cases of flood and fire , it showed great willingness .
We understand , of course , that according to regulations , the damage should exceed 3 billion , but the houses that fall are not those of Onassis or Bill Gates ; they are the homes of the poor .
We can therefore bypass the regulations .
Since the Mediterranean region has often suffered intolerable ordeals verging on unfair physical punishment , we are calling , if possible , for the activation of the Structural Development Fund , the Solidarity Fund ( provided its strict rules can be moderated ) , the European Regional Development Fund and also the Civil Protection Fund .
This will permit the funding of vital research programmes and also allow the repair of damage , wherever this can humanly and fairly be achieved .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this excellent report by our colleague Mr Vakalis links in seamlessly to the three reports on natural disasters adopted by Parliament last year and is an important addition to them , for these previous reports did not deal with the issue of earthquakes .
We know , however , that many countries and regions - especially in southern Europe and the Mediterranean region - have a high risk of earthquakes .
I therefore endorse the rapporteur 's call for the Commission to draw up a communication evaluating the hazards posed by earthquakes and proposing the counter- and follow-up measures necessary to address them , as it recently did in the case of floods .
The question of financing is key , of course , and as the rapporteur on the Solidarity Fund , I cannot understand why the Council is still dragging its feet on - indeed , has in effect shelved - the adaptation of the Solidarity Fund , which this House has endorsed .
Immediate action is required here to ensure that this solidarity and funding instrument is available in future so that the damage caused by natural disasters , including earthquakes , can be remedied quickly , efficiently and flexibly .
Without this flexibility , particularly in terms of the timetables and measures for funding , it has been shown in the past that the needs of earthquake victims have been virtually ignored .
We must consider - as the previous speaker has said - that the Solidarity Fund that is currently still in place has only been used once in relation to earthquake damage .
However , earthquakes are just as much natural disasters as floods , forest fires and storms .
There are other forms of financing , in addition to direct funding , which should be used as well , however , such as regional state subsidies or loans from the European Investment Fund .
This is the only way to ensure that appropriate resources are available to tackle earthquakes .
The report makes a good contribution to this process .
( DE ) Mr President , the earthquake in Friaul 30 years ago killed more than 3 000 people and is something which I still remember very vividly .
The images of the destruction , caused within a matter of seconds , and the race against time to free the injured from the rubble are something I will never forget .
It is therefore especially welcome that the European Parliament is dealing with this important issue .
Without the unstinting commitment of rescue workers - including volunteers from neighbouring countries - this type of earthquake disaster is almost impossible to cope with , for only swift assistance is helpful .
Despite that fact , there is still very little cooperation in the EU on research regarding earthquake risks and no common mechanism at European level for crisis intervention .
Binding rules for cross-border cooperation are needed and the cooperation with emergency relief organisations must be stepped up .
I welcome the proposal to incorporate Eurocode 8 instructions in the planning regulations of vulnerable countries .
In most European countries at present there is no legal basis for the assessment of major building structures , but it is those public buildings of strategic importance for civil protection and other critical infrastructures which , in the event of a disaster , must remain undamaged and operational and which require special protection .
The assessment of important buildings must therefore be incorporated as a key element in the regional programmes .
Finally , may I take this opportunity to pay tribute to the reconstruction that has been carried out by the people affected by these disasters .
They are a good example of how , through their own efforts , there is hope of a better future even after total destruction .
I would therefore like to thank the rapporteur sincerely for his work .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by recalling Johann Wolfgang von Goethe 's words that there is no point arguing with an earthquake .
Although 150 years old , these words still hold true today .
As described in the report by Mr Vakalis , we must learn to live with earthquakes and be completely prepared for them .
I would like to commend the rapporteur for his laying down practical instructions and showing us the way forward .
There is no doubt that an earthquake is a destructive phenomenon .
According to estimates by geo-physicians and historians , since the dawn of civilisation earthquakes have claimed the lives of 150 million people .
Fully half of the human population today live in areas with seismic activity .
In Europe , earthquakes might not always have catastrophic consequences ; however , we still need to be protected from them .
An earthquake reaching just 5 on the Richter scale can be dangerous in that it causes loose objects to fall , roofing to cave in , buildings to be negatively affected and gas and water services to be damaged .
I personally believe that the steps taken recently to eliminate the negative impact of earthquakes are the correct ones .
They include : introduction of a single emergency phone number ; construction of integrated emergency systems ; promotion of international cooperation ; and exchange of information between rescue forces .
We need to follow up on these steps by continuously strengthening the cooperation of rescue forces in neighbouring regions and countries , improving the qualifications and skills of civil protection experts , ensuring widespread use of information technologies and promoting training for , and simulation of , possible disasters .
We should not aim for the impossible , for example setting up common bodies or harmonising legislation .
Rather we should focus on the flaws in the existing system .
Last but not least , we need to realise that earthquakes are just one form of natural disasters , like floods , fires or drought , and that the problem of natural disasters should be dealt with as a whole .
( SL ) They say that a friend in need is a friend indeed .
A region where a powerful or even catastrophic earthquake has occurred naturally requires rapid and effective European Union assistance , particularly where the country concerned is itself unable to provide such assistance in full .
In view of the frequency of earthquakes in Europe , the number of victims and the material damage involved , it is highly unlikely that resources from a solidarity fund to assist the victims of earthquakes would be used only once .
The catastrophic fire in Greece demonstrated that the European Union is not sufficiently well organised to deal with such disasters .
I agree with the proposal that we should invest greater resources in research into improved seismic risk monitoring , and funds for that purpose have already been provided in the Seventh Framework Programme for Research .
It is also prudent to cooperate with countries which already have extensive knowledge and experience in this field .
A strategic plan for dealing with earthquakes , rapid response , coordinated rescue and cross-border assistance can save a large number of human lives .
Naturally , advanced measures can also prevent many problems .
Who could imagine Brussels without the Grand Place , Paris without the Eiffel Tower , or London without Buckingham Palace ?
Every country and region has its jewels and cultural heritage which it must protect as much as possible against earthquakes .
Standards for earthquake-proof building must also be complied with consistently , in particular in areas with a high level of seismic activity .
Mr President , once again I should like to thank all the speakers in tonight 's debate for their extremely positive contributions .
The Commission supports the approval of the report on the regional impact of earthquakes .
Citizens expect the Member States and institutional bodies to act effectively and in a spirit of solidarity when faced with disasters .
The prevention of environmental damage and damage caused by human activity entails the strengthening and development of civil protection resources and capabilities at local , national and European level .
The Commission is confident that Parliament will continue to endorse and support this aim in the future .
Lastly , let me remind you , ladies and gentlemen , that on 22 and 23 November , the Commission is holding its second civil protection forum in Brussels .
The forum will be attended by approximately 500 participants who work in the field of civil protection or have an interest in it .
It will enable participants to exchange ideas and will give them a chance to meet others who share their interest in civil protection and who work in the same field .
I therefore call on my fellow Members to take part in the forum and meet the civil protection community .
Once again let me congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Vakalis , on his excellent report .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written Statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( FR ) Tectonic movements are manifested not only by earthquakes but also by volcanic eruptions .
In addition , the effects of these natural hazards can be aggravated , notably by land movements and tsunamis .
The European Union 's outermost regions , which often suffer this type of disaster , have developed key experience in observing , preventing and responding to these phenomena .
I hope that the Commission and the Member States encourage the setting-up of centres of excellence in scientific , technological and architectural innovation in the regions affected by these natural hazards , notably the outermost regions .
The dual objective of these structures would be to ensure public safety and to enable sustainable land development , through interregional cooperation and the networking of research establishments , SMEs and local authorities in the regions concerned .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for having approved my amendments to this end and I reassure him that I fully support his renewed request to the Commission to publish as soon as possible an ambitious proposal for a genuine European civil protection force .
Proclamation of consensus on humanitarian aid - The European Union and Humanitarian Aid ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on :
the Commission statement on the proclamation of consensus on humanitarian aid , and
the report by Mr Cornillet , on behalf of the Committee on Development , on the European Union and humanitarian aid .

Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , rapporteur , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by thanking Mr Cornillet and congratulating him on his report , which identifies perfectly the challenges facing the humanitarian effort , and in particular on the fact that he also identifies perfectly the approaches to be taken in relation to European humanitarian action .
This report is a vital contribution to the joint work by Parliament , the Council and the Commission to put in place the future European Consensus on Humanitarian Aid .
Our common objective is to formalise in a joint declaration by the three institutions our vision and our common approach to humanitarian aid policy .
There is no doubt in my mind that the active involvement of the European Parliament is essential for the success of this process to adopt the declaration .
Allow me to reiterate very briefly the reason for this political initiative : basically , the humanitarian context has changed in recent years and we need to adapt to it if we want our humanitarian action to continue to be coherent and effective .
What are the main changes and what are the main challenges ?
In my opinion , they can be summed up as follows . Firstly , there are more and more conflicts and natural disasters and their death toll is also rising .
In particular , the natural disasters are often caused by climate change : the recent floods in Mexico reflect the reality and extent of this worrying trend .
Secondly , we are also witnessing an increase in complex crises and significant changes in the nature of conflicts .
The methods and means used in armed conflicts , for example , make the work of humanitarian organisations more and more complicated .
The risks of attacks and pillaging of aid are also unfortunate daily realities , be they in Darfur or Somalia , Sri Lanka or Myanmar , Colombia or eastern DRC .
We are also increasingly the witnesses of systematic violations of international humanitarian law and , consequently , restrictions of humanitarian values .
There is a constant risk of confusion between the political and humanitarian agendas .
I firmly believe that the European Union , as the largest global donor - I think it is important to reiterate that together we account for 40 % of global humanitarian aid - but also as a political pillar of international law and multilateralism has , as far as I am concerned , a particular responsibility to ensure effective and adequate humanitarian aid .
We can , and we must , act as a political catalyst and be a political benchmark and reference , too . That is the context in which , almost a year ago , we decided to launch the initiative to reach an explicit consensus on humanitarian aid at EU level .
These concerns are clearly reflected in Mr Cornillet 's report and I naturally support the key elements that the European Parliament wishes to underline and defend in the preparation of a European humanitarian consensus .
This consensus and appropriate monitoring involving all 27 EU Member States and the Community will for the first time provide a common political core of values , objectives and principles , supported by the Member States and the Commission , which will help to improve the complementarity and coordination of the work of the Member States and the Commission .
What are the main elements of the draft consensus ?
The first is respect for humanitarian principles : humanity , impartiality , neutrality , independence .
You are of course well aware of what is entailed .
The second is the need to strengthen respect for , and application of , international humanitarian aid law at international level .
Let me tell you a brief anecdote in this respect .
I will not mention the country but I remember , not too long ago , I was in a particularly dramatic theatre of operations from a humanitarian perspective .
I was putting questions to one of the country 's senior figures , who was responsible for what was happening there , and I said to him : ' You are not complying with international humanitarian law ' .
He gave me a truly terrible response : ' That is true , but this is a time of war ' .
It is evident that international humanitarian law is designed precisely for times of war .
You can therefore imagine the extent to which we are in fact moving further and further away from it , in some way without any reaction , or moving further and further away from the most basic standards in this respect .
Thirdly , we need to improve donors ' practices and methods as well as the quality of the partnership with the humanitarian organisations in order to make the aid provided more efficient .
Fourthly , there must be a voluntary commitment from the Member States to strengthen the complementarity and coordination of our humanitarian actions , and this is of course all the more necessary with enlargement bringing us up to 27 Member States .
The future consensus will also have to provide a general framework to define the relationship between humanitarian aid and the EU 's other external policies .
The ultimate goal is to make the EU 's humanitarian action more consistent and more effective .
All of this will make a significant contribution to strengthening the international system under the aegis of the United Nations and this is a point that I would like to emphasise .
The move to promote a European approach is evidently not aimed at weakening or competing with the central role of the United Nations .
On the contrary : it will serve to reinforce this central role , and it is sad to see at times some reticence about this European consensus on the grounds that it would be in competition with the United Nations .
That is absolutely not the case .
The opposite is true : it aims to strengthen the European pillar within the framework of the United Nations , and this goes without saying .
The draft text of the declaration on the consensus clearly refers to the elements of the consensus that will to some extent form the European Union 's humanitarian doctrine in the future .
I would like to thank Parliament and the Portuguese Presidency for their work during the negotiations on this text .
We are now reaching the final stages of this trilateral procedure , which should enable us to fulfil the ambition of having all three institutions sign a joint declaration on 18 December .
This declaration on the consensus is but the beginning of a process .
It not an end in itself , but the beginning of a process .
We know that this approach is going to require considerable efforts to ensure that our words become actions .
To this end , at the start of next year we are going to present an action plan for the implementation of the future humanitarian consensus .
Over these months of debate to prepare the consensus , the European Parliament has put forward some very specific suggestions , and we feel that it is entirely appropriate to incorporate them in the action plan , such as your proposal to draw up a humanitarian aid atlas based on the model of the development atlas .
Allow me to add a few comments on two subjects of particular interest to the Members of this House .
They relate to quasi-philosophical elements of humanitarian aid , which are today at the centre of certain debates and which are , moreover , elements of the goal of humanitarian aid itself .
The first is the issue of the ' responsibility to protect ' .
Following Parliament 's suggestion , we highlighted in the draft text of the consensus the commitments made in this respect by countries within the framework of the UN and the international community .
I should point out that humanitarian action and the responsibility to protect are based on two different approaches , even though they have an important point in common , namely stopping human suffering .
We must avoid any confusion between these two approaches because it could damage the image of the humanitarian actors as neutral and independent , something that is vital for us to be able to help people affected by humanitarian crises .
The concept of the responsibility to protect is still relatively ambiguous .
This concept , in the past and even today , is very closely linked to the idea of the right of interference and military intervention for humanitarian purposes in extreme circumstances , for example to prevent genocide .
However , that interpretation is precisely the reason why some regimes reject the concept of the responsibility to protect : they see it as a political cover for Westerners to justify their imperialism , to justify interventions founded not on humanitarian interests but on a desire for power .
At times there is confusion between this doctrine of the responsibility to protect and protective humanitarian action , which , inter alia , is traditionally part of the mandate of the ICRC .
We fully support the latter activity through our humanitarian aid .
Mr Cornillet 's report also raises a very relevant question regarding the institutional framework for debating humanitarian policy .
Parliament has appointed a Permanent Rapporteur for Humanitarian Aid , and we congratulate it on that .
The report rightly raises the issue of such representatives in the Council .
On behalf of the Commission , we gratefully acknowledge the considerable efforts of the Portuguese Presidency to give the Council the time needed for the preparation of the consensus in the development working group .
The institutional decision to set up a Council group to focus on humanitarian policy is of course down to the Member States , but I agree entirely with Mr Cornillet that it is vital to establish an appropriate body to tackle systematically humanitarian issues on an equal footing with the Union 's other external policies .
Humanitarian aid is neutral and independent of any political or other objectives but that does not mean that politics are not involved in any way .
On the contrary , the elements and actors that threaten humanitarian values are political in nature .
The Lisbon Treaty clearly recognises that humanitarian aid is a separate chapter of our international action and I feel that this should be reflected in an institutional structure .
In that regard , I must say that I feel that there is a growing trend - which I am not denouncing yet because there is no reason to denounce it when nothing dubious is going on - to believe , for example , that the logistical capacities of armies could quite easily , to some extent , be more closely involved in the humanitarian field .
I will not reject anything out of hand , but I will say , however , that we should reject any interference by a sector that does not have a humanitarian purpose .
I can understand that in certain specific cases military logistics are used to assist humanitarian actions .
However , I will not deny that I , personally , would prefer such actions to be the political responsibility of foreign ministers , as is the case in certain countries , instead of them being carried out under the aegis of one or more defence ministers .
This debate will continue , but I feel that it is more and more common to see in the humanitarian field sectors or logistics - corpora - that can undeniably cause confusion .
In conclusion , Mr President , Mr Cornillet , ladies and gentlemen , I am pleased with the European Community 's considerable contribution to the humanitarian effort and in particular I pay tribute to all the men and women who work on the ground in very difficult circumstances to provide humanitarian aid to those who need it .
I firmly believe that this consensus should allow for more systematic , coordinated action .
It is to some extent the basis of the doctrine , the founding principles and it genuinely offers a framework for permanent coordination at European level .
On the basis of this future consensus , we can become much more effective , which is after all the objective .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I will try not to repeat the excellent points the Commissioner has just made .
We are evolving in a completely new landscape .
Insofar as the Constitution had provided for it and the simplified Treaty will incorporate it , we are going to put together a full Union policy , the humanitarian aid policy , and , as the Commissioner stated , we are the world 's largest source of aid .
It in this landscape that this report must be examined .
It is not just a response to a Commission communication ; it is a working document on the consensus achieved with my colleagues .
For the first time the three institutions are going to publish a joint document . It is the first time since the adoption of the Regulation on humanitarian aid in 1996 .
It was time for a well thought-out text that provides a general political declaration on humanitarian aid for our three institutions .
I would like to emphasise the excellent collaboration involved in this discussion , both in the Committee on Development , where my report was unanimously adopted , and with the European Commission and the Portuguese Presidency .
I would also like to emphasise that the Members of this House supported 12 specific points , plus a budgetary point .
I would like to outline them here in order to explain , first of all , the extent to which we support them and why , and in particular to say that these points were incorporated in the consensus and that the European Parliament was pleased with all of the points it requested .
As regards the first point , closely linked to the previous topic of natural disasters , we wanted to see a new definition of humanitarian action because of course there are armed conflicts that , by their very nature , cannot necessarily be predicted and there are disasters that , paradoxically , are starting to become predictable , as a result of climate change in particular .
We know that in some countries there are going to be disasters , even if we do not know when exactly : the floods in South-East Asia are one example .
We thus hope that the boundaries of humanitarian action can be put in place much earlier , with training of personnel and pre-positioning .
Then , at a later stage , we can clearly see the grey area that can exist between what is still part of the humanitarian effort but is already becoming reconstruction and will eventually become development assistance .
We were very firm in our belief that these boundaries should be extended , and this would have budgetary implications , which I will discuss later .
Another important element of these boundaries , as far as Parliament is concerned , are the forgotten crises , which are forgotten in the minds of the public , but not forgotten by those who live in the midst of them .
For example , in Colombia there are almost as many displaced people as there are in Darfur , and that is something that warrants our attention .
The second point is of course the definition of humanitarian aid and its principles , which were reiterated by the Commissioner : humanity , neutrality , impartiality , independence .
The consensus defines these principles for action , on which our institution 's humanitarian action is based .
Finally , we highlighted the most vulnerable groups , with specific reference to women , gender and the specific role women play in the field of humanitarian action .
We also wanted to emphasise the role of local actors and civil society .
I will come back to this topic when discussing food aid .
As regards the use of military resources - and the Commissioner was very clear on this - military resources , especially logistical resources - I am of course thinking of helicopters that that can be crucial in a front-line intervention in a natural disaster - can only be used as a last resort and within the framework of a mandate , so that their use is extremely clearly defined .
There is always the risk that they are party to the conflict or considered to be party to an armed conflict , and it is thus important to look at this in great detail .
The same applies to civil protection : here , too , we hope that the use of civil protection assets will always be an exception and take place within the boundaries of a clear framework to ensure that the humanitarian effort does not become blurred by the intervention of actors who are not directly front-line actors .
Here in the European Parliament we obviously support the reforms within the UN , with one stipulation , Commissioner . We hope that the funds to be allocated to the CERF are additional funds .
There is no reason why our institutions should be deprived of the ability to be a driving force through the ECHO Directorate-General in particular .
If the Member States or other donors want to contribute to the United Nations funds for front-line intervention , that must not be to the detriment of what is already being done and should be over and above this .
Another aspect that is very important to us is food aid .
It has naturally been incorporated in the humanitarian aid framework , but we wanted to emphasise that it can sometimes have a harmful impact by disrupting local markets .
When food aid is offered but not properly thought out , it can violate the primo non nocere principle : ' do not harm ' .
It is important to learn from the example of other countries that are very well-known for this in their humanitarian actions so as not to make the same mistakes .
Finally , I want to talk about the responsibility to protect .
What the Commissioner said was extremely important and we fully support your comments on the right of interference and the need to stop and think , and on complete respect for the humanitarian effort , which should possibly result in consideration of sanctions at EU level .
We have at last secured our representative and thank you for pointing that out .
We simply want this consensus report to incorporate not just a set of principles but also a roadmap with which we will have - and this has been agreed - an annual meeting so that Parliament , too , can play a full role .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Foreign Affairs supports Commissioner Michel 's proposal for an interinstitutional declaration on the European Consensus on Humanitarian Aid , but the individual governments of the 27 Member States are still pursuing national policy goals on humanitarian aid , which sometimes differ substantially from Europe 's goals .
The Council and the Member States must make humanitarian aid a moral and political imperative , inspired more by the effectiveness of that aid than by national or post-colonial interests .
We cannot confine ourselves to distributing rice and bread , however necessary that may be .
The EU 's humanitarian aid must be accompanied by political and diplomatic activity that makes compliance with international law , especially international humanitarian law , a priority for the so-called recipient state .
The principles of humanity , neutrality , impartiality and independence must be safeguarded and kept distinct from any active military intervention in the field of humanitarian aid .
Failure to comply with these principles could be prejudicial both to humanitarian workers and to the populations concerned .
It is important to remember , too , that in humanitarian aid operations particular attention should be paid to the most vulnerable groups such as women and children .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats welcomed the communication from the European Commission to the European Parliament and the Council of the European Union entitled ' Towards a European Consensus on Humanitarian Aid ' .
We should bear in mind that the European Union is the largest donor of humanitarian aid in the world .
In 2006 it allocated EUR 2 billion to humanitarian aid .
These funds brought relief to more than 100 million individuals in 75 countries around the world .
It is also the case that the European Union 's potential is not being fully exploited .
This is confirmed by the latest OECD report , which points to structural inadequacies and to certain paradoxes relating to the European Union 's activities .
A joint and unambiguous declaration by the three largest institutions of the European Union is an exceptional opportunity to achieve a political consensus on the way in which the European Union should react to the increasingly complex crisis situations emerging around the world .
The declaration will allow us to establish a framework and definition of humanitarian aid and to lay down the European Union 's principles and strategies regarding the provision of aid to those most in need .
Furthermore , the declaration will help to establish and present a single European Union stance at fora involving a range of humanitarian organisations .
In addition , it will allow us to draw attention to the fact that the European Union does not focus only on awarding humanitarian aid , but is also involved in analysing the reasons why such aid is required .
Whenever possible , we endeavour to assist in finding appropriate political solutions through which to eliminate the aforementioned reasons .
I believe that Mr Cornillet , the rapporteur , has provided an excellent analysis of the complex and complicated context in which humanitarian aid has been granted over the last 15 years .
Commissioner Michel also referred to this complexity today .
Circumstances are changing and , as a result , the European Union and the international community as a whole are now facing new challenges .
The changes include a fundamental difference in the nature of armed conflicts , and more frequent occurrence of natural disasters whose effects are increasingly painful .
The number of internal conflicts is also growing , resulting in a higher number of refugees .
In many places international humanitarian law is being ignored or deliberately infringed .
Workers attached to international humanitarian organisations are under increasing threat .
More and more entities are involved in the provision of humanitarian aid .
I therefore agree with the rapporteur that complementarity , coherence , effectiveness and coordination of humanitarian aid at technical and political level between the 25 Member States of the Union is essential .
Indeed , it is a sine qua non to enhancing the European Union 's status as the main international donor of humanitarian aid .
It is also necessary for the development of a strong European policy in the context of international institutions , a policy more appropriate to the budgetary resources made available by the Union .
I should also like to refer to the so-called duty of protection .
I support the rapporteur 's opinion that the European Union should take the lead in making the notion of this duty a reality .
It involves giving priority to diplomatic and preventive action , supporting governments as they fulfil their obligation to protect their own people , and applying appropriate pressure where necessary .
The latter could include diplomatic and economic sanctions .
The use of force such as military intervention should be a last resort , and should only be used in exceptional cases , whilst fully respecting international law and complying with it .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would firstly like to thank our colleague Mr Cornillet for his work on this report and for the debates he led in our Committee on Development .
I would also like to thank the Commissioner for his pertinent analysis at the beginning of this debate .
The report on humanitarian aid rightly focuses on the protection of humanitarian personnel and access to victims , which are the two major issues that humanitarian aid must tackle now and will have to tackle increasingly in the future .
In this respect , I would like to point out , as the Commissioner did , that the changes in the way the armed forces are used can blur the image of humanitarian actors .
The confusion caused by the use of military resources , at times to accompany humanitarian workers , inevitably results in NGOs and their teams losing the immunity they used to have in the field .
Moreover , in order to reach victims and demand a certain freedom of expression , it is crucial not to appear to be involved in these conflicts or dependent on the policies of the organisations ' countries of origin .
In conflict areas the recent changes have made the perception of NGO positioning more complex .
In Darfur , in particular , several international NGOs , including Médecins du Monde , say that it is becoming more and more difficult for them to reach the victims outside the camps for the displaced and that there is a fresh upsurge of violence against the people and humanitarian workers .
Their room for manoeuvre is dependent on reaffirming their independence in relation to the armed forces involved on the ground and any political positioning .
It is also important to note that an increasing proportion of the financial resources of humanitarian NGOs comes from financial institutions , particularly European institutions .
This situation can also reinforce mistrust of these NGOs , which can sometimes see their action confused with the geo-strategic positions of the donor countries or the Union .
For that reason , I wish to stress here that the increase in public funding , which we welcome and which is an excellent thing , must not , however , lead to these NGOs being used as pawns .
In the last 10 years more than 1 000 humanitarian workers have been killed in more than 500 attacks on civilian aid operations .
If we do not make every effort to guarantee the independence of NGOs , their capacity for action will undoubtedly decrease and , consequently , the number of areas in which international humanitarian law is applied will be vastly reduced .
The media approach means that today the whole world is focusing on Zoe 's Ark , which is an extremely small amateur association compared with the vast majority of humanitarian operations , which are carried out by recognised structures whose staff have great courage and human and professional qualities .
This isolated case must not therefore be allowed to discredit all humanitarian aid actors .
On the contrary , it reminds us that it is essential for humanitarian operations to be carried out strictly in accordance with international humanitarian law and the resolutions of the United Nations Security Council .
We therefore welcome the fact that this European consensus , which will be adopted at the next part-session , encompasses our request for the creation in the Council of a formal structure that is specifically responsible for humanitarian issues , and for an annual review of the consensus and its accompanying action plan .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , first I would like to refer to paragraph 21 of Mr Cornillet 's report , which considers that the consensus should recognise and further define the different roles , mandates and comparative advantages of the various humanitarian actors .
In the case of the new Member States , there are some countries , including my own , which could perform most efficiently when cooperating with the others , pooling their skills and resources and sharing individual know-how .
When put into practice , this could benefit a lot of the humanitarian activities of the EU and enable the new Member States to become further involved in European policies .
However , the European Union should be ready to start centralising its agencies to coordinate its activities in the best possible way .
The second point that I would like to make is that the contribution of the new Member States to humanitarian aid tends to be rather modest .
The new Member States that relied on development assistance and humanitarian aid nearly two decades ago now luxuriate in rapid economic growth .
I encourage those countries to increase their contribution vigorously and remember that this is a chance to assist less-developed countries in the same way that the developed world lent them a hand not so long ago .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the conviction that it is a moral obligation to provide humanitarian aid to the victims of crisis situations is currently widespread amongst European societies .
We should be proud that the European Union is the largest donor of aid .
Nonetheless , due to the scale of natural disasters and other crisis situations it often happens that the aid is inadequate , or that there are delays in granting it .
Sometimes the aid fails to reach those most in need .
The effectiveness of aid could be greatly improved through good organisation , including cooperation with other aid donors , clear principles and unambiguous criteria .
It is important to coordinate humanitarian aid with development assistance .
This provides an opportunity for recipients to become self-sufficient , which means they will not be dependent on aid in the future .
That is why a European Consensus on Humanitarian Aid is so important .
Another relevant consideration is the need for volunteers to be protected against violence .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the report we are discussing today emphasises that the humanitarian activity of the EU must be governed by principles , as defined by the rules and good practice relating to humanitarian aid .
When we read something like this , we may well wonder about the two-faced role of the EU , which gives with one hand and takes with the other .
Palestine is a case in point .
Here we are giving money in order to vaunt our humanitarianism , while at the same time our foreign policy marginalises 1.5 million people both economically and socially , giving them no hope of improvement in the future .
The moral lesson of this should be that humanitarian aid without a realistic foreign policy makes no sense : the two go hand in hand .
It is time the Commission woke up to this .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , in recent years there have been many humanitarian crises and as many emergency aid programmes .
Every day , people are suffering from food shortages and disease ; every year there are numerous natural disasters which leave thousands without shelter and a way back to regular life .
The principal issues in crises like these are securing the safety of the area and of the people , attending to medical needs and providing food , water and shelter .
These immediate issues are primary and all efforts should be directed towards them .
Unfortunately , victims have limited access to humanitarian aid , and humanitarian aid workers ' lives are being put at risk , due to the rising internal conflict in some countries .
Sometimes , after the immediate crisis is over and the aid ends , the suffering can again become acute because nothing has been put in place to help people rebuild and be independent in the long run .
This is our most important duty : that of aiding others in their time of greatest need .
Problems with this cannot be allowed to continue and we must find another way to help in both the short and the long term .

( CS ) Mr President , I congratulate Mr Cornillet on his extremely professional report on humanitarian aid .
The need for this type of aid is not diminishing ; on the contrary , natural disasters are growing in number and scope .
Armed conflicts in developing countries have not decreased ; they have merely changed in character .
Humanitarian workers often face attacks or other acts that violate international law .
A total of 40 % of worldwide humanitarian assistance was provided by Europeans directly through the Member States or through the EU .
Last year alone this aid amounted to EUR 2 billion .
This is enough for us to strive for a more effective provision of aid .
We are aware that it should be systematic and well coordinated with other actors .
I agree that humanitarian aid should be also linked to development assistance .
It should also go hand in hand with political and diplomatic activities , notably to protect humanitarian workers and to ensure that they reach the areas of intervention .
An interesting figure on humanitarian aid provision shows that nine out of ten Europeans are in favour of it .
Half of them believe that humanitarian aid is more effective if provided at EU level as opposed to national level .
It is therefore logical that humanitarian aid has this year become an EU policy area in its own right .
This is , of course , also a great commitment .
We need to be aware that humanitarian aid is not a crisis management tool : it should avoid having any effect on local politics or markets and remain independent of political circumstances .
This is why I fully identify with the principles for its provision such as humanity , impartiality , neutrality , independence , immediacy and effectiveness .
I support , too , the idea of the Central Emergency Response Fund , because disasters always require speedy intervention .
I am also in favour of a common EU framework for needs assessment .

Mr President , firstly I would like to add my congratulations to our rapporteur , Mr Cornillet , for his hard and valuable work on this very complex issue .
I would also like to welcome Commissioner Michel and to underline his call for good cooperation with our Committee on Development .
The European consensus on humanitarian aid will play a very important role for development in humanitarian policies .
I think it is very relevant that it is jointly agreed by the Council , Parliament and the Commission .
In doing so , we seek to confirm our commitment to the humanitarian principles and to put in place a foundation for working together more closely to ensure the most effective implementation of EU humanitarian aid in the years to come and help the many people who are suffering in humanitarian crises .
As a member of the Development Committee , I am pleased that the final text includes key elements such as an explicit mention of the UN resolution on the responsibility to protect and takes into account the specific needs of vulnerable populations , with special attention to children , women , the elderly , and sick and disabled people .
The possibility of a yearly revision of humanitarian aid provisions is also mentioned in the text , a very important item that allows for a humanitarian response based on funding adequate to the needs .
Furthermore , the text mentions the idea of using local support capacities and NGOs active in the field , which allows the use of expertise and knowledge of local conditions for a faster and better response to humanitarian emergencies .
We must not forget that those who suffer most from disasters , natural or man-made , are those who are already in fragile situations due to poverty .
They live mainly in developing countries and have few possibilities for a better life .
It is important , therefore , that the European Union sends a message of solidarity and support .
For this to happen , a proper , quick and effective response in the event of humanitarian emergencies is essential .
Better coordination is also essential to achieving better linkage between relief , rehabilitation and development in order to ensure that the aftermath of a disaster claims as few human lives as possible .
( SV ) Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to thank the rapporteur for a well-balanced report on a very important subject .
Few matters are more important for our Union than being able to respond , and respond forcefully , when war breaks out or when natural catastrophes occur .
The EU has the will and the ability , but more is needed .
Let me touch on two sensitive points .
First , in certain cases it is , in my opinion , reasonable to be able to use military action to protect humanitarian efforts .
In Darfur , direct armed protection is needed to guarantee the humanitarian efforts .
Here we must primarily consider the result - saving lives .
Second , aid can be used to promote democratic development .
Here we must also consider the results .
Let me give a concrete example which the Commissioner knows well .
In Eritrea a Swedish journalist has been in prison for more than six years simply because he exercised his freedom of speech .
Thirty Swedish managing editors are currently demanding that a link be made between Swedish aid and the imprisonment of David Isaak , which is the journalist 's name .
I am inclined to stand by them .
Eritrea should know that the willingness to provide aid can disappear if democratic principles are abused as flagrantly as they are in Eritrea today .

( CS ) Commissioner Michel and Mr Cornillet , thank you for your work .
Ladies and gentlemen , a much needed and valuable text has lost already some of its value in the title : geographically , the EU is only one part of Europe , unless negotiations on the Commission proposal have already commenced with European countries outside the EU such as Russia , Ukraine , Turkey , Kazakhstan , Serbia , Belarus and others , which of course is not the case .
I support the adoption of this excellent and much-needed resolution .
However , how will we ensure that it is observed in our transatlantic neighbours ' prisons in Guantánamo or in Afghanistan ?
Or do we agree with their practices , in the context of a deepening of the Transatlantic Partnership ?
Yes , the resolution is necessary and correct .
Let us reflect , however , on ways of encouraging our transatlantic partners to recognise and apply the humanitarian principles .
Otherwise , we will be striving to solve issues triggered by others .


( ES ) Mr President , by congratulating the rapporteur , Mr Cornillet , and also the Commissioner for his proposal and his speech , and echoing the words of my group spokesman , Mr Hutchinson , at this time of night , I am wrapping up my speech and donating the minute saved to you , Commissioner .
By the way , Mr Borrell told me that Commissioner Michel gave a brilliant performance at the Lisbon meeting last weekend .
Mr President , I have saved one minute .
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would briefly like to thank you for the very broad support for Mr Cornillet 's reports and the Commission 's positions .

The response to forgotten crises is precisely a better division of work .
It is clear that if there is no division of work and humanitarian aid or development are dependent on political opportunity , on a country 's foreign policy , you will naturally have forgotten crises and orphan countries ; hence the division of work is the only response .
The idea of a humanitarian atlas , for example , like the development atlas , which is making excellent progress and has already been implemented , is clearly a good solution .
I also agree with the many speakers who referred to the need to emphasise the crucial role of local actors and the involvement of civil society .
As regards the CERF , I completely agree - and I have said this on several occasions to the United Nations , to OCHA , to everyone , and you know my position on it - ECHO will not contribute to the CERF unless additional funds are available .
Each year ECHO spends everything it has available for humanitarian actions , and if an ECHO contribution were to be necessary it should be in addition to this .
Secondly , in reality ECHO is a European CERF .
It is important to remember this .
Thus there is no great need for it .
ECHO is just as flexible - I dream of having the same flexibility in the development sector - and perhaps even more flexible than the CERF .
Thirdly , I would like the UN to concentrate on its core business in relation to humanitarian aid , which is essentially the coordination of humanitarian aid and that is where OCHA comes in .
There is important work to be done in that regard , too .
Mr Hutchinson asked a very important question about the description , or to some extent the label - even if that is a dangerous word - given to NGOs and civil society actors .
I agree with him that we cannot of course hold NGOs up to public opprobrium because of one association or another .
I should mention in passing that the Commission has never contributed to Zoe 's Ark , nor has it ever financed it or used it as an operator , and I want you to know that so that there is no misunderstanding .
Having said that , the question you raise makes me think of a question that we should perhaps discuss with the NGOs - and I have already had the opportunity to talk about it - namely the creation of a high authority of NGOs and civil society actors , which would consist exclusively of NGO and civil society representatives .
There is therefore no provision for public authorities to be represented in this high authority , and I saw that Bernard Kouchner reacted to this proposal .
It could to some extent be modelled on what is know as the medical association or the professional association , for example , which themselves resolve a number of problems that might otherwise arise , on the basis of a code of practice and ethics .
That is one suggestion that I am putting forward , although it would be worth looking into it in detail .
As far as the new Member States are concerned , I am very pleased to note that there is high degree of willingness , especially among some of them - and the Czech Republic comes to mind in particular - to demonstrate international solidarity through greater humanitarian aid in the future .
It is also important to point out that six Member States ( of EU25 ) alone provide 49 % of the European Union 's total aid and that the share of the other 19 Member States accounts for 18 % of the total .
Thus the commitment in the humanitarian field is far from balanced .
As regards Palestine , I do not believe that the European Union is giving with one hand and taking with the other .
There are of course questions surrounding the fact that our development assistance and , in particular , our humanitarian aid are often held to ransom by the situation in Palestine , but I do not feel that the European Union , and certainly not the Commission , deserve to be accused of taking back as much as they have given .
I would like to make a short comment , Mr Schmidt , on humanitarian aid in Eritrea .
There is no humanitarian aid in Eritrea ; we do not spend a cent on humanitarian aid there .
I presume you are confusing it with development assistance .
In our political dialogue with Eritrea , the issue of the journalist that you mentioned is always on the agenda .
I called , in fact I met , Issaias and spoke to him about this issue .
He is hiding behind the fact that the problem is strictly a matter of Eritrean law .
I obviously share your point of view and your position on this matter , but linking development assistance to this issue is extremely dangerous .
If you tie the journalist 's release , for example , to a political decision , if you tie your development assistance to this issue , who will suffer ?
Not the Eritrean authorities , but the people you want to help , in other words the population .
It is slightly more complicated than you seem to think .
We cannot necessarily tie such issues together .
Even though they are highly distressing issues , which I worry about and which are a permanent topic in our dialogue - and I am constantly applying pressure to try to get this problem resolved - we cannot tie them to the granting of development assistance .
In any event , as far as humanitarian aid is concerned , I can tell you that there is no European humanitarian aid in Eritrea , although we do finance development projects there .
The debate is closed .
I must draw your attention to the fact that the vote on the Commission statement will take place in Brussels on 29 November 2007 and that the vote on Mr Cornillet 's report will take place tomorrow .
Written Statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - I welcome this initiative by the institutions to establish an EU Consensus on Humanitarian Aid .
It will provide , for the first time , a clear statement of EU policy regarding humanitarian aid .
The environment where humanitarian action is taking place is evolving rapidly and continually poses new challenges .
There are increasing numbers of vulnerable people in crisis situations and in natural disasters .
In 2003 there were 200 million people affected , with 45 million people in need of life-saving assistance .
Since then we have had the Asian tsunami , numerous earthquakes , floods and hurricanes affecting Central America and the horrific situation in Darfur .
The Consensus will underline the humanitarian principles of humanity , neutrality , impartiality and independence .
Development assistance is a crucial link to preventing humanitarian emergencies .
Disaster risk reduction and a clear commitment to link relief , rehabilitation and development are essential .
Military forces have become increasingly involved in the provision of relief and reconstruction assistance to civilian populations .
Such encroachment into what has traditionally been seen as humanitarian or development space raises important questions .
The distinction between civilian and military actors is a concern for many working in the humanitarian field .
The mandates of the different actors must be clearly defined .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of sitting
( The sitting was closed at 11.45 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9 a.m. )
The European Interest : succeeding in the age of globalisation ( debate )
Ladies and gentlemen , I am pleased to see that two of the group chairs are here at least .
I had almost overlooked one of them just now , but there he is striding quickly to his seat .
The next item is the presentation of statements by the Council and the Commission on the European interest : succeeding in the age of globalisation .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Mr President , President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , globalisation is not merely a phenomenon that must be viewed in terms of its economic consequences and technological implications .
For you , ladies and gentlemen , for the Members of the Council of the European Union and for all of us in fact , it is essentially a political issue .
It involves people losing their jobs , regions in crisis , disappearing economic sectors , and new security and environmental threats , but it also involves new job opportunities , new sectors of production and lower prices for a vast range of products , allowing improved financial resource allocation and growth of trade in goods and services .
Globalisation has fostered an unprecedented exchange of ideas and contacts between people .
The prospects for both economic and cultural enrichment are huge , but the risks of various types of new global imbalance are also huge .
We are faced with the challenge of shaping this new and increasingly fluid interdependence in an ever smaller world .
Above all , coming to terms with and regulating globalisation is a key issue for our democracies and for the very concept of effective democracy : will we be able to keep political control of the fundamental options in economic governance and so many other aspects of our life in the hands of our people and our elected representatives ?
I firmly believe that in various crucial areas we Europeans will be effective only if we are capable of providing new collective political solutions to the most serious problems of our time , such as economic growth and job creation , environmental protection , energy , migration and the fight against terrorism .
The European Union has been updating its internal policies to ensure competitiveness and fair and sustainable development .
The strengthening of social cohesion and respect for the environment should guide economic reforms .
Investment in research , innovation and education must drive growth and employment .
We are not alone , however , and it would be irresponsible to become inward-looking , convinced that self-interest can be effective .
This new world does not have effective walls or strongholds .
We must work together with other countries and regions to achieve results which are positive for everyone .
Stability , freedom , security and prosperity will be consistent and lasting only if they are shared .
This is Europe 's vocation .
We must lead and shape globalisation according to our principles and our values , looking outwards with a universalist attitude , as we did during the finest hours of our common history .
Working together , the EU and its Member States have shown that they can address common problems and common challenges by harnessing their experience of 50 years of integration .
The new Treaty of Lisbon provides more effective and more transparent institutional conditions for the EU to play its role in the world .
The challenge is to preserve and strengthen what we have achieved in that time and to find ways of defending our interests and projecting our common values beyond our borders .
The renewed Lisbon Strategy has provided the framework for Europe to respond to this challenge .
The launching of a new governance cycle gives us the opportunity to reflect on the path we intend to follow .
The Commission communication under discussion today is an excellent starting point for the debate and provided the basis for the discussion between the Heads of State and Government at the Lisbon informal meeting on 19 October .
Our work in the Council is based on this document and seeks to define a package of texts to contribute to the preparation of the Lisbon Strategy 's next cycle .
This week 's Ecofin Council has now adopted conclusions , the Competitiveness Council on 22 November will also approve some texts , and the 5 and 6 December Employment Council plans to adopt conclusions on the future of the European Employment Strategy in the context of the Lisbon Strategy 's new cycle .
Other Council formations have addressed issues relevant to the preparation of the new cycle .
I can confirm that we are essentially in agreement with the Commission : the renewed Lisbon Strategy must continue to be the appropriate framework for Europe 's response to the major challenges we face , especially the challenge of globalisation .
Europe is making significant progress .
The goals set out in the four priority areas , employment , knowledge and innovation , the business environment and energy and climate change , which were selected in 2006 , are still appropriate .
The major lines of the new cycle must preserve the stability needed to consolidate results .
It is important at the same time to make adjustments and improvements so that the full potential of the renewed Lisbon Strategy can be achieved .
Taking advantage of the momentum generated by the progress already made , our priority must be to step up the pace of reforms to make our economies stronger .
The EU has global responsibilities and must be better prepared to face globalisation through a strategic , coherent and determined approach at global level .
We must remain firmly committed to implementing measures at national level , meanwhile , that enable us to deal more effectively with the problems arising out of demographic change , the quality of public finance and its long-term sustainability , the labour market , employment , social cohesion , the internal market , competitiveness , research and innovation , energy and climate change and education and training .
At the same time the Community Lisbon programme has an important role to play in the new cycle by offering more effective guarantees of the necessary coherence of reforms .
Parliament and Council 's ownership must be reinforced , and the exchange of good practices between Member States must be developed .
Migration has a fundamental role to play in the context of globalisation by helping to increase growth potential and facilitate adjustments .
According to a recent report , submitted to the Council this week , on this situation 's effects on the mobility of labour , EU demographic growth is increasingly supported by migration flows , and note should be taken of the decisive way these help to reinforce the flexibility required to face crises and to offset low levels of intraregional mobility .
In this globalised context the external dimension of the Lisbon Strategy must be reinforced and developed , projecting the EU 's political and economic goals and social and environmental standards beyond its borders .
As you know , this was the aspect that was addressed in the discussion of the Heads of State and Government at the Lisbon informal meeting , where we developed issues relating to financial market instability and climate change in particular .
This interesting and stimulating political debate , in which the President of this House also took part , reinforced our faith in the future .
As the Portuguese Prime Minister , José Sócrates , has already pointed out here , Europe has a duty to lead the globalisation process and is in a position to do so , taking advantage of the new opportunities that have been created , including in the area of ideas and cultural exchange .
By strengthening relations between the peoples and interdependence between nations , the EU is making a key contribution to peace and global stability .
Europe has the political and institutional conditions to respond consistently to the challenges that globalisation raises in the economic , social and environmental fields , and can therefore influence the process of globalisation .
We need stronger strategic cooperation with our partners in order to develop a new global agenda that combines the mutual opening of markets , improved environmental , social , financial and intellectual property standards , and the need to support the institutional capacity of developing countries .
As the Portuguese Prime Minister also announced at the end of the Lisbon informal meeting , an EU declaration on globalisation will be approved at the European Summit on 13 and 14 December .
This will be a clear sign to citizens and to the world of the determination and commitment of European leaders to stimulating the EU 's capacity to influence the globalisation agenda and to find the right responses .
The challenges ahead of us are both difficult and stimulating , and the Portuguese Presidency will continue to engage with them .
We are counting on the European Parliament 's support , as we always have done , to promote and develop EU and national action that is agreed at global level and that allows Europe to assume its responsibilities in the global context and to succeed in meeting future challenges .
We sometimes tend to forget what Europe means for so many people in this globalised world .
The images of migrants prostrate on our beaches are a cruel reminder of that reality and of how privileged we are here in Europe , which has become a bastion of hope , hope that it is possible to build a model combining freedom , economic growth , social justice and environmental protection based on partnership , cooperation and shared responsibility .
It is not just our success as Europeans that is at stake .
A stronger Union for a better world is our Presidency 's motto , as you know , and we sincerely believe that Europe must play a crucial role in building a more just and a more balanced world .
President of the Commission . - ( PT ) Mr President , Secretary of State for European Affairs representing the Presidency of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , globalisation is the central theme for this generation of Europeans .
It touches the lives of all our citizens in one way or another , so it is appropriate that it has risen to the top of the European agenda .
As you know , I am personally convinced that the 21st century European agenda must be organised largely around the theme of globalisation , while naturally maintaining the values and principles that have always informed the European project .
Globalisation , however , must also be seen as an opportunity for Europe to defend and assert its interests in this increasingly interdependent world .
I am therefore very pleased to be taking part in the debate on this issue organised by the European Parliament .
As the Secretary of State has just said , the Commission document drafted last month on the European interest generated an excellent debate at the Lisbon Informal European Council .
I was particularly encouraged by the stimulating consensus reached around our ideas on how to respond to globalisation .
I would also like to thank the Portuguese Presidency for its constant support for this global European agenda and for the need to give the Lisbon Strategy a dimension that can respond to the challenges of globalisation .
We also support the idea of a declaration on globalisation at the December European Council .
That would be an excellent way to consolidate this consensus , which must also be promoted here in the European Parliament by the drafting of a joint motion for a resolution on such an important issue .
The European Union has in fact been developing a gradual and truly European response to globalisation that has encouraged Europeans to make the most of the phenomenon .
This response acknowledges the legitimate concerns of those who are facing change , however , since it must not be forgotten that some people may be adversely affected by it , and we must also have a response for them .
I believe the European interest lies in striking the right balance , but it can in no event be a fearful or a defeatist response , it must be based on confidence .
A new interest has in fact arisen in the last few months : turbulence on the financial markets has shown how the health of the European economy is linked to global developments , while extreme climate conditions have shown how serious the potential consequences of climate change are and how a response to this problem is increasingly urgent .
Every day we see that jobs in Europe , energy in Europe , the health of our people and quality of life throughout Europe are all influenced by a global dimension .
Mr President , I am convinced that our starting point should be one of confidence .
We have the experience of being the world 's largest economy and its largest exporter .
We have pioneered innovative ways of tackling new problems - just look at emissions trading - and we have some clear ground rules which have served us well .
First , we have a responsibility to protect our citizens without being protectionist .
We should target our policies so that others take the same route as us , to open up .
We should not close doors ; we should , rather , make others open theirs .
Protectionism for Europe , which is the biggest exporter in the world , would be a self-defeating doctrine .
Second , we are open , but we are not naive .
This means that we are not in the business of giving a free ride to those who do not respect certain key principles .
That was the spirit behind our recent proposals to ensure that the rules on energy investment would apply to third-country companies .
Third , there is much to be gained from a rules-based system , and the experience of the European Union leaves it uniquely well placed to provide a good basis for regulation at global level - a concrete way to shape globalisation .
Let us be honest : to have open economies , we need some rules .
Markets cannot work without institutions , and in the European Union we have , more than any other , the experience of putting together different rules , putting together different national experiences .
That is why I really believe that we are better equipped than any other entity in the world to shape globalisation - not to impose , but to propose our model for this globalisation phase we are now entering .
We also have some tools to help us face globalisation with confidence .
Never has it been clearer that the euro is a force for stability in the international financial system .
The ability to use European Union law to set binding targets for greenhouse gases and renewables gives us also an unrivalled credibility , and we have a well-established lever for reform in Europe in the shape of the renewed Lisbon Strategy .
When we relaunched the Lisbon Strategy in 2005 , we sought to refine it in a number of different ways .
We increased ownership and accountability by a defined partnership between the Member States and the Commission .
We clarified the work to be done by turning to country-specific recommendations .
Every Member State now has its own national reform programme and every Member State accepts that there is a collective effort in going on with those reforms .
We have also refocused the Union 's financial instruments on growth and jobs .
The results are now bearing fruit .
Despite current concerns , performance has improved : almost 6.5 million extra jobs have been created in the European Union of 27 in the last two years ; 8 million are expected to be created over the period 2007-2009 .
The Lisbon reforms have undoubtedly reinforced the growth potential of the European economy .
However , there is no room for complacency : the task is far from finished .
Member States and the Union must press ahead with reform .
This is the best way to make our economies more resilient in the face of an uncertain economic outlook .
The four priority areas agreed in 2006 provide the right framework for Lisbon : research and innovation ; a better business environment ( fighting red tape and promoting better conditions for investment ) ; greater employability , and the great issues of energy and climate change .
These areas , and the definition of these areas , have given the strategy a much sharper focus .
Of course , those areas are also closely interrelated .
We will never become a knowledge-based , low-carbon economy without a highly skilled workforce , as well as more research and greater innovation .
So I would like to underline this point about research and innovation .
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the European Parliament for its support of the Commission demand for the knowledge triangle of research , education and innovation .
Indeed , I would like to thank you and draw your attention to the need for our work together to keep the Galileo project as a great European project , and I would also like to thank you for support for the EIT project .
We are moving forward in the need for a European space for knowledge .
In fact , in our document one of the novelties was precisely the presentation of the idea of a fifth freedom - the freedom of circulation of knowledge in the European Union .
We will never create a new dynamism without the right climate also for our SMEs .
There are 23 million SMEs in Europe .
So that is why I believe all those areas taken together can create a virtuous circle helping all our goals at once .
As we prepare for the launch of the next three-year cycle , we must update the strategy in the light of lessons learnt and new circumstances .
There must be a greater focus on the social dimension .
More investment in education and training for all ages is the best weapon against inequality and social exclusion and , as I said earlier , not everybody is winning from globalisation .
If we want to be sure of the support of European Union citizens for our agenda , we should , in due course , take in the concerns regarding the social dimension .
That is why , for instance , the Commission has proposed an adjustment to the Globalisation Fund , precisely because we have recognised since the beginning the need to give concrete responses concerning these areas .
I am particularly encouraged by the agreement of the social partners on the set of flexicurity principles that were proposed by the Commission before the summer .
In fact , at the European informal Council in Lisbon , we received very good news about that agreement between the European social partners .
I hope that the December European Council can give its support to those principles .
This provides a very good basis for each Member State to define a better balance between flexibility and security in their labour markets .
Vigorous implementation of outstanding reforms , stronger emphasis on skills and education , concrete steps to convert Europe into a low-carbon economy : these are , from our point of view , the priorities for the next cycle .
The integrated guidelines provide an important instrument for coordination , a common framework for diverse Member States to pursue their own national reform agendas .
Analysis and feedback from Member States show that the guidelines are working .
They are the foundation for the Community Lisbon Programme .
My feeling is that , while there is a need to update them , if they are not broken we should not fix them .
We also need to do more to ensure that the Lisbon Strategy progresses at an even pace in all Member States : a slower pace of reform in one Member State has obvious knock-ons in the others .
We also need more involvement of parliaments , social partners , local and regional authorities .
The commitment of this House to the Lisbon Strategy has been critical in sustaining the momentum .
Together with Vice-President Verheugen and with all the College , I very much look forward to deepening our joint work as we move into the next cycle of Lisbon .
The link between globalisation and Lisbon gives us an excellent opportunity to show how , in this day and age , the European economic agenda is not an optional extra : it is the key to unlocking a successful future for Europe .
Economic reform , a global vision , a low-carbon economy : these are interlocking goals that need to be pursued in parallel , and only the European Union can provide the reach and coherence that Europe needs so much .
Only together can we pursue what we call in our document ' the European interest ' .
Let me conclude by saying that I really believe it is not only the European interest .
I really believe that , in the age of globalisation , the world also needs a more committed Europe , with our interests being protected and defended but also with our values - the values of freedom and solidarity - being sustained in this globalisation age .
( Applause )
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , my dear Hans-Gert ; President-in-Office of the Council , Manuel Lobo Antunes ; Mr President of the Commission , José Manuel Barroso , in the eyes of our fellow citizens , globalisation is no abstract concept .
Globalisation is a reality that affects ordinary Europeans on a daily basis and they look to their governments and institutions for answers to the problems it brings with it .
Our fellow citizens expect a great deal from the European Union in this regard .
They expect to be protected and to be given security : physically protected in the face of terrorist threats and protected , too , from the vagaries of the financial markets .
They also look to us , however , to guarantee their food supply and food security ; yet only last summer a sharp rise in cereal costs sent consumer prices rocketing .
European consumers need an assurance that low-priced , imported products will be safe in every respect .
This is a particularly topical issue : as the festive season approaches , we must be able to reassure parents and grandparents that the toys they are buying for children 's Christmas stockings will not put their health at risk .
While globalisation must contribute to prosperity , it must also be fair - and it must be subject to ethical rules , for example to prohibit the exploitation of children .
Globalisation cannot be built on the backs of those who are weakest : it must be an instrument for combating inequality not only within individual countries but also between countries .
Globalisation must be directed at increasing the purchasing power of the poorest in society .
We have always spoken out in favour of free trade , but that trade has to be based on strict rules .
The European Union 's openness to the rest of the world is a driving force in the global economy and many companies are keen to set up in Europe .
They will have to accept our rules and comply with our health , environmental and consumer-protection standards .
In the space of 50 years the European Union has managed to create a functional internal market , in which harmonisation of the Member States ' legislation has always been the rule .
The European Union has a role to play in exporting its know-how and helping to raise the production and quality-control standards of its partners .
We are already on track to do that with a number of them .
The success of the first Transatlantic Economic Council meeting , held last Friday in Washington , is a positive sign , and we now have to step up our efforts to remind Brazil , China and India of their responsibilities .
We take a somewhat softer line with Africa .
To meet the external challenges we must , firstly , strengthen our own single market by investing more in research and development and , secondly , ensure better coordination of research and innovation among the Member States .
While globalisation offers new opportunities , it also demands adaptation work , for example in terms of education and training throughout people 's working lives .
My group welcomes the new initiatives under the Lisbon Strategy for growth and employment , and likewise the Small Business Act proposed by the Commission , because small and medium-sized enterprises remain extremely important engines of stability and job creation in Europe .
Ladies and gentlemen , we as politicians are increasingly called upon to address the challenge of energy problems .
Until it has a common policy for energy security and environmental security , the European Union will remain vulnerable .
With the price of oil at almost USD 100 per barrel , this Europe that we live in faces an emergency .
We need a European energy policy to guarantee us security of supply and sustainable growth in this sector .
We need to undertake a thorough examination of renewable energy sources and to explore the energy-supply potential of civil nuclear power .
All discussion of these issues must be transparent , with a view to raising people 's awareness and securing their support for what we undertake .
Ultimately we want cleaner , more efficient and safer energy for Europe .
Europe must spell out its interests , not only in terms of trade and the global economy , but also in terms of culture , language and tradition .
By working to produce joint solutions to the challenges of globalisation we shall put ourselves in a position to protect the legitimate interests of our fellow citizens , without being protectionist .
( Applause )
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the title of this debate reflects the fact that the European Parliament is to discuss with the Council and the Commission the role that Europe - the European institutions and the EU Member States - intends to play in dealing with the opportunities and risks of globalisation .
We must therefore make it clear - as indeed today 's debate will do - that the consequences of globalisation can be seen in different ways and can be addressed through various competing methods .
The negotiations on the resolution to be adopted today have shown that there is a profound difference , in many areas a gulf , between the conceptions on the right of this House and what we in the Socialist Group want .
What we say in this debate will therefore define the parameters we apply when assessing the roles the institutions should play , especially the Commission .
Having listened to you very attentively , Mr President of the Commission , and to Mr Daul , I would say there is some common ground , but there are also some stark differences .
Anyone who stands for election to the office of President of the Commission , now or in the future , will be measured by our group on the basis of certain key criteria , relating in particular to his or her perception of the Commission 's role in the globalised economy .
Macroeconomic policy coordination , to use the jargon , or what we might also call common economic and fiscal policy , must be guided by the principles of social policy .
Economic progress in Europe must result in greater social stability .
The EU must ensure that global economic progress leads to greater equality of rights and opportunities in the world .
That , too , is social policy .
Human welfare at home and abroad is our common yardstick .
Economic progress is the prerequisite for social security - not the other way round , as we have heard it suggested in a few speeches in this House .
The idea that less social security in Europe should be the source of economic progress is an absolute aberration .
Anyone who believes the EU can be used to erode achievements in the field of social policy behind the smokescreen of globalisation , as it were , is mistaken .
Deregulated markets leading to maximised profits and lower social standards is perhaps the ideal in the minds of the right in this House .
It is not ours .
What we are saying is that the secret of Europe 's success has been social progress and economic progress , which are two sides of the same coin .
Nothing has changed in that respect as far as we are concerned .
( Applause )
That was an interesting interjection from Mr Daul .
For those who did not hear it , he said , ' The economy first ! '
No !
Economic growth and social welfare must go hand in hand - that is the crucial point , and it highlights the error of right-wing politics in Europe .
Let us get one thing clear : the overwhelming majority of the governments in the Council are centre-right governments , and the Commission , of course , is no El Dorado of Socialism .
You , Mr Barroso , are a politician from the centre-right , as are most of your Commissioners .
We are therefore keeping a close eye on the actions of the Commission in order to gauge the credibility of your statements .
Of course we need research , innovation and education , and of course we need the internal market to develop in a way that protects the environment and stabilises society 's resources .
We most certainly do !
But we also need the Commission to present the appropriate proposals for directives .
Then we shall need the corresponding legislative initiatives to consolidate the process .
There are some good points , and we support them , but there are also quite a few that we need to probe thoroughly .
We also need effective administration .
I do not know whether that should be called better Lisbon governance , as it is referred to in the headings of EU documents .
I do not know whether the ordinary man or woman in the street understands what we mean by that .
And when you speak of simplifying administration and enlist the former Minister-President of Bavaria to lead that effort , all I can say is three cheers and the best of luck !
The one thing that we most certainly need - and on this we agree wholeheartedly with you , Mr President of the Commission - is a set of rules to tame this Wild-West capitalism that prevails in the financial markets and , yes , threatens entire national economies .
So let us make a start with these rules in Europe .
To spell out what is needed , let me say that we expect the international financial capitalists to be subject to supervision , their operations to be transparent and , of course , their power to be curtailed , and your pursuit of these aims will have our support .
That is one of the keys to social progress in Europe .
In conclusion , Mr President - Hans-Gert - ladies and gentlemen , let me say that the issue we are discussing today , namely how we should line up to face the challenge of globalisation and what influence Europe , by which I mean institutionalised Europe - you in the Commission and we in Parliament - can actually wield in pursuit of these ambitious goals , is also the measure by which the voters will judge us .
If we keep confining ourselves to general debates where we describe exactly what we want but they are not followed up with concrete legislative measures here and in the Member States , the whole exercise will be pointless .
That is why we expect that what we describe here will also be reflected in our joint resolution and converted into firm policy .
( Applause from the left )
Mr Schulz , the fact that you were allowed to exceed your speaking time quite considerably had nothing to do with the way you addressed the President .
In fact , the extra time you took will ultimately be deducted from your group 's allocation .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , we have just heard the language of the past :
Die Rede der Vergangenheit !
Others know , often better than we , that we already live in a global society .
India , China and Brazil have caught the wave of opportunity and they are riding it high , while too much of Europe fears the wave crashing over it .
When President Sarkozy addressed us yesterday , he spoke of ' different possible futures for the Europe of tomorrow ' , putting our policies for competition , energy and enlargement up for debate .
Mr Barroso 's expression during much of that speech told us more than all of his words this morning .
If Europe sits on its hands because national leaders - citing citizens ' concerns - contest the EU 's agenda , we will miss the chance to shape globalisation in Europe 's collective interests .
It is not citizens we need to convince , it is Member States .
Survey after survey has shown that most of our citizens see the European Union , not national government , as best placed to manage globalisation .
Look how the earthquake of globalisation is shaking Europe 's body politic .
Some on the right are retreating , in the face of global challenges , from Conservatism into nationalism , or from Christian democracy into Christian autocracy .
The fissure of globalisation runs right through the EPP .
On the left , Kurt Beck and his friends are holding back much needed reforms .
Franz Müntefering saw that and that is why he has voted with his feet .
And yet the visionaries see the need for reform and they have written it into the new European Socialist manifesto , adopted appropriately in Oporto .
The division in our politics is no longer between left and right over economic policy but between those who respond to global challenges by pulling up the drawbridge and those who - with Liberal Democrats - advocate the open society .
Mr Barroso , you have majority support in this House for your Commission 's approach to globalisation .
But it is not a majority based on one political family .
Indeed , it may even prise apart and refashion Europe 's political families .
Globalisation will increasingly shape our politics .
Not globalisation in the rather narrow economic sense defined in this communication - although a stable euro and effective competition rules and market regulation are in all of our interests - but in its wider , more holistic sense , encompassing world population growth and migration ; climate change and energy security ; and internationally organised crime linked to terrorism .
Is that not the validation we need to ' act on a continental scale ' , as this document urges , to utilise our ' critical mass ' to ' enable Europeans to shape globalisation ' , as the Commission 's communication demands ?
If so , Mr Barroso , where are your policies ?
Your timetable ?
Your comprehensive approach ?
We were promised action : instead we are proffered a paper which is rich in rhetoric but rather poor in proposals .
This cannot be the final word in Europe 's response to globalisation .
I await your single market review , to see how you will drive growth and jobs in difficult terrain , and your legal migration policy , hoping it encompasses the concerns of the countries of origin .
My colleagues and I await urgent action on cutting energy use and fighting cross-border crime .
We believe , too , that social health and economic vitality are both important .
If we are creating a global market , we need a new global social contract , reconciling the competing demands of flexibility and fairness because , as Martin Luther King taught us , ' injustice anywhere is a threat to justice everywhere ' .
So the Union must bring together the Lisbon agenda with its focus on competitiveness , the Cardiff agenda with its focus on social rights , and the Gothenburg agenda with its focus on the environment .
The world needs a strong , united Union to counter injustice , conflict and poverty wherever they are found because we are one of the few players capable of tackling global issues and , if we do not take the lead , nobody will .
That means stopping the hypocrisy of trade tariffs and fashioning a fair deal for developing countries in Doha ; clinching a contract on carbon emissions in Bali , using our collective influence to get America on board ; and building an international approach to financial markets , focusing on regulatory cooperation , convergence of standards and equivalence of rules .
Resolving these challenges in fairness to everybody needs more , not less , globalisation .
For we live in an interconnected world , a world that requires solidarity at global level as much as it requires solidarity between European citizens .
And we must look forward , with Victor Hugo , to the day when the only battlefields are those of markets open for business and the human spirit open for ideas .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , globalisation is a phenomenon that , in many ways , is irreversible .
Individual European Union countries should not only understand this , they also need to respond to these changes in a practical manner .
The actions of the EU cannot , however , impinge on the economic interests of sovereign states , for example by making unjustified restrictions on carbon dioxide emissions , which will bring serious harm to the economies of countries such as Poland .
On the other hand , these political steps should not lead to the loss of national identity .
While countries in Asia are successfully adapting to the new situation and their economies are expanding rapidly , we in the European Parliament are discussing such weighty issues as rear view mirrors on agricultural and forestry tractors and the role and importance of circuses in the European Union and other similar matters .
The EU is constantly adding to regulations , making effective competition increasingly difficult and does not seem to see the reality , which is evidenced by today 's speeches from the Socialist representative .
I hope that today 's debate will help to change the way that we think about globalisation in a European perspective .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I think that what we have seen in this particular communication is an absolute failure of imagination , given the seriousness of the situation that we face .
We have in this no real definition of globalisation .
It normally relates to the economic side - that is what I want to talk about .
This paper talks about us facing a third industrial revolution .
I think we need to learn some of the lessons from the past industrial revolutions .
Those that have not taken environmental costs fully into account ; those that have not taken social costs fully into account .
There is an assumption that low commodity costs are going to continue , often on the back of the world 's poorest countries ; that we can trade in countries where we force open markets when social infrastructure and a sound public sector are not in place ; that we need to beware the siren of reciprocity if it is not amongst equals .
There are also instances where we have overestimated the role of the markets in delivering social goals , and there are issues surrounding economic consolidation , especially when this is based on a debt economy and speculation rather than on reality and thus becomes highly dangerous for economic stability .
The new context that we face is not just about climate change .
It is about peak oil and what that will do to developing countries ' opportunities ; it is about meeting the Millennium Development Goals .
It is true we need to rebalance trade , the social dimension and the environmental dimension .
The WTO prioritises trade over production methods , over anything else that gives us the right to say that we have problems with the way in which goods are produced because this does not meet our standards .
We chose not to write that into the rules .
If we are looking at growth , we are still talking as if the quantity is what matters , not the quality and not what is actually growing within our societies .
I welcome the Commission 's conference on this next week , but this is work that should have been going on for years .
What are we going to do with our agricultural sector ?
With our tourism sectors ?
With so many others in the face of climate change ?
We do not agree that we do not need to revisit the guidelines and to revise them .
We think we do .
If we are talking about training and education , the sustainable development strategy now demands that we look at that within the context of climate change and environmental progress .
I have heard no real , serious link on that .
There is no European strategy on that at all .
If we are talking about a low-carbon economy , how are we going to deliver that ?
There is nothing within this paper to give us any great confidence on those issues .
And we need to look at the social inclusion side again .
The gender pay gap is still there .
We still need a liveable wage , and flexicurity has to take into account financial security for individuals .
We still need to integrate Lisbon and Gothenburg .
That is the challenge .
This document does not face up to it and I am not convinced Parliament does either .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to express my disappointment over the final version of the draft resolution .
I am disappointed on two fronts .
Firstly , it is a pity that for a long time it was impossible to come to an agreement and that a majority agreement was reached only at the last moment and under time pressure , for which the price to pay ( in my opinion ) was excessive concessions on fundamental questions .
Secondly , I am disappointed because the resolution does not reflect the European Interest , as per the title of the document , and - more to the point - it does not even reflect the interests of the majority of European citizens .
This double disappointment stems from my analysis of motion for a joint resolution , which in no way recognises the negative influences of globalisation and , in fact , does not offer citizens anything more than an approach for putting up with globalisation much like they would put up with floods for example .
In my opinion , it is impossible to like either globalisation or floods , let alone put up with them .
The normal approach is to try to influence these processes , to prevent their negative impact .
There is , however , nothing of that sort in the resolution : it does not even offer a model of sustainable global development .
In its motion for a resolution our political group focused on the following facts in particular :
- The fight against poverty , since the statistics show that around 80 million people in the European Union have a disposable income of less than 60 % of the national equalised median income ;
- We stressed the need for more effective means of ensuring citizens ' rights , such as access to quality and well-paid employment , and minimum social standards ;
- Regarding the Lisbon Strategy we stressed that a new integrated strategy for sustainability and solidarity is needed to replace the current Lisbon Strategy and provide an effective implementation tool .
Yesterday some political groups agreed on a joint resolution and completely ignored our group 's proposal .
By doing this they have clearly shown that they attach more importance to economic issues than to social rights and justice .
For the above-mentioned reasons our group will not support the resolution .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , yesterday we enjoyed a wonderfully clever speech by the French President .
I listened intently to this articulate wee man .
He stood foursquare for free trade .
But , of course , if other countries were for protectionism , so was he .
He stood foursquare for democracy : the people were entitled to have their views heard , but then , it would seem , ignored , as the people of France and Holland have been ignored .
He is , as he would have it , a European first , but a Frenchman through and through , a Frenchman first , but a European through and through .
Okay , with a bit of Hungarian goulash thrown in .
We need a European army , navy and air force to ensure our peaceful European values are spread far and wide , for we must never go to war again .
We must build on our democratic institutions but not , it would seem , too much .
The French cannot have another referendum , because that might lead to an English referendum , and of course we all know that the British would reject the new Constitution - oh , sorry - ' Treaty ' .
We must , he suggested , examine ourselves more closely and make sure there is more motherhood , not just for women but for men ; more apple pie , especially for the poor , whether they want it or not .
To coin a phrase , an old English phrase - and I love to test the best interpreters in the world - it was all humbug !
behalf of the ITS Group - ( BG ) First of all , I would like to remind the Commission and the Council that the globalisation is not a process that exists in itself , that Europe is a big factor in world politics and that the policy pursued by Europe will determine whether globalisation will develop .
And it is exactly this that I could not understand from the strategy of the Commission .
Is the Commission willing to pursue a policy that will develop globalisation or slow down this process ?
Furthermore , I would like to draw your attention to the fact that the single market , on its own , is not a guarantee for Europe 's success in the globalisation development process .
The Council has declared that it finds competitiveness to be very important but currently there are new economies in the European Union , which are fragile and lack competitiveness even on the internal market .
The Commission , in its turn , has stated that it considers the development of the Lisbon Strategy to be most important for them with a view to implementing their plans from the globalisation perspective .
Specially for Bulgaria , I expect the Lisbon Strategy to fail because my country , as we have repeatedly stated , was not ready when it joined the European Union .
Therefore how can we protect the interests of the European citizens if we do not use some forms of protectionism ?
The open society that Graham Watson is talking about is simply traitorous to the weaker economies in the EU .
If we have global solidarity first instead of solidarity within the Community , then why do we need the Community at all ?
In this context , a future development of globalisation with weak economies that have big trade deficit and are not competitive even on the internal market would continue to pressurize these economies up to the point of breakdown and these economies which have been fighting to embark on a normal way of development would disintegrate as houses of cards .
( CS ) ( The beginning of the speech was inaudible ) ... to make an effort so that Europe is as strong a player as possible on the world market .
To achieve this , however , the world trade negotiations must be brought to an end , subsidies to European farmers must be lowered and US customs fees must be reduced .
It is also necessary to firmer against China within the WTO , and to make systematic use of anti-dumping measures .
If we want to tackle globalisation successfully , we have to do away with the burden of excessive regulation hampering small and medium-sized enterprises .
This is what the Barroso Commission had promised but then it got stuck at the beginning of the road .
The Union would also become stronger if Turkey and Ukraine were to join , and if it had a proper economic partnership with Russia .
The migration policy is unhealthy .
Instead of being a final destination for poor people , Europe should become a final destination for the brains that these days leave for China and the US .
If we really want to tackle the challenges of globalisation , the most important thing is to enable the Union to speak with one voice on the international stage ; otherwise it will not be taken seriously .
I hope that the heads of state will arrive at the same conclusion come December .
Allow me to make a couple of final comments .
My colleague Mr Schulz talked about Wild West capitalism raging on the financial markets .
This used to be the rhetoric in the days of deepest Communism when financial capitalists were labelled ' Wall Street thugs ' .
We all know what this attitude finally did for the Eastern bloc economies .
Mr President , I should like to thank the Presidents of the Council and the Commission for their statements on this fundamental issue for the future of Europe .
To survive and prosper , Europe needs to face up to the challenges of globalisation , and we must rise to these challenges and see the opportunities and not just the threats .
Fulfilling the Lisbon Agenda is central to Europe 's future prosperity and we need to make sure that we finally secure a deal in the World Trade talks .
We need to reform the common agricultural policy and we must give a fair deal not only to our own farmers but to those in the developing world .
We must push further and faster on the deregulation agenda , freeing business and industry to compete on competitive terms with China and India , and we must make real progress supporting Chancellor Merkel 's efforts to create a transatlantic common market .
I welcome the President of the Commission 's recent statement on globalisation , in which he said that the EU 's raison d 'être for the 21st century is clear : to equip Europe for a globalised world .
And in order to do so , he said , we must invest in people , in growth , in jobs , in energy security , in fighting climate change and in giving consumers a fairer deal .
He went on to say that protectionism cannot make Europe wealthier ; protectionism would impoverish , not protect , our citizens .
This is a crucial statement and one that all European governments should heed now .
Of course , in financial services and accounting , European standards are fast becoming global standards and I am proud of that .
The way forward in Europe is radical reform of the European social model , increased flexibility in labour markets and further action to deregulate and reduce burdens on business .
Of course , we must also lead the way in tackling climate change , and I welcome Parliament 's decision to include aviation emissions and the emissions trading scheme , another sign of our willingness to lead the global community .
In the fight against poverty we must ensure that the programmes of the EU are credible , cost-effective and targeted .
We need to enhance the trading opportunities for the developing world and make a real difference in Africa .
We should be proud of our achievements , but there are many opportunities still for us to seize .
( FR ) Mr President , in negotiating the motion for a resolution on the challenge of globalisation , I saw very clearly the extent of the divide between left and right in this House .
My PPE and ALDE colleagues have sought to criticise the millions of ordinary people who - as they watch jobs disappear due to corporate relocation , mergers and takeovers , or compare their tiny incomes to the lavish bonuses heaped on senior executives ( who , by the way , preach the virtues of wage restraint ) - doubt the benefits of globalisation .
In my view , globalisation is a necessary process , particularly as it gives the poorest countries access to international markets , thus enabling them to raise their people 's living standards .
But let us not be deceived by sound bites !
The perfect market , much beloved of liberals , is an illusion .
Competition is necessary but it is never free .
Take the energy market , for example , where 90 % of the world 's resources are controlled by sovereign states .
A cartel dominates the oil market .
Another cartel is gearing up to grab the gas market .
Pricing policies are not transparent and they apply to no more than 40 % of world trade .
A third of the end price goes to a long chain of intermediary speculators whose economic contribution is nil .
When these speculators and their ' special vehicles ' end up in the ditch , central banks pump billions into the financial system to stave off widespread instability , but the effect is actually to underwrite speculation .
A few CEOs may manage a soft landing thanks to their golden parachutes but millions of consumers end up mired in debt and forced to sell off their homes .
In the space of six months , nearly half a million Americans have had to file for personal bankruptcy .
The European economy , meanwhile , is marking time .
The Commission may have trimmed its economic forecasts but , in place of policy proposals , it is content to churn out familiar mantras .
Yes , indeed , we need more growth and more job creation , driven by better coordination and more research and development and , yes indeed , we need to face new social realities .
But where are the budgets for these things ?
Where are the resources ?
Mr Barroso does not want to improve the integrated guidelines .
The right wing refuses to discuss economic coordination .
Mr Sarkozy emits quantities of high-sounding hot air but not once in half-an-hour does he use the word ' social ' .
Yet all the opinion polls confirm that people want to see greater emphasis placed on social issues : they want to feel more secure , they want their purchasing power to improve and they want better public services .
The mayors of ten European capital cities have just signed a declaration in defence of public services accessible to all .
But what is the Commission doing ?
It is hiding behind a shabby little protocol to the future treaty , guaranteeing subsidiarity only in respect of non-economic services - all the better to demolish the public services that ordinary Europeans are calling for !
My group will not accept this Commission cop-out .
We intend to join with the mayors , the Committee of the Regions , the Economic and Social Committee and the trade unions in a political struggle for a Europe with a stronger social dimension , in which public services have priority .
( Applause )
( LT ) Many EU citizens are worried about the changes in their living environment as a consequence of globalisation and our duty as politicians is to provide the answer .
Very often Parliament encourages the Member States to prepare a common strategy , but I would like to point out that we should start with ourselves .
Preparing this resolution was very hard work and it was not easy to combine the opinions of all the committees to form a single generalised opinion .
Therefore , I would like to suggest that we should try and combine the opinions of various committees and various resolutions into a generalised opinion more often , so that we can give EU citizens a coordinated answer regarding what we are actually going to do .
Another very important issue is our role as a global player .
I would like to point out that our role in the world should be an active one .
At present the European Union is the largest union , owing to expansion , owing to the new opportunities .
We are bound to have the largest role to play , notwithstanding our willingness or reluctance to take it on .
Nevertheless , the impression is that we are lingering , as if we are waiting for somebody else to come up with the solution .
Our foreign policy through the external dimension of the Lisbon Strategy should be active .
Speaking of domestic policy , I would like to underline the importance of revising our priorities .
According to the most recent research , the reason why the European Union is lagging behind in terms of growth in productivity is not the lack of computers or high tech equipment .
The reason is that we have management problems .
We do not take full advantage of the single market and fail to create positive conditions for the movement of goods and the expansion of the financial market .
One more question : is it right that the EU 's main priority for the future would be the development of technologies ?
Is there a possibility that food production might become the main priority , as experts warn us ?
In summary , we should develop a new attitude towards our economic market and give priority to the expansion of the domestic market .
Speaking of social policy , which has been mentioned here on many occasions , I agree : yes , it should be one of the main priorities on our agenda , but it should be active too .
We should abandon the tendency to support certain people ; our role should be that of creating opportunities for them to earn a living .
People should not be pushed into the position of being freeloaders ; they should be active market participants .
That is why it would be wise to invest in the social spheres which in the future would help accumulate intellectual capital and would ensure an increase in productivity .
In conclusion , I would like to emphasise the importance of increasing coordination among the EU institutions .
This resolution and today 's debate are examples of good coordination .
I hope that in the future we will have an opportunity to discuss these questions not only at the night-time sessions , but also during the day .
( GA ) Mr President , it is in the interest of the EU to have a strong , fair international trading system under the auspices of the World Trade Organisation .
It is not acceptable , therefore , that the Doha talks should revolve solely around further concessions by the EU regarding agriculture , which , after all , accounts for only 5 % of world trade .
What about the other 95 % ?
Could surrender be the issue here ?
To my mind , Commissioner Mandelson is too willing to back down where EU agriculture is concerned .
At present he is advocating a 46 % import tariff cut in the agricultural sector .
But , as President Sarkozy said yesterday here in Parliament , we need to maintain our domestic sources of food .
America , for example , has so far not given any ground whatsoever in the matter of agriculture .
The recently published US agriculture bill suffices to demonstrate the point .
We need to move forward in the world trade talks in the fields of industry , trade , and services .
The average tariff 4 % in force in the EU stands at 4 % , whereas the equivalent rate in Asia and South America is 30 % .
Once the Indian and Chinese markets have been opened up in the software and telecommunications sectors , there will be a chance to bring about progress driven by competition .
In addition , simplification should apply not just to customs procedures , but also to future trading arrangements .
( FR ) Mr President , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , to my mind , something major is absent from the document before us and it was absent , too , from Mr Barroso 's speech .
The missing element is effective analysis of the proposals being made on the operation of international financial markets , on the existence of international tax havens , on the fight against international financial crime , and on tax treatment at international level - on capital flows in the strictest sense .
I believe that international debate needs a reality check here .
Neither in the documents nor in the words of the Commission President do I find any remotely incisive policy initiatives on what are , after all , extremely serious subjects and I cannot help making the connection with climate change and the forthcoming debate in Bali , where the financial dimension will be crucially important , particularly in relation to helping the most vulnerable countries sign up to the second Kyoto Protocol .
We all know that this will require very large sums of public money .
Where will they come from ?
While I realise it is extremely hard to push these issues to the top of international agendas , I believe that if we fail or refuse to do so we will inflict damage on our own international policies .
My second comment concerns the global battle for standards , especially environmental and social standards , and more specifically environmental standards .
The Commission document is very general , as Mr Watson says , and I share his opinion of it .
You tell us on page 6 : ' A new international approach focusing on regulatory cooperation , convergence of standards and equivalence of rules is emerging as a result of sectoral bilateral discussions with third countries . '
Well , Mr Vice-President , I should like to know exactly what that implies for the preservation of European environmental standards .
What does it mean in terms of developing those standards and what are its practical implications in terms of promoting them internationally as Mr Barroso envisages ?
My concerns are only heightened when I read newspaper reports of the negotiations currently taking place between the European Union and South Korea , suggesting that when it comes to upholding standards - or at least social standards - our stance is weaker than that of the USA .
You owe us detailed answers to these questions .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , globalisation is not a natural process , even though some may like to present it that way .
Globalisation is itself the fruit of politics . It is a political creation , born of every measure taken to deregulate and liberalise the international movement of capital .
Its political creation continues every time a developing country is blackmailed into opening its capital market and permitting foreign takeovers .
It is a creation of the industrialised nations and not least of the European Union .
What the term ' globalisation ' actually stands for is not nearly so much the internationalisation of the economy as the power of property owners , banks and conglomerates , which are now beyond the reach of national legislators , to put their money wherever it yields the highest returns , regardless of the social consequences .
That power , of course , also enables them to play off countries against one another as potential business locations and thereby compel them to create conditions that are increasingly conducive to profit maximisation .
This is precisely the hidden agenda that lurks beneath the aim of competitiveness , namely the drive to slash corporate taxation , destroy welfare systems and engage in brutal wage dumping - in other words , the quest for increasingly unbridled capitalism .
This means , of course , that not everyone is a loser in the globalisation game ; it also produces some very bloated winners .
Not least among these are the European conglomerates which have developed into global players in the course of this globalisation process and whose profit trends in recent years could scarcely have been bettered .
The vast majority , however , are not benefiting from this development .
On the contrary , the law of the jungle that prevails in unbridled capitalism enables the ' haves ' to oppress and exploit the ' have-nots ' .
The resolution on the table whitewashes this state of affairs , and our group will not support it .
Instead , we shall continue to fight for a different economic order in Europe , for an economic order in which people are not mere cost factors and countries are more than just business locations .
( PL ) Mr President , we need to distinguish between two realities : the phenomenon of globalisation and the globalism programme .
Globalisation results from the development of new technologies in areas such as transport , communications and the collection and processing of data .
Globalisation opens new opportunities , but it also creates new threats .
It is up to us how we make use of it .
Globalism , on the other hand , is a programme aimed at creating a supra-national global power .
This is opposed to freedom for peoples and nations and acts to exalt a small number of those with the most capital and global infrastructure in such a way as to allow them to realise their own selfish interests within the framework of a global country and does not act for the good of peoples and nations .
In essence , this is a totalitarian programme .
It is opposed to pacifist ideals and provokes threats of war .
Europe is faced with the temptation to undermine the rights of its own nations in order to increase the role played by its cosmopolitan elites in the running of the world .
To give in to this temptation would be to wipe out the centuries old heritage of European nations , which rests on respect for human rights and the rights of human societies .
In the age of globalisation , Europe 's success would be respect for human rights , for the rights of families and nations , expressed in the development of institutions that guarantee respect for their achievements .
Europe 's success will be to show other peoples and nations in the world how to create a situation of freedom and dignity for the citizen .
It would be a disaster for Europe to go down the path of a totalitarian globalism programme .

( FR ) Mr President , colleagues : globalisation , internationalisation , or ' planetisation ' as the Jesuit Teilhard de Chardin would have it , is obviously here to stay , and what we are seeing now is a second wave of globalisation , more comprehensive than that of the 1990s because it embraces finance , the economy , language , population movement and ideology , with a single dominant model - namely the market .
The negative effects of this globalisation are equally obvious : in the southern hemisphere where resources are being over-exploited , in India and China where people , land , forests , seas and rivers are affected and human rights are jeopardised .
Here in the North we see the impact in corporate relocations , job losses and financial destabilisation of our social systems , and in the risk - as our population ages and we face the cost of caring for the very elderly - that Europe will turn into a geriatric Rwanda , with all the implications of that in terms of disregard for human life and violation of human rights .
Confronted by these realities , faced with the obvious , what is our response ?
It would seem to be a mixture of magic words , minimalism and mumbo-jumbo .
We hear the magic words , for example , in our current debates and resolutions .
Our political ' spells ' consist of references to the Lisbon Strategy and a more competitive economy .
It is reminiscent of Khrushchev at the UN in the 1960s , trying to catch up with the capitalist system .
It is the Harry Potter answer to globalisation .
Then there is the minimalism .
The perfect example is the Globalisation Fund : a little poke of financial sweeties .
Unable to control what is going on , we then look to the heavens and try the old mumbo-jumbo .
In the name of the Father , Adam Smith ; the Son , David Ricardo ; and the Holy Spirit of the Market ; before the great global altar of free-trade ideology , we make the sacrifice of cutting and then eliminating customs duties .
Utter mumbo-jumbo !
Yet Europe 's greatest invention , the product of its genius 2 500 years ago , was logical thought : reason !
What reason tells us today is that free trade is necessary , but it is equally necessary to protect our social and cultural assets .
So we have to find a way of reconciling free trade with human security .
We actually have the capacity to do that , thanks to a new form of customs technology .
I am talking about the technology of deductible customs duties : under this system , customs duties are of course payable by exporters but their payments give those exporters an equivalent amount of customs credit , deductible against the cost of purchases in the importing country .
This new generation of variable , refundable , negotiable customs duties , subject to rebates , will enable us to solve the all too familiar problem of economic , social and environmental imbalances in international trade between North and South .
Mr President , for an increasing number of our constituents , globalisation means desolation , as factory after factory pulls out and moves east .
Just two weeks ago in Limavady , in my constituency , Seagate Technology announced its closure with 960 job losses , leaving that small town reeling .
It is not just the lure of cheap labour , but our crippling burden of regulation on European industry which is devastating our manufacturing .
President Sarkozy was right when he told us yesterday that the EU has the right to protect itself from such ravages ; I wish it would .
Two immediate steps would help : a lowering of the threshold for the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
One thousand job losses in Paris is bad , but in a small town like Limavady it is catastrophic .
So the threshold should be lower for smaller economies .
Secondly , the EU needs to loosen its state aid prohibitions so that things like modest industrial derating might help keep our manufacturing afloat .
I would invite the Commission on those two specifics to respond positively .

( DE ) Mr President , anyone listening to the speeches here , especially those delivered by Mrs Wagenknecht and Mr Schulz , can tell that they were talking of a time which , I am glad to say , has long passed .
These were sayings dug out of the Socialist glory hole , and they bring us no further forward on globalisation issues .
Everyone in this Chamber knows that economic freedom , increased prosperity and the social model are mutually compatible .
Europe is the best illustration of that fact .
Just as we introduced the euro as an internal fitness programme for the single market , we now have the Lisbon Strategy , for all the reservations and problems that may accompany it , as a fitness programme to get us into shape for global competition .
We have no reason at all to hide from globalisation .
The way it is being discussed here is absolutely unreal .
Globalisation is the mainspring of democracy and prosperity for underdeveloped countries .
It is certainly untrue that there is only a downside , as the examples cited in the last few speeches implied . In fact , all countries benefit from globalisation : the developing countries , the newly industrialised countries and even those developing countries with an overextravagant government apparatus that taxpayers can no longer afford .
We cannot turn back the clock , and Europe is the model for the rest of the world .
I wonder why we hush that up .
Why do we only speak about the bad things ?
Of course we can speak about Wild-West practices in the financial markets .
Yes , we do need international coordination .
We need international restriction and supervision .
But who , apart from Mr Goebbels , has mentioned the fact that there are also systemic malfunctions which we have not yet managed to curb ?
In Japan the rule is that the senior manager of a company must not earn more than twenty times the salary of its average worker .
What justification is there for allowing managers in Europe and the United States to earn a thousand times more than their companies ' workers ?
We can talk about these things , but we surely cannot demonise globalisation in general , for globalisation opens up new opportunities while combining freedom with prosperity .
( NL ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is good to see the Commission acknowledging the external dimension as a new element in the Lisbon Strategy , but above all we should not forget that globalisation also has implications for our own internal European policy .
The Lisbon Strategy has been good for economic growth and jobs , true , but it is also true that not everyone has benefited as a result .
In Europe globalisation has considerably widened the gulf between those with skills and those without .
So I am glad that the Commission and the Council of Employment Ministers will be paying greater attention in future to the social dimension because there are still too many people - the poorly skilled , persons with a disability , older workers , migrants - who have no access to decent training and good employment prospects .
Six million youngsters leave school without qualifications , 72 million live in poverty on the margins of society and Europe even has 14 million working poor .
Economic prosperity should benefit everyone , ladies and gentlemen .
So I would like to highlight three additional points .
One : it is clear that the new generation of policy instruments for Lisbon must be focused far more heavily on social inclusion , equal opportunities , poverty reduction and proper social protection .
The social dimension must again feature in the integrated guidelines .
Two : there must be greater emphasis on Member States ' fulfilment of the undertakings they give regarding employment and training .
Economic growth does not automatically mean quality jobs - for that there has to be a clear commitment on the part of Member States .
Three : a lot more must be done in partnership .
A good strategy for growth , jobs and social inclusion also requires input from national parliaments , local and regional authorities , social partners and civil society .
So my group does not think that the next generation of Lisbon Strategy instruments can just be ' business as usual ' .
The Vice-President of the Commission should appreciate that there are many reasons to make critical adjustments to the Lisbon package .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this recurring debate about the pros and cons of globalisation makes just about as much sense as debating the pros and cons of winter on Christmas Day .
The only real issue for us is how the European Union can attempt to turn what is an ineluctable phenomenon to the advantage of its peoples .
What the citizens of Europe expect are effective reforms to boost employment and support them through changing times .
Following the Lisbon Strategy has so far been rather like Waiting for Godot .
We hear a lot of talk about it , we are desperately anxious for it to materialise , but we never actually encounter it .
Those who hold the key to the Lisbon Strategy 's success , namely the Member States , must come up with the resources to achieve the aims they have set .
We expect them to deliver initiatives as well as a full and objective assessment of their results .
It is not my intention to paint an entirely gloomy picture .
There are a few encouraging signs , such as the Adjustment Fund , which is functioning even if its effectiveness has yet to be judged .
It is also significant that , for the first time in Europe , the social partners have an agreed analysis of the challenges to be addressed on labour markets .
They have also agreed to ask the Member States to implement flexisecurity policies , combining the twin elements of flexibility and security , for both employees and employers .
I shall conclude , Mr Barroso , by urging you not to sacrifice the social dimension of the Lisbon Strategy because you think it makes us less competitive .
Ordinary people expect Europe to be attentive to their concerns , and companies expect Europe to implement a policy that will counter widespread social dumping .
( PL ) Mr President , the Commission 's document contains many words about the place of the European Union in the globalisation process , but does it provide specific answers to the questions that we are asking ourselves ?
I rather doubt it .
The document gives the impression that good EU regulations will guarantee growth in the EU and prosperity for its citizens .
However , growth and prosperity depend on the efforts of the citizens , who need to be more efficient and productive than before , and also need to be more efficient and productive than citizens in other countries .
Good regulation is not enough to ensure future economic growth in the European Union .
It is not enough to equalise economic levels between the old Member States and the new Member States , which are growing at a faster rate than the EU average .
The effects of economic migration from low labour cost countries to high labour cost countries are not enough .
Future economic growth in the EU will depend on its competitiveness , but instead the Commission 's document talks a great deal about protecting social gains .
This is all very well , but these are not the causes of growth , but its result .
While we are protecting these social gains let us not forget that growth comes from innovation , improved organisational efficiency , greater productivity and competitiveness .
Mr President , I would like to thank the Commission and the Council for their statements .
I agree that there is potential for the EU to take a very positive role .
But , to date , economic globalisation has led to the acceleration of environmental degradation , poor conditions for workers and growing social imbalances .
On a local level it has come to mean job insecurity and , worse still , the loss of jobs in manufacturing and services , which I saw at first hand in my own community in Wales , where I live , earlier this year with the closure of the Burberry factory , which meant the loss of hundreds of jobs in a very poor area , a convergence area .
Companies are finding it easier to move around , seeking the cheapest labour and not worrying about the consequences of their actions , despite voluntary corporate social responsibility agreements which , like Burberry 's , look wonderful on paper but mean very little in practice .
The consequences are devastating for local communities and those local communities , as we have already heard , are the key to jobs and growth , the very purpose of the Lisbon Agenda .
All of this leads to disillusionment with politics , proving that the market is stronger than democracy .
The EU can help by making sure it improves labour and social standards across the world , including the cost of climate change in the market price to avoid environmental dumping .
The effects of globalisation make social protection even more important for workers and for communities .
I do agree that the way forward is to support small business and provide long-term sustainable jobs , high-quality jobs , and I do hope that the proposal for a small business act will help to achieve this in the long term .
( PT ) Madam President , in this debate it is right to stress that the European Union 's success depends on how it responds in terms of solidarity and economic and social cohesion .
When the European Union continues to suffer a high level of poverty affecting 17 % of the population , or some 80 million people in the EU-27 , when employment insecurity is rising and the percentage of poor workers is increasing , our fundamental priority must be to abandon neoliberal policies and prioritise employment with rights , decent wages , enhanced social protection and high-quality public services for all that supports productive investment by micro and small businesses and a fairer distribution of the wealth produced so as to promote real convergence among Member States , foster development and social progress , and implement a cooperation policy with the countries of the Third World .
( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , our fellow citizens - who are also workers , consumers and taxpayers - recognise quite clearly that the European Union , as currently configured , is not so much a bulwark against the excesses of financial globalisation as a staging post on the road to those excesses .
For 20 years now we have been promised a shining future , courtesy of the euro and the dismantling of borders ; that is what they dangled before us , for example , to win our support for the Maastricht Treaty in 1992 .
Despite everything , however , our manufacturing base is packing up and pulling out , leaving behind it millions of unemployed , tracts of industrial wasteland and a deserted countryside .
To hear President Sarkozy argue the case , before this House , for a mission to protect Europe , one would almost think he had never accepted either Maastricht or the Lisbon Treaty .
It is quite splendid to hear him coming on like General de Gaulle and declaring he will stand up in the WTO against any negotiations likely to damage our national interest .
He appears to have forgotten , however , that France does not possess a veto and that the only one doing any negotiating is a Commissioner from Brussels , who consistently disregards the terms of reference given him by the Member States .
Similar illusions were evident when - once again with every justification - he attacked the deflationary obsession of the independent European Central Bank in Frankfurt .
But who are we to believe : the man who stands before the TV cameras proclaiming French sovereignty , or the man who abandons our national sovereignty in a European treaty ?
The reality is that the Lisbon Treaty confirms the logic of the existing treaties , which bar us from steering the course of the euro , from protecting our markets and from standing up for ourselves in global trade negotiations .
Yes , the treaty mentions as an aim the protection of citizens but that is no more than a policy statement without legal force behind it .
Significantly , the treaty strengthens the powers and independence of both the Commission and the ECB , with their free-trade thinking .
Protocol No 6 , and also Articles 3 and 4 of the EC Treaty , reinforce their dogmatic conception of unfettered competition , heedless of national interests , unbridled by borders and careless of democracy .
We believe that the people of France and the people of Europe want something different .
So let us rehabilitate genuine free trade , in the form of exchange between nations that enriches them without stripping them of either their defences or their identity .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , over the next three years the Commission intends to present proposals for a realignment of economic , social and environmental policies in the European Union .
That is a good thing because , as we all know , there is nothing on the table yet .
The October paper , which is the basis of our present discussion , is a brief document . While I must mention in passing that it is always good to present brief papers , this one is also a shallow paper , a thin paper , from which we can learn nothing about the direction this journey is supposed to take .
The Commission must help us by resolving a contradiction . If we take today 's debate as the cover page , the introduction , we are dealing here with enormous challenges : globalisation , climate change , the issue of the international financial markets - the formidable challenges that face us in each of the Member States .
If , however , we then follow the discussion further into the realm of practical implications , we are told that there is no need to alter the practical policy guidelines .
That is incomprehensible .
It is totally incomprehensible because it naturally raises the question of the real nature of this globalisation debate .
Is it a pretext for taking no action in terms of the practical implementation of our social , environmental and economic policies , or is it really an opportunity to see the real picture and to provide responses to the urgent questions and needs of people in the countries of the European Union ?
Let me raise a few more questions .
If our future does indeed lie in an environmental industrialised society , why is it so difficult to speak in the Commission , with the Commission and even in this House about the proper investment policy that is needed if we are to achieve that goal ?
Why can we not talk about the building-refurbishment programmes and the modern vehicles and transport systems we need to achieve that goal ?
Why is it almost taboo to discuss a decent investment policy ?
And why do these things not feature in the Commission 's programme ?
Why are they not in the Lisbon work programme either ? I do hope there are still changes to be made .
When we talk about the knowledge triangle - the need for education , research and innovation - why can we not make the European Youth Pact a practical instrument and guarantee high-quality training for all young people in Europe , so that they can use their specialised knowledge and intelligence in the effort to restructure industrialised society .
These are the practical challenges to which we want to respond .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I think that there have been speakers in this debate as well who have placed economic freedom in opposition to the assurance and protection of social rights and the fight against poverty .
That opposition between economic freedom and social rights smacks of the last century and is no longer current in the politics of our Europe .
We undoubtedly have a duty to ensure that the rules are applied to the full in respect of economic freedom against monopolies , the transparency of financial markets , and ensuring that the costs of environmental pollution are paid for .
That is without a doubt fundamental !
From the point of view of social rights , however , what is now stopping us from helping the poorest in our countries are old social security systems geared towards corporations and organised work which do not help the unemployed and those who continue to be outside social guarantees and social protection .
In my country , Italy , we have a system which more or less forces people to retire at the age of 58 or 59 , when at the same time only 20 % of the unemployed have any social protection .
That is the problem that the poorest face : not globalisation or economic freedom , but the fact that social security mechanisms are old , outdated and behind the times ; those mechanisms have to be rethought and that is where the Lisbon Strategy and the Commission can help .
( PL ) Madam President , I do not want to repeat the same old banal statements about the benefits of globalisation .
It would also be valuable in the European Parliament to present a critical opinion as regards globalism .
For me , the best illustration for our debate is the voice of the Canadian philosopher John Ralston Saul .
I dedicate his words to the choir singing the praises of globalisation , singing the same song today in the European Parliament .
Globalism is an ideology that takes many elements from typical Western religion .
Globalism is the belief in a single idea that excludes alternative points of view .
At its basis there lies a conviction in the supremacy of economics over other areas of life and a certainty that all economic theories apart from liberalism have failed and that there is no other way .
This conviction is born from the fact that liberalism put in motion global forces that support liberalism as the right way forward and make other approaches appear incorrect .
However globalism is deluded in believing that economics is the motor behind civilisation .
Over the last twenty or thirty years we have learned to look at everything in economic terms .
Even Marx did not go that far .
He said that economics is important but did not go so far as to say that everything should be viewed through the prism of profit .
- ( EL ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the topic presented by the Commission today is full of contradictions .
Allow me to highlight two points :
Firstly , the Commission emphasises that the increase in adaptability to globalisation needs to be intensified in order to ensure viability in our citizens ' standard of living .
This is not the situation we have at present , given the failure of the Lisbon Strategy .
The truth is that these policies of intensified competition aggravate the inequalities in wealth and manufacturing power , and only the European Commission can see any enhancement of prosperity or elimination of unequal development among the EU Member States .
Secondly , we learn from the document that the Commission is working towards a social Europe , an idea we have heard so much about but evidence of which we have never seen for ourselves .
Let me quote a simple example : since 2002 , the price of automotive fuels in the Member States has risen by 35-50 % .
This , along with many other things , hits the purse of those on low incomes , and none of the Commission 's social economic strategies seems to offer a solution .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , our European aim of success in the age of globalisation can be achieved if we take our chances .
Our discussion in the public forum focuses all too often on the adverse effects of globalisation .
We discuss them whenever companies have to shed jobs or relocate abroad , but we say far too little about all the good things that come out of globalisation .
Take my constituency , for example - my home region . No less than 74 % of the industrial output of my constituency is now exported .
We are reaping definite benefits from globalisation .
In my home region , sadly , workers are also being laid off by businesses that are no longer profitable , but many more can be recruited by other businesses that are benefitting from globalisation , companies that have adapted , and our unemployment figures are falling sharply .
Unfortunately , we speak too rarely about that side of the coin .
The European Union has an important role to play in shaping globalisation .
Four hundred and eighty million Europeans must stand together for their interests and values .
We already have the world 's most open economy , but we need worldwide market access .
We must set greater store by reciprocity .
Non-tariff barriers and other obstacles to trade are unacceptable .
We must be able to defend ourselves against unfair trading practices .
To that end we need trade-defence instruments , and we need a Commissioner who neither lacks credibility nor exudes arrogance when representing the European Union in the world , but who boldly defends our trading interests in a spirit of cooperation and mutual trust .
We must protect intellectual property more effectively , we must press harder for global rules and standards , we must strengthen the WTO , and we must practise transatlantic partnership .
If we and the Commission perform these tasks , we shall truly be able to use and shape the globalisation process to ensure that people in general can continue to live their lives in freedom and prosperity .
( PT ) Succeeding in the age of globalisation is the great challenge facing the European Union .
The question is , how can competitiveness be reconciled with social cohesion , or in other words , globalisation with regulation .
The Lisbon Strategy provides the answer , and the Treaty of Lisbon will make decision-making easier , but success will depend above all on Europe seeing globalisation as an opportunity rather than as a threat .
We must understand what is happening with China and India .
China has overtaken Great Britain , France and Italy in the ranking of most industrialised nations , overtaken the United States as the major exporter of technological products , and accumulated enormous financial reserves .
As regards India , few people are familiar with the name ' TATA ' .
In 2006 , however , TATA 's automobile-manufacturing subsidiary had a higher stock exchange value than General Motors , while no-one had heard of the MITTAL Group until it launched a hostile takeover bid against ARCELOR , triggering panic in Paris , Brussels and Luxembourg .
The other side of the Asian miracle , however , must not be forgotten .
This is a tale of suffering arising out of the Beijing Government 's complicity with western multinationals that have relocated their factories to take advantage of cheap labour and the absence of a welfare state .
It is in Asia , meanwhile , that the challenge of combating global warming will be won or lost .
Europe must be firm and must demand reciprocity in international trade , but must not systematically adopt protectionist policies .
It is true that Chinese competition is unfair because of low wages , lack of political and trade union rights , counterfeiting and the undervalued currency .
All this is true .
It is also true , however , that there are 800 million Chinese and 700 million Indians who are eager to get a decent minimum income and to demand greater social justice .
These are challenges for a stronger Europe and a better world .
Madam President , I also believe our reaction to globalisation should not be based on fear but on a sense of opportunity mixed with intelligent adaptation .
As the resolution says , the EU as a global player is one of the major beneficiaries of an open world economy .
You would not always realise that from the volume of European anti-globalisation rhetoric .
I agree with Mr Czarnecki that liberalism has spread across the world .
But , unlike him , I am glad about that .
The EU can only achieve its objective by being active and organised on the world stage , and this is particularly true of migration .
I am grateful to see that a paragraph I drafted for the ALDE Group has survived almost unscathed into the final resolution .
I really do think that migration deserves to be a priority on the EU agenda , on a par with climate change and energy .
We see the pressure from outside ; we see the social tensions and , indeed , the racism from inside the EU .
But still there is no comprehensive EU policy on legal as well as illegal immigration , and on integration .
Finally , let us not forget the potential of global communications and especially the internet to promote human rights .
Okay , maybe it is not as inevitable as we once thought - if you look , for instance , at the censorship being successfully practised by China - but , still , globalisation and the internet and other global communications are a very potent force for good .
That is also part of globalisation .
( PL ) Madam President , honourable colleagues in the Council and Commission , just as , in the life of man , childhood is followed by a period of adolescence , so globalisation appears to be a natural stage in the development of humanity and the next challenge for it .
In this difficult debate on this ever-changing and unfamiliar issue I would like to say that , paradoxically , all the preceding speakers from both the left and right of the House were correct to a considerable degree .
What is most important is that there is a real need to create proper guidelines and regulations for a just division of the benefits of globalisation .
Since , from the very definition of globalisation , it is clear that it is a widespread phenomenon , it is not enough that only the European Union should have such institutions and regulations - they have to be accepted by the whole world .
Mr Barroso was quite right to say that the European Union can and should propose to the world a balanced and just model for globalisation .
- ( EL ) Madam President , the topic of today 's discussion is misconceived .
Success in the age of globalisation safeguards neither European interests nor the prosperity of workers in EU countries , but only the interests of capital .
In the context of globalisation , the new order being created by business interests and multinational companies at Community and international level aims to multiply the profits of capital through the intensified exploitation of workers .
Mr Sarkozy 's statements yesterday about globalisation confirm the EU 's reliance on big capital .
They underline the intensity of intra-imperialist conflicts and the intention to use the EU as a battering ram against other large imperialist centres , and especially against the achievements and rightful claims of workers .
The common denominator of all these endeavours is a full-on attack on workers .
Reduced wages , increased working hours , adaptation to the needs of capital , an increased pension age , flexicurity and the restructuring of labour relations are at the core of the Lisbon Strategy .
We therefore consider that the harsh reality experienced by millions of workers cannot be judged by any terms of globalisation .
Nor is anyone convinced by the arguments put forward by the Commission and the Council about environmental protection .
Madam President , it is very difficult for Commissioner Verheugen to listen to everything that is said in this Chamber , but of course some very poignant points have been raised and I hope he takes them into account .
I listened to what President Barroso had to say .
I thought he put a point across that I totally believe in , that globalisation is here to benefit the European Union .
Mr Toussas has just talked very glibly about the working class , but if we do not have globalisation , if we do not have industry and business in the European Union , there will be no jobs for people .
What actually worried me considerably was what Mr Sarkozy said yesterday .
Are we going to have an old France , a protectionist France , or are we going to have a France which is going to embrace a new generation ?
I am reminded of when the Chinese went to sign the declaration to join the WTO in the United States .
President Clinton had managed to stop them from signing it for 10 years .
When President Bush signed it , his advisers looked back and said , ' my God , China has signed it !
What have we done ? '
In actual fact , what they have done is that they have brought into play some great opportunities for us .
We must look upon China and India as an opportunity .
We must not bring up the drawbridges , man the battlements , close the doors , because Europe has a huge opportunity here and we must take it .
Mr Caspary quite rightly talked about employment in his constituency .
I know that it is very difficult to keep employment , but if we do not allow ourselves to be part of a global market , then we will get nowhere .
I do believe that we have a huge opportunity if we can embrace it .
We must look at such things as free trade agreements .
Morocco , at the moment , has signed a free trade agreement with the United States .
We must look at that .
Finally , I would ask the Commission to allow business and industry to get on with doing what they are supposed to do .
Be very careful about the legislation you put in place which damages European opportunities .
( FR ) Madam President , Presidents of the Commission and the Council , we have just heard Mr Barroso tell us that the European Union is uniquely well placed to provide a good basis for regulation at global level .
He is right . But if that is what we intend to do , we must also put our own house in order .
The tools available in the Union for tackling these challenges include what we call the ' guidelines ' on economic policy and on employment .
I fear today that the Commission is trying to lose these necessary guidelines under the carpet of globalisation .
But they are useful and we need to review them .
We need to do this firstly because , at the European Council last March , the Heads of State and Government adopted the best possible strategy for enabling the European Union to address globalisation and the challenges of energy supply and climate change .
If , in pursuit of that strategy , we do not use all the means at our disposal in the European Union , including the guidelines - and perhaps especially the guidelines - we will get nowhere and we will merely foster disillusionment about the Union 's ability to tackle globalisation .
We also need to do this because Commissioner Almunia himself has recognised that that questions of exchange rates , oil prices and the real impact on the EU economy of the sub-prime lending crisis will affect the Union 's projected economic growth .
He has revised the projections downwards : from 2.9 % to 2.4 % for the Union as a whole and from 2.6 % to 2.2 % for the euro area .
We need to do this for the further reason that we need to respond to peoples ' aspirations in Europe and , whatever Nicolas Sarkozy may think , social Europe is a very real issue that you will have to address if you want to avoid being disowned by Europe 's citizens in the very near future .

The final reason for doing this was pinpointed today by Commissioner Almunia when he admitted that , in the prevailing international climate , Europe 's growth will be driven primarily , if not entirely , by internal consumption .
Is it conceivable that , against this background of comprehensive change , the only constant should be the guidelines ?
Is it conceivable that there should be no change in the Union 's only instrument for effectively steering its Member States ' economic and social policies ?
I would ask the Commission representative and the Commission Vice-President to tell Mr Barroso that he needs to change the guidelines ; that he needs to take account of the new context so that the Union can equip itself internally with the best tools available for meeting the challenges of globalisation head on .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , those who proclaim their commitment to a fairer world have no qualms about blaming globalisation for the difficulties in their own economies .
They therefore call for less free market , more regulation and more government intervention .
Yet globalisation offers the genuine prospect of a win-win situation because it enables the emerging economies and the slow starters in the world economy to catch up and give us the opportunity to develop new markets for high-quality , top-of-the-range products , facilities and services .
If we are to grasp these opportunities , however , we must do our homework , which means redoubling our efforts in the fields of training , further education - particularly for young unemployed persons - and lifelong learning , becoming even more creative in the ways we shape the value-added chains and processes of our economy and encouraging even more free enterprise .
Unimpeded globalisation leads to more open markets and more competition , which benefit all consumers .
Let us resist the temptation to shield our economy .
Such a move would quickly degenerate into sheer protectionism .
Instead , let us nurture the inherent power of our economy to keep renewing itself .
Let us invest in the technologies of the future , and the future will be ours .
( PL ) Madam President , the economy should be for the benefit of the people and not the other way round .
Natural differences in the tempo of movements of capital and labour in the age of globalisation are leading to a spiralling drop in employment standards .
Manufacturing is moving to areas with ever lower salaries and ever more dangerous working conditions .
This leads to loss of jobs for employees in regions with higher employment standards and to a loss in the purchasing power of employees , which damps down demand for consumer goods .
If the European Union wishes to be successful in the age of globalisation , it has to find effective tools to combat social dumping and to uphold and protect Europe 's social dimension .
Madam President , I think the Commission 's contribution to the globalisation debate is a very valuable one .
I think globalisation is not a threat but an opportunity .
Europe is well placed to rise to the challenge .
We have highly developed infrastructure , education systems , technology , capital markets , and vibrant home markets in the making .
It cannot be emphasised too strongly that Europe 's strength lies in an internal market that is a springboard for our companies globally .
Business innovations are born all around Europe .
Their proliferation , which brings well-being to Europe , should not be burdened with red tape .
I especially look to Commissioner Verheugen on this .
Reducing red tape in Europe is a key issue for globalisation and the competitiveness of Europe .
We have to focus on SMEs in particular .
They are the right focus for the Commission 's attention .
Much has been achieved but , for example , tax barriers still hamper business in Europe .
Strong businesses do not exist without a workforce , which threatens to be a scarce resource in Europe very soon .
Europe 's demography requires immigration .
Here , other world regions are far ahead of us , which shows in their economic performance .
This is a difficult issue requiring balanced consideration of all interests , not least those of employers .
It is an EU issue , of course , because competitiveness does not come about without a mobile workforce .
Plans such as the ' Blue Card ' are welcomed to this end .
Another element that should move freely but steadily is capital .
Financial stability is a sine qua non of a competitive and economically safe Europe .
Financial markets are , globally , one of Europe 's strong sectors , one of our new winning industries .
Innovation thanks to market-led regulation , which does not equal ' laissez-faire ' - here , also , making it easier for the sector to function across Europe is vital .
As for the outside world , Europe should establish itself as a strong global actor .
We need unity from European Union Member States , and the Commission can also contribute to bringing that unity .
- ( SV ) Madam President , Commissioner , President-in-Office of the Council , I would rather look at the opportunities of globalisation than the problems , but that depends on how we act in Europe .
I agree that we should invest in research and development , that we should make more long-term investments in a good environment and that we should invest in people and lifelong learning , but what the Commission is forgetting - the error in the Commission 's document - is that we are neglecting the social dimension .
Developments in Europe today point towards good growth and more jobs , but also greater exclusion , bigger gulfs and more insecure jobs - more jobs , not least in Germany , on which you cannot support yourself and you need to receive social security benefits to supplement your pay .
We must link growth and employment with a social dimension which reduces the gaps between people and regions in Europe .
This was discussed in the debate in Guimarães in which I participated during the meeting of Ministers for Employment and Social Affairs .
The Portuguese Presidency is attempting to push the issue of the Integrated Guidelines and change them to make the social link much clearer and much more integrated .
However , the Commission does not want to do this .
The Commission does not want to change the guidelines .
The guidelines need to be changed .
In our resolution we have reached agreement that we want to have new guidelines which integrate the social dimension and , of course , also deal with the issues of security in change and ' flexicurity ' .
The Commission should also take this on board so that we have a stronger link between issues of growth and the social dimension .
We must also embed the Lisbon Strategy .
At present it is not embedded at the national , regional or local level .
There are many people who are unaware of the Lisbon Strategy .
We must integrate it and get the social partners and civil society to also work to ensure that these issues - the social dimension , growth and employment - are treated as important and are integrated .
( FI ) Madam President , I wish to bring a northern perspective to this debate .
Two years or so ago I worked in a regional development organisation close to the Arctic Circle and the Russian border .
For that distant region , globalisation was both a threat and an opportunity .
We began development work , trusting in our own strengths as we took advantage of globalisation .
Companies , the public sector , the education system and universities pooled their resources to build a productive innovation environment .
The skills base was strengthened by networking with global skills networks in the spirit of the Lisbon Strategy .
At the same time renewable energy projects were launched .
The results are encouraging .
A particular example is the fast growth in international tourism in the area .
I believe that this region would serve as a useful model elsewhere in Europe , and the EU should make this sort of work much more feasible .
( NL ) Madam President , Europe 's stature stems from the single market , liberalisation of the single market and liberalisation of the world market , globalisation .
This has brought us not only prosperity but also stable democracy .
So we must be wary - and I am talking primarily of trade aspects here - of an excessively defensive strategy , and above all of protectionist-style trade instruments .
Madam President , Europe 's competitiveness is better served by an attitude of openness towards the world , so I think it is important to give greater priority to opening up economic markets in non-EU countries , more specifically in the emerging industrial countries such as India , Brazil and China , because the enormous potential for growth of those markets represents an opportunity for European companies and an opportunity for the European economy .
These emerging industrial countries will in turn have to open up their markets to our companies , in respect of services too , and in the interests of reciprocity I urge the Commission , in its negotiations , to bring pressure to bear accordingly on these countries in particular .
We visited Singapore as part of a delegation from the Committee on International Trade and we saw that American firms get far better access there than European ones , Madam President , and we cannot have that .
So we need to be pro-active .
We are after all the world 's largest economy .
If we all pull together effectively , we should be able to use our power to open up these markets .
Then there is the abolition of import levies and non-tariff barriers to trade , Madam President , and in our strategy on market access it is also important to prioritise these emerging markets .
- ( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , President-in-Office , Europe has been asked to show its citizens a different side to globalisation .
This is not the side of unfettered competition , but that of social solidarity , redistribution , diversification and cultural values .
In this internal dialogue , and also in any opening-up of the EU to the rest of the world through economic , social and environmental policies and those on security , viable development and immigration , the European Commission must promote and strengthen the EU 's cultural ethos .
The Commission must directly promote in its annual legislative work , in the Lisbon Strategy and also in the process of strengthening the post-reform Treaty , the following areas in the cultural sector :
Firstly , the Commission must strengthen the cultural industries based on high-quality , innovative services while providing significant productive and innovative possibilities for the European economy .
This sector is of considerable importance for intercultural dialogue .
Secondly , it must strengthen the ' knowledge triangle ' of research , education and innovation .
This , unfortunately , does not yet have the backing of legislative measures , although it should be one of the EU 's aims .
Innovation in the field of culture should not be a luxury enjoyed by a few multinational companies , but a horizontal policy for SMEs .
Madam President , the European Commission and the Council must clearly decide their positions for meeting the challenges of globalisation .
They must do this through open dialogue , initially with the national parliaments .
Globalisation can be presented as part of European history if it can be imbued with the ethos of European culture .
Madam President , globalisation is blamed for everything , from population explosion to climate change to exploitation .
But these are just products of mankind ; so is competition .
Darwin called it natural selection .
European citizens are fearful .
We must educate them , true , but not by stating that we need a policy at EU level to face the challenge of a globalised economy .
That makes me fearful , suggesting that we do not have a policy .
The EU has unique power at supranational level to shape things and to challenge excesses .
In July , in the Financial Times it said : ' Brussels is the regulatory capital of the world and cannot be ignored from Washington to Tokyo ' .
So , if we have got it , let us use it , but judiciously .
What is the purpose of a competitiveness agenda if it is not to maintain our position in the world ?
What is the purpose of a single market if we fail to get it properly completed ?
Stop the faint-hearted excuses .
The EU is absolutely about meeting the challenges .
We just need to get on with it before natural selection catches up .
( ES ) Madam President , representatives of the Council and the Commission , globalisation is good for Europe ; Europe must encourage globalisation .
We are witnessing an as-yet slow but irreversible dissolution of frontiers in the world , a process which has succeeded in lifting more than 400 million people out of poverty in less than twenty years and for the first time , in 2007 , China will be the country , the area of the world , which will contribute most to the growth of the world economy , China , not the European Union , ladies and gentlemen !
This means in short that globalisation is a challenge but also a great opportunity .
It is a challenge in the sense that opening-up means more growth , more welfare and more employment , and this is something we must explain to European citizens .
What concerns me again is hearing the word ' protect ' in this Chamber .
Protectionism is a denial of globalisation and a denial of the European Union .
Protecting citizens is not necessary when they are the protagonists of their own economic growth and their own well-being .
We must hand that ability back to the people and we must therefore also conduct an exercise in self-criticism in the European Union .
This is because we in the European Union are not doing what we must when our growth is inadequate , when we also have our share of responsibility for the crisis in world financial markets and , in short , when we do not do everything we must at home , on our own doorstep , to foster economic growth among small and medium-sized enterprises and create more employment , because we need much more employment than the process of opening up the economy will be able to provide .
The Lisbon Agenda is really a marker : achieving the internal market , putting public finances in order , reforming , modernising our labour market , committing ourselves to environmental reform , renewable energy and in short opening Europe up really means greater social cohesion in Europe .
( ES ) Madam President , Mr President of the Council , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I think it most appropriate for the debate on globalisation to have taken place under the Portuguese Presidency because Portugal is a country whose flag is on the map , because the Portuguese were at the forefront when we Europeans began globalisation , and because globalisation is not a plague upon our heads .
The Europeans began the process of globalisation during the Renaissance , when we were less developed than the Chinese and the Indians , and that is how we are seen in the rest of the world .
Now , with the Treaty of Lisbon , we will also be pioneers in what I would call ' post-imperial globalisation ' .
We are not going to conquer new continents ; what we are doing is giving a response in which we bring together , of our own volition , the values shared between States and peoples and we can be an example of the type of globalisation which is most needed , namely political and social globalisation .
Here we have talked about impetuous , uncontrolled financial globalisation despite the fact that we have , for example , a European at the head of the International Monetary Fund .
We are the principal bloc at the WTO and have a specific responsibility .
What is missing ?
What is missing is precisely for us to be able to find answers in a globalised world which are in line with this .
Specifically , there are two very important , challenging aspects on which we must be very active : not only in terms of trade and technological development but in the universal defence of human rights , especially workers ' rights , for which the International Labour Organisation exists , and also the negotiations and policies necessary to tackle climate change .
In any event , Madam President , and on this I shall close , I believe that we Europeans have no right to hold a pessimistic view of globalisation .
We sought it and must now come up with innovative answers .
( PL ) Madam President , Mr President , it is obvious that we will not be able to solve all the problems of globalisation with one statement and one measure to promote the Lisbon Strategy .
However , the statement of the Council and of the Commission is good because it draws attention to the fact that globalisation is not a curse and does not have to be a threat , in fact , it could be something positive for the citizens of Europe , and that it is the citizens and their activities that should be the principal guide behind the actions of the EU .
I am in favour of four areas of activity .
First of all , the knowledge triangle , particularly innovation , and I understand that here it is essential to act quickly in order at least to launch the European Technological Institute .
Secondly , the business environment , and this means a fully open and free internal market without monopolies , with open competition , less regulation and less bureaucracy , which is something that the Vice-President of the Commission , Günter Verheugen , is fighting for so courageously .
Thirdly , human resources , entailing the problems of migration and , primarily , counteracting the brain drain , which means better education , attractive investments , and a social dimension to the EU based on the achievements of the economy .
Fourthly and finally , energy and climate change , which means a common energy policy , which I believe is something we are all aware of , and reductions of emissions .
However , there is no way that a reduction in greenhouse gases in the European Union alone can save the world 's climate .
For this reason we need to have an EU that is politically strong because only a strong EU can influence the United States , China and India towards compliance with climate protection guidelines .
As regards a reduction of emissions in the EU - yes , I am in favour , but I am also in favour of an EU that is politically strong and this means full ratification of the European Treaty as quickly as possible .
Madam President , hopefully , and I say hopefully , the Lisbon Treaty is going to represent the closing of a chapter in the history of the European Union , the chapter of the growth of the EU , the consolidation and peace and stability on the continent , the dismantling of trade and economic barriers between Member States , and the institutional development which was needed to achieve those things .
Now , though , we need to open a new chapter , a chapter of looking outwards , of rising to the challenges of globalisation .
We need a global Europe which sets a completely new agenda for globalisation , resting on the principles of openness , fairness and the importance of cooperation between Member States .
We know what the challenges are - they have been well explored in this debate .
Climate change and migration are , in my view , the two biggest , but we need to maintain high growth and jobs .
We need to have a modern effective social agenda .
We need to deal with terrorism and crime and promoting security beyond our borders and dealing with poverty .
And indeed , as Ms Bowles has said , we do have policies towards those .
But let us be frank : progress has been slow , it has been uneven and it has not always been very effective .
If we really are to deal with globalisation , we need a radical and fundamental shift , not only in our policies but in our entire thinking in the European Union .
We have to focus now simply on action and delivery .
We have to ensure that Member States fulfil their promises , because we have an EU framework .
What we do not have are 27 Member States that all do as they say they are going to do , and our focus must now be on delivering on promises and fulfilling all the potential that the EU has .
( DE ) Madam President , sum up globalisation in two minutes - well , here goes !
My first request is that we deal a little more honestly with the subject of globalisation in our discussions .
My native region of Bavaria earns half of its GDP from exports .
Many people are critical of globalisation , but if we asked them whether they agreed that their local companies should not be allowed to serve the world market any more , they would say ' no ' .
Likewise , if we turned to the public galleries and asked whether anyone was prepared to give up the opportunity to buy competitively priced goods - be they electrical appliances , textiles or other products - there would be no volunteers .
Everyone knows that imports from low-cost countries are the reason for the low inflation rates of recent years .
It is only right and proper to acknowledge that , even if we regularly speak of globalisation as a threat .
Europe must shape the globalisation process , for it has been benefiting our manufacturers as well as our consumers .
That is the purpose , for instance , of eliminating red tape , which is an important objective both for Commissioner Verheugen and for Europe .
I do not wish to imply that this is a task for the Commission alone ; I am also referring to Parliament and the Council .
We are speaking about globalisation now , but afterwards we shall be adopting the Soil Protection Directive and creating more red tape .
In short , our actions need to be rigorously consistent in Europe , and it is our mission to shape Europe .
When we consider the subprime mortgage crisis in the United States , we need to realise that international financial markets are intertwined and that we Europeans must help to make things happen .
How do we deal with rating agencies , and how do we deal with hedge funds ?
Regrettably , Commissioner McCreevy , who is responsible for these matters , has not yet taken the lead in the movement to rein in the Americans and other markets , and so Europe is lagging behind .
Nevertheless , I firmly believe that Europe is well prepared for globalisation .
We are benefiting from it , which we must explain to the public , and we must press for minimum standards , although these would not be European standards , and then we shall be prepared and fit to win the globalisation game .
Whether or not globalisation takes place is not determined in Brussels or Strasbourg .
( HU ) Thank you , Madam President .
I speak as a representative of a region that was not able to choose its fate after the war .
There was barbed wire between our country and the luckier part of Europe , but not even that was able to stop the unexpected effects of globalisation .
In 2000 we started to familiarise ourselves with competitiveness and solidarity in the strategy for work and workers , and in the Lisbon Strategy .
Since then , the balance has tipped in favour of capital recovery many times and it came to be feared that the human face of the strategy was becoming obscured .
Competitiveness and work are incontrovertibly and historically inseparable concepts , and we are starting to realise that worthwhile work is only part of a worthwhile life .
A worthwhile life also includes basic security , a contribution to a healthy life and development , a lack of discrimination and acceptable living conditions .
But Europe should not only view itself as defending values , but also as shaping the dreams of generations , creating an opportunity for European citizens and for those coming from third countries who want to make things .
And it is for precisely this reason that solidarity should not merely remain a slogan ; it should be the chance for people who are able to make things , or to enable them to do so .
Ladies and gentlemen , the labour market and the capital that demands a return is ruthlessly selective , and new human resources require investment at a price greater than capital , whose movement is ever easier , can acquire labour .
The Europe of values cannot accept that those starting their careers , the elderly , those who are isolated by poverty , those forced to learn new skills , and the gypsies who carry the burden of many kinds of disadvantage , will not have work .
Especially so that the burden of disadvantage should not weigh heavily on the shoulders of coming generations , the Community funds spent on us not only keep them within the framework of a worthwhile life , but also continue to increase the prospects of European competitiveness . Thank you , Madam President .
- ( EL ) Madam President , the conclusion that is naturally drawn from the debate is that projecting the European model onto the global ' megascreen ' entails both risks and opportunities .
As a rule , globalisation is perceived by European citizens as an external phenomenon : it has no obvious European regulatory or political intervention .
It is therefore up to the European plan of action to show that a visible , measurable European interest is indeed being defended , while at the same time promoting global understanding .
As regards the Union 's external commercial agenda , my view is that priority should among other things be given to ensuring terms of market access reciprocity and competition on equal terms , as the French President , Mr Sarkozy , emphatically pointed out yesterday in this House .
The strict European regulatory framework for environmental protection and public health protection for consumers and workers is a significant indication of the Union 's political and institutional maturity .
However , if this is not to be a protracted competitive disadvantage for the Union , it must meet with an equivalent response from other leading international players .
The give and take between the internal and external aspects of the Lisbon Strategy will help to promote the European model in the global arena of governance .
However , it clashes with a lower degree of regulatory rigour and legally binding completeness in both the WTO and other international organisations .
The Union is called upon to play a leading and constructive role at an increased level of international cooperation .
It is called upon to prioritise the undertaking of binding obligations and the adoption of international standards in the interests of upwardly escalating regulatory convergence .
Madam President , this has been a very wide-ranging debate and at the end I would like to bring it back to a focus on social policy as a productive factor .
The launch of the integrated guideline package was supposed to lead to a balanced delivery of the economic , social and sustainability strands of the Lisbon process but in practice , when it comes to the employment guidelines , it has been a case not of integration but of subordination .
The employment guidelines have become virtually invisible , hiding the very wide variability in Member State performance against the range of indicators and targets they are supposed to meet under the employment strategy on youth unemployment , integration of older workers - a range of factors .
In some Member States , spending on lifelong learning and active labour market measures has actually declined over the last five years - not improved but declined .
That is disastrous for the Lisbon process overall .
The employment strategy therefore needs to be given much greater visibility in the next Lisbon cycle .
One other point - the joint resolution that we are debating here today in several places emphasises the need to deliver decent work and to focus on improving the quality of work .
This focus is not helped by the Commission 's concentration on the idea of employment security as opposed to job security , which is repeated in both the Green Paper on labour law and the communication on flexicurity .
In our work on flexicurity in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs we make clear that both employment security and job security are important .
What a fast changing flexible firm needs - a firm changing its production line every six months , its IT configuration every four months - is an adaptable , skilled , loyal and dedicated workforce , not a casualised and fragmented labour market .
So we will do our best to help produce a good set of principles on flexicurity but they must then lead to an amendment to the guidelines .
President Barroso said earlier , ' If it ain 't broke , don 't fix it ' .
Well , it is broken and it needs fixing .
Madam President , I congratulate the Commission on an excellent paper and I would just like to highlight these four points .
The first one is on the knowledge economy .
I think the way this has been expressed in the paper , about the free movement of ideas and researchers being perhaps seen as ' the fifth freedom ' of the EU , is a beautiful way of expressing it , and I would like to see that developed .
In reaction to what Mr Hughes has just said , I think this point really reflects where we are , debating in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , that we want to move away from the idea of just simple job protection towards employment protection , by promoting employability and by strengthening skills ; in that way , success for Europe in the age of globalisation can mean success for individuals - success for people - which is what the EU should be very much more about .
The second point concerns SMEs .
There is a reference to a wide range of new proposals for the end of 2008 .
I welcome that , but there is a ' but ' : please let us not shift our focus towards new proposals for agreement tomorrow before we first focus on delivering against existing commitments for action today .
Here , particularly for Mr Verheugen , I would draw attention to this 25 % reduction in simplification of existing EU legislation .
Let us please see some real delivery on this across the board , sooner rather than later , as this will particularly benefit SMEs .
I would encourage , in this context , a wholesale review of the Working Time Directive , where much more lateral thinking is required of us all - and I do mean of us all , including MEPs .
Thirdly , the single market : adding an external dimension is all very well , but let us get the internal dimension first , completing our own single market before we develop grand ambitions outside .
I would say to Mr Schulz , as well as to Mr Hughes , I agree absolutely that this is not just for our economic progress but also because this will deliver social progress .
Finally , on a more personal point , the only thing I really stumble over in the document is the very first line of the front page , which says ' Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament , the Council , the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions ' .
I recognise that the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions exist - although I am never clear why - but please do not elevate them to the same level as the two codecision institutions .
( SK ) The phenomenon of globalisation is becoming more and more perceivable .
In such a situation , the European Union has to react fairly quickly and determine whether Europe 's competitiveness has not only been preserved but whether it has also been growing ; whether the Lisbon Strategy , the tool that is supposed to ensure that this happens , is capable of providing solutions in the areas of innovation , energy , migration , education and demography , in particular .
All of this must facilitate growth and the ability to create jobs .
New challenges are appearing in relation to the environment , such as CO2 emissions , the use of pesticides , concerns about clean water reserves and sources , the protection of soil and agriculture .
Last but not least , there are also challenges concerning health and epidemics , as well as fighting obesity , cardiovascular diseases and the growing occurrence of all types of cancer .
Ladies and gentlemen , globalisation brings further challenges in the areas of security and migration , and there is a growing danger relating to criminality and terrorism .
Very soon we will witness the fall of the last remains of the Iron Curtain and the divided Europe when nine new Member States join the Schengen area .
We have to do everything possible to guard this common area comprehensively so that illegal migrants , who aggravate the security situation in the Member States , cannot get in .
On the other hand , I am advocating a responsible approach in the area of work permits for legal migrants : we must think about it properly and we must choose qualified employees for the employment sectors most in need .
I also believe that the older Member States of the European Union - and I would like the Commission to take note of this - will do away with the nonsensical restrictions on the employment of citizens from the new Member States .
In today 's situation this is an incomprehensible anachronism .
( FR ) Madam President , the European Union cannot let itself become a victim of globalisation or give its people the impression that they are caught up in something they cannot influence .
So the question now is not whether globalisation is good or bad : it is whether we are prepared to bring our own weight to bear on it and to regulate it .
To face that challenge , the European Union needs to reconcile competitiveness and economic and social cohesion .
Strengthening multilateral rules is part of the process .
In an open economic system , the best way of ensuring that consumers ' and citizens ' right are respected is by observing the rules of competition and establishing a fair and equitable market , reflecting environmental and social standards .
Therefore , until we have a set of rules that are internationally recognised , it is crucial that we retain and do not water down our existing trade defence instruments , which are our only effective tools against dumping .
And yes , it is possible for Europe to protect its citizens without being protectionist .
Europe also needs to invest in those sectors that will determine its economic clout in the future : namely research , innovation and the development of clean technologies .
Furthermore , in order to support those who have most difficulty in benefiting from globalisation , Europe needs to step up its arrangements for putting solidarity into practice , for example through the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund and flexisecurity .
It is in Europe 's interest , in terms of coping with international competition , to anticipate adaptation and to embark on reform .
The European Union possesses all the necessary capabilities and resources to meet the challenge .
( FI ) Madam President , success in globalisation is vital for European prosperity : it is the producer of its material content .
Now that the three-year cycle for the renewed Lisbon Strategy is coming to an end , we need to focus attention on the external dimension in particular .
I wish in particular to highlight three elements .
Firstly , energy , its supply and sufficiency , raises and lowers the position of societies in the global competitive environment .
The situation in Europe does not seem to be a happy one .
The decline in energy self-sufficiency is a serious challenge for the EU .
Even now we import half of our energy from outside the EU and dependence on imports is predicted to grow .
In addition to making a determined effort to increase energy self-sufficiency , we need a strong foreign policy on energy , a common voice , solidarity and security of imports .
The second central issue is climate change , a global phenomenon , which is having a negative global impact on the environment , the economy and society , and which calls for global solutions .
Unilateral actions distort competition and cause carbon leakage .
The following assume prominence where globalisation is concerned : the inevitability of a global emissions trading scheme , the compulsory commitment to such an idea on the part of all industrialised countries and rising economies , and the removal of barriers to market access for clean technology .
Thirdly , the EU should always remember Schuman 's brilliance , i.e. that in our success story the economy would be made to serve common objectives , the human good , peace and stability .
Our cultural tradition obliges us to strive for a more human world which respects human rights .
Only then can globalisation be in the interests of everyone .
Only then will we prevent the world from slipping out of our hands .
- ( EL ) Madam President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , European citizens generally seem to be greeting the historic phenomenon of globalisation with scepticism - many of them , indeed , with fear and an entirely negative attitude .
This is because of the revolution taking place in the global economy and the social fabric of Europe .
Prejudice , fear and above all inaction and passive observation of developments are , however , no way to face the new order on the world stage .
The situation cannot be reversed .
Globalisation is here to stay , whether we like it or not .
The great global village is being built , as President Barroso said .
The EU has European interests to protect .
It must therefore become involved in a methodical , planned , collective and dynamic manner in the globalisation process , in order to develop proper rules of operation in the new world system .
The EU must move forward ; it must aim for the wellbeing both of European citizens , of course , and of world citizens .
As a commonwealth of principles and values , the EU must give pride of place to its human-centred character and promote it internationally .
It must convert economic competition into genuine emulation to promote freedom , democracy , the principle of legality , social justice , respect for human rights , environmental protection and the peaceful coexistence of nations and individuals .
This is the role that the EU can and must play in the process of globalisation .
( NL ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this debate comes none too soon .
Globalisation is a fact .
Every generation has its own challenges , so they say .
Well , the challenge for us is to respond as best we can to the new circumstances brought about by globalisation .
The best response is of course not to resist globalisation - as some would still have us do .
We cannot and we do not seek to .
That would in any case be particularly counterproductive for us in Europe since more than anyone we depend on the rest of the world for raw materials , energy , markets to sell what we produce and even , given our ageing population , labour .
Our response must be to go along with globalisation and shape it better .
That means concluding agreements and setting rules internationally .
As Europe , we are well schooled in concluding intra-Community agreements .
So let us use this experience to give more of a lead internationally .
We should do that , Madam President , with the necessary self-confidence and inspired by the values which also inspire our actions within the EU , the values we have expressed so well in the Reform Treaty and Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Ladies and gentlemen , yesterday 's assurance that the Commission Legislative and Work Programme 2008 is focused on the desire to shape globalisation to best effect is a good sign , a sign that things are getting serious .
The fact that globalisation was also a topic discussed at the informal Lisbon summit indicates that the Lisbon Strategy needs a new external dimension .
As group coordinator on the Lisbon Strategy I would emphasise that this strategy has galvanised us into action .
Gradually , in fits and starts , we are now getting somewhere .
The first three-year cycle following the mid-term review has almost ended and maybe a new adjustment is needed .
I would suggest , Madam President , that from now on we focus less on targets , percentages and statistics and more on the real objectives : innovation , a good business climate , competitiveness , growth , and more and better jobs .
Ultimately we must work towards the goal which hopefully we all share , namely good chances of a decent quality of life for as many people as possible .
( CS ) Europe 's ability in the past to cope with the modern age has to be admired , but when it comes to globalisation we are not sure how to find an adequate strategy that would enable Europe to play a key role .
The first step in this search is to understand that the Lisbon Strategy lacks an external dimension and that it will have to become a part of a more complex economic and social strategy .
This strategy should properly identify the conflict between the highly regulated European economy and liberalised global trade , and should give us a tool to minimise this conflict , which makes Europe much less competitive .
The two reasons that justify regulation inside a common economic area are fair competition and a high level of consumer protection .
However , both of these are being increasingly eroded by floods of cheap goods from third countries and counterfeit items .
We are facing frightening tasks , such as checks on the gigantic volume of imported goods that do not comply with European safety standards .
The key point of our complex strategy must be to promote the convergence of regulatory mechanisms , in other words the creation of global rules and standards , not only technical but also ecological , social and safety rules and standards .
One way to help this process is to insist constantly on respect for human rights in third countries .
Freedom of speech will enable the citizens of these countries to demand higher living and working standards , and thus contribute to convergence from the other side .
Our new energy policy provides a good response to the challenge of globalisation and sets a good example .
However , we need to revise other policies , too , which will subsequently become part of an appropriate and complex strategy for the managing globalisation .
We have to do away with relicts such as the agricultural policy , for example .
If we want to continue to be an important player on the global stage , we must not just react : we must actively cooperate in setting up global convergence rules both within and outside the EU .
Europe must change slightly .
If not , we can expect to meet the fate of the boiled frog : the water will come to the boil very gradually and then it will be to late to leap out of the pot .

( DE ) Madam President , one of the previous speakers , Alexander Radwan , said that Europe was well prepared for globalisation , yet the modern-day version of globalisation has already been with us for eighteen years .
We , meanwhile , are sliding straight from the globalisation trap - the talk of what used to be , the reversal of mass prosperity and the onslaught against democracy - into the European trap , a product of the political original sin of failing to secure a decent treaty back in Nice , where overhasty enlargement was preferred to deeper union .
As a result , the core of today 's problems consists in bureaucracy , wastage of billions of euros and - yes - mistakes in the political recruitment of Europe 's elites .
Indeed , you yourself , Commissioner Verheugen , are a case in point .
The despicable personal attacks on you began when you tried to bring the bureaucracy under control .
Now there is a new man , and they are already trying to pull the carpet from under his feet . We shall see what progress he manages to make on red tape .
This is no way to proceed .
If we cannot cure these ills , the Union will remain in the grip of political paralysis , and the challenges of globalisation will defeat us .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Madam President , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , this has indeed been a long and full debate , and of all those I have taken part in here on behalf of the Presidency , this one had the longest list of participants and Members to have given their opinion .
This is clearly a highly topical issue of major importance , but let there be no illusions that it is also a difficult and controversial one that has generated a broad variety of opinions , analyses and comments .
I take there to be a common conclusion , however , which is that globalisation is here to stay and to develop and to manifest itself in new ways .
There is no turning back , there are no steps backward , we cannot reverse history .
Globalisation itself is the result of our march towards the future .
What we must do , what we must analyse and what we must decide naturally concerns how to make the most of and get the greatest benefit from globalisation , while reducing or eliminating all the known risks associated with it and always bearing in mind - a very important point for me - that globalisation must be at the service of humankind and citizens rather than the other way round .
It is not humankind , citizens or human beings who must be at the service of globalisation .
There is also little doubt that to be able to make the most of and take full advantage of what globalisation has to offer , we in Europe must equip our enterprises , whether large or small and medium-sized , with tools and policies enabling them to face the challenges of economic globalisation .
We must raise qualifications and train European citizens and we must also reform our social model .
It is not a question of reducing or weakening that model , quite the contrary in fact .
We must reinforce it and adapt it so that it can successfully meet the challenges and threats that globalisation raises .
In the environmental field it must be recognised that the European Union has proved itself in protecting the environment , and it has proved its capacity to lead and point the way to the future like no other regional bloc in the world has done .
The negotiations that will begin in Bali in December will clearly demonstrate this .
Finally , I must also refer to the ' external dimension ' of the Lisbon Strategy , which is so closely linked to globalisation .
The idea is to invite others who share this pathway , these difficulties and these challenges of globalisation to share economic , social and environmental values and principles with us , and naturally to make it very clear that globalisation will be successful for everyone only if we can actually agree on a social , economic and environmental world which is truly regulated for and at the service of all .
This aspect is fundamental .
Let us not be naïve , ladies and gentlemen .
We believe that with solid policies , solid principles and solid values , we can as I have said really achieve what is a fundamental objective for us : globalisation at the service of humanity .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Communication from the Commission on the European interest that has served as the basis for today 's debate is nothing more than a kind of discussion paper .
It is not the Lisbon plan for the next three years .
It is a document which is intended to stimulate discussion in the European Council and the European Parliament , so that the Commission can feed the results of that discussion into its proposals for the next Lisbon cycle .
These proposals will not be made until December .
They are not yet on the table , and so those honourable Members who criticised the Commission for not having presented any tangible proposals were labouring under a misapprehension .
That is not what today 's debate was about .
The Commission 's aim was to find out what you , the representatives of the European voters , have to bring to the Commission 's attention for the formulation of the Lisbon plan .
I am pleased to say that I can respond favourably to much of what has been said here .
The guidelines will remain the core instrument of the new Lisbon package .
As President Barroso made clear , the instrument has worked , and we shall not change the instrument as such , but it will , of course , be formulated so as to enable us to take due account of the experiences of the past three years and to attach greater weight to the issues that have come to the fore during that period .
Let me cite a few examples .
We shall have to place greater emphasis on the connections between competitiveness , energy and the environment .
There have been several requests to that effect in today 's debate .
That is entirely correct .
It is time to stop considering policies in isolation .
We need a fully joined-up approach .
We must attach greater importance to the formulation of firm proposals designed to ensure that global competition , which is certainly what we want , takes place on a level playing field with the same rules for everyone .
We must devote more attention to finding ways for social policy to underpin structural change .
In today 's debate , there seemed to be a cross-party view that this is the real big issue , and indeed that view is justified .
Let me say something on that subject .
I believe it is wrong to see investments in social stability and social security as nothing more than charitable handouts .
On the contrary , they are also investments in economic potential , for there can surely be no doubt that Europe 's economic potential depends on a highly motivated and highly efficient labour force , and the reason why we possess this asset is that we have high wage levels and a high level of social security .
It is not the case that economic growth and social welfare are mutually incompatible . In actual fact , as several speakers have said today , each complements and nurtures the other .
I regard that as a major consideration .
I should also point out that , if only because more and more regions and sectors are suffering from a lack of trained and skilled labour , the question of employability must be addressed far more forcefully than hitherto .
So I believe we are on the same wavelength in many of these matters .
The Commission , let me add , shares the view that the turbulence we have recently been experiencing in the financial markets calls for international , multilateral action .
Things cannot simply be allowed to run their course because what we have here , as has been said , is an inbuilt structural defect in the international financial system .
It is not about human error on the part of those managers who are now being put out to grass with severance packages worth 100 to 200 million dollars ; no , it is the result of a structural defect .
I would like to make another three brief comments on the keynote debate that has taken place here today on the subject of globalisation .
Firstly , it is so difficult to forge a common European policy on the basis of this debate because there is no agreement as to what the European interest actually is .
In our everyday work , in fact , we are constantly confronted with a kaleidoscopic definition of Europe 's interests .
Depending on the situation at any given time , Europe 's interest may lie in low supermarket prices in one Member State or in a high level of industrial employment in another , and this is a conflict of aims which is not easily resolved .
Europe 's interest may lie in a high level of employment in the steel industry in Liège , to cite a very topical example , or in high environmental standards in European emissions trading .
We are continually faced with these conflicts , and there is no uniform line that 27 Member States can follow in order to define their common European interest .
Secondly , we cannot adopt the attitude that globalisation was fine as long as it meant the poor countries of the South being dominated by the rich countries of the North , that it was good as long as those circumstances obtained but is bad when the countries of the South become competitors .
That is no way to react .
Nor is it acceptable to come up with demands for high environmental and social standards in the developing regions while refusing to change our own policies .
What I am hearing in Europe today is that China and India must change their environmental and social standards .
So they must , of course , but the Chinese and Indians perceive such demands as pure European protectionism , as we rose to prosperity with the aid of low social standards and low environmental standards , and now we are telling others that we want to keep what we have but that they cannot have the same .
Such a policy , ladies and gentlemen , is doomed to failure , I can assure you .
The only viable approach for us is to demonstrate to these developing economies that there is another way , that it is possible to turn the environmental and social challenge into an economic opportunity .
Hence the term ' environmental industrial policy ' .
I believe we are largely in agreement on that point , and against that backdrop the Commission will now work hard to present its proposals for the next Lisbon cycle .
These will then be dealt with at the spring meeting of the Council in March , which gives the European Parliament ample opportunity to voice its opinion on the specific initiatives and proposals before the final decision is taken in March of next year .
( Applause )
Thank you for the summing-up , Commissioner .
I have received seven motions for resolution in accordance with Article 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( Abbreviated in accordance with Rule 142 of the Rules of Procedure )
in writing . - ( HU ) Mr President , Council , Commission , ladies and gentlemen , the consequence of developing globalisation is that more and more countries become democratic and switch on to free global trade .
As such , it shows the success of Europe 's half-century policy of peace and democracy .
On the other hand , the fact that some countries sometimes gain an advantage in international trade by using illegal instruments is a sign that the switch-over to constitutionality is gradual and is not perfect immediately .
It is for precisely this reason that Europe 's goal should continue to be the promotion and reinforcement of democracy .
How successful we will be in the global competition arising from this depends on us .
As the author of the Parliament 's report on globalisation , I know that we have recognised the challenges , and it is time for action .
We must think about the fact that the prosperity we have today should remain for our grandchildren , and in such a way that in the meantime the other peoples of the world should develop in this way .
Will they have energy ?
Will they have an inhabitable environment ?
This is what the European energy policy and the building of a ' low-carbon ' economy are about .
We must ensure that every person in Europe , irrespective of their origin and situation , and every business , irrespective of their size and registered office , can develop all their talents and their best abilities .
This is what equal opportunities , the building of a knowledge-based society , innovation policy and the new European SME policy are about .
We must switch over to the digital age , for which we must implement e-inclusion in all areas and for everyone .
In short , we have all the tools ready ; we just have to do it .
Let us get to work !
in writing . - ( PL ) Globalisation is an unstoppable process , but the success of the European Union in this globalisation is not a foregone conclusion .
For certain , the Lisbon Strategy , implemented as it has been so far , is no recipe for success .
In fact , it is just a paper strategy and even at the halfway stage , in 2005 , it was clear that the main objective , which was the race against the USA in the areas of competitiveness and innovation , had not been achieved .
In the meantime other challenges have presented themselves in the form of the economic offensive from China , India and other Asian countries .
So far , the multitude of sensible objectives have hidden the fact that there is not the political courage to undertake structural reforms at national level , which is the level at which the possibility of an innovative and dynamic Europe is decided .
Due to the lack of this courage , the European Union is looking for replacement solutions . For example , by placing its hope in a radical change in the Community budget , meaning increasing public expenditure on research and development .
This is not enough if it does not go hand in hand with an ability to take risks together with support for innovative companies from the private financial sector .
A solution in the form of the European Institute of Technology illustrates the tendency towards institutional solutions , while the Globalisation Adjustment Fund shows the extent of exaggerated European concerns .
The proper response to the challenge of globalisation is full market liberalisation and courageous reform of the European social model .
in writing . - In order to succeed in this era of globalisation , the European Union needs to develop a Foreign Direct Investment Policy for Europe .
We need a policy to cover :
Incoming Foreign Direct Investment , that is direct investment into the European Union and originating anywhere else in the world ;
Outgoing Foreign Direct Investment , that is direct investment anywhere in the world originating in the European Union ; and
Internal Foreign Direct Investment , that is direct investment in any European Union Member State originating in any other European Union Member State .
It is true that we have elements of such a policy , such as the Seventh Framework Programme , which provides the conditions to attract research and development investment .
But this is only one part , albeit an important one , of the story .
Facts and figures show the immense importance of foreign direct investment in today 's world economy , or Europe 's foreign direct investment position in relation to the rest of the world .
These facts show that if we are to put any real strength in the Lisbon goals , we need an overall FDI Policy for Europe to reap the maximum benefits of FDI for our people .
in writing . - Nowadays Europeans don 't find it at all strange to backpack in Latin America , chat online with friends from Africa and order cds from US .
Because of globalisation , the world is shrinking .
Especially the young generation regards Europe as the backyard and the globe as just the hometown .
Still the term globalisation has a bad ring to it .
A common fear is that due to globalisation , countries with low labour costs will deprive Europe of jobs .
The EU has a significant role in changing these attitudes .
And it has - by proving that together the member states are strong enough to not only survive globalisation but even gain from it .
As mentioned in the statement , Europe is the worlds ' largest exporter of goods and services and the second largest destination of foreign direct investment .
And talking about employment : in 2006 altogether 3,5 million new jobs were created !
Sure , there are things to improve : Europe 's innovation policy would do with a boosting , global market regulation is needed and climate change prevention should not be only Europe 's problem .
Still , all in all , I have no doubt that the EU will pass the test of globalisation with flying colours .
1 .
The regional impact of earthquakes ( vote )
- Report : Nikolaos Vakalis
2 .
The European Union and Humanitarian Aid ( vote )
- Report : Thierry Cornillet
3 .
Protection of soil ( vote )
Report : Cristina Gutiérrez-Cortines
4 .
European insurance and occupational pensions committee ( implementing powers conferred on the Commission ) ( vote )
- Report : Pervenche Berès
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , we are about to vote on nine reports .
In fact , the six that follow will be in the same vein .
This is all about implementing the agreement on comitology procedure that was so impressively concluded among the three institutions .
What we are engaged in here is the necessary practical follow-through and we need the support of this House , following the long and fruitful negotiations between the Council and the Commission .
5 .
Transparency requirements in relation to information about issuers of securities ( implementing powers conferred on the Commission ) ( vote )
- Report : Pervenche Berès
6 .
Capital adequacy of investment firms and credit institutions ( implementing powers conferred on the Commission ) ( vote )
- Report : Pervenche Berès
7 .
The taking up and pursuit of the business of credit institutions ( implementing powers conferred on the Commission ) ( vote )
- Report : Pervenche Berès
8 .
Life assurance ( implementing powers conferred on the Commission ) ( vote )
- Report : Pervenche Berès
9 .
Supervision of credit institutions , insurance undertakings and investment firms ( implementing powers conferred on the Commission ) ( vote )
- Report : Pervenche Berès
10 .
Insider dealing and market manipulation ( implementing powers conferred on the Commission ) ( vote )
- Report : Pervenche Berès
11 .
Markets in financial instruments ( implementing powers conferred on the Commission ) ( vote )
- Report : Pervenche Berès
12 .
Prospectus on securities ( implementing powers conferred on the Commission ) ( vote )
- Report : Pervenche Berès
13 .
Community Code on the rules governing the movement of persons across borders ( Schengen Borders Code ) ( implementing powers conferred to the Commission ) ( vote )
- Report : Michael Cashman
14 .
Deliberate release into the environment of genetically modified organisms ( implementing powers conferred on the Commission ) ( vote )
- Report : Gyula Hegyi
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - Mr President , I do not want to steal my colleagues ' time , but as we did not have a plenary debate and we have reached the first reading discussion , I would like to inform you about the basic elements of the new legislation on GMOs .
The compromise package gives Parliament the right to control the deliberate release of GMOs .
Parliamentary control means transparency on this sensitive issue .
The Eurobarometer opinion poll showed that , with regard to GMOs , 94 % of our citizens want the right to choose , 86 % want to know more before consuming GMOs and 71 % simply do not want GMO food .
That is why our greatest success is that the Council and the Commission have agreed to Parliamentary control of the implementation of the labelling requirements of GMOs .
I wish to thank the shadow rapporteurs , the Commission and the Portuguese Presidency .
Having greater openness on genetically modified organisms makes Europe more democratic .
15 .
Placing on the market of biocidal products ( implementing powers conferred on the Commission ( vote )
- Report : Åsa Westlund
16 .
Statutory audit of annual accounts and consolidated accounts ( implementing powers conferred on the Commission ) ( vote )
- Report : Bert Doorn
17 .
International accounting standards ( implementing powers conferred on the Commission ) ( vote )
- Report : Manuel Medina Ortega
18 .
Prevention of the use of the financial system for money laundering and terrorist financing ( implementing powers conferred on the Commission ) ( vote )
- Report : Philip Bradbourn
19 . 1-benzylpiperazine ( BZP ) ( vote )
- Report : Jean-Marie Cavada
20 .
International accounting standards ( IFRS 8 ) ( vote )
- Motion for a resolution
21 .
Application of the international accounting standards ( vote )
- Motion for a resolution
22 .
EU-Russia summit ( vote )
- Joint motion for a resolution : EU-Russia summit
- Before the vote :
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to draw your attention to the fact that , following the discussion on the compromise version of this resolution , we had precisely 16 minutes to submit amendments and to review the results of our work .
I believe that this undermines the rights of every Member of this House and every political group in this House to be able freely to influence the texts of our resolutions , including by submitting amendments .
I would ask that this situation should not be allowed to reoccur in the future .
- Before the vote on amendment 1 :
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , I would like to propose the following amendment to Paragraph 6 .
This will require a split vote .
The first sentence should be changed to read :
' emphasises that the situation in Chechnya continues to be a point of dissent in the relations between the EU and Russia '
( NL ) replacing the text as it currently stands .
The rapporteur is in agreement .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
- Before the vote on paragraph 23
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , we must allow the realities to speak for themselves , and the summit on Siberian overflights .
This has not taken place , so we ask that the reference to it in the text be replaced by a reference to the next summit .
( The oral amendment was accepted . )
- Before the vote on recital O :
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , we speak about frozen conflicts .
We mention two conflicts - Abkhazia and South Ossetia - but I would like , on behalf of my Group , to introduce after ' frozen conflict ' the phrase ' such as Transnistria ' , so that Transnistria is also mentioned in Recital O.
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , Mr Swoboda has already informed you of our amendment , which was about Transnistria .
( The oral amendment was accepted . )
23 .
Report on the deliberations of the Committee on Petitions during the year 2006 ( vote )
- Report : Carlos José Iturgaiz Angulo
That concludes the vote .
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes )
Membership of political groups
I have today received letters from Ms Daniela Buruiană-Aprodu and Mr Cristian Stănescu announcing their decision to leave the ITS Group .
Parliament takes note of this decision with effect from today , 14 November 2007 .
Taken together with the announcements already made this week concerning three Members leaving the group , I conclude that the number of members of the ITS Group has now fallen below the minimum of 20 Members required to form a political group laid down by Rule 29 ( 2 ) .
( Loud applause )
Parliament therefore takes note of the fact that the ITS Group no longer fulfils the conditions of the Rules of Procedure for the formation of a Group .
As a consequence , the group ceases to exist with effect from the moment of this announcement .
( Applause )
( DE ) Mr President , I should like to bring to your notice that , when I , like many other Members , was applauding your last announcement , Jean-Marie Le Pen made this hand gesture , signifying ( EN ) ' Fuck you ! '
( DE ) directly at me .
May I ask you to check that on the video recording .
I believe such an action really must have consequences .
I find it appalling that anyone should behave towards me in such a downright aggressive manner .

Thank you , Mr Martin , I did not see it myself , but I take note of your point .
Explanations of vote
in writing . - Conservatives have supported the Vakalis report but have grave reservations about paragraphs 16 and 17 .
We believe that both prevention and rapid reaction capabilities in relation to earthquakes should be concentrated on the resources of the Member States and do not support ' the establishment of a European Civil Protection Force . '
in writing . - I am in favour of this report on the regional impact of earthquakes .
As a geologist and oceanographer - in fact my thesis was on the seismicity of the mid-Atlantic ridge from 12 ° N to 20 ° S. I am all too well aware that the United Kingdom is almost immune .
According to records in the UK , only one person has died as the result of an earthquake and that was in the mid-seventeenth century .
Yet across Europe the same is not true , with thousands killed , and massive devastation across the centuries from Lisbon to Sarajevo .
Part of my own constituency , Gloucestershire , was devastated by floods in July that caused billions of euros of damage to road and rail , hospitals and schools , water treatment plants and power stations .
We are likely to get assistance from the European Solidarity Fund .
I hope it will not prove necessary , but if it does Europe must prove willing to assist nations , regions and committee hit by earthquakes .
in writing . - ( PT ) As has been pointed out , the whole of southern Europe is delimited by the edge of two tectonic plates that cross the Mediterranean and go on through the Atlantic Ocean via some of the Azores Islands , which means that earthquakes are one of the most frequent natural disasters in this region .
This EP report contains a variety of concerns and proposals that we appreciate , particularly when it recognises that the outermost regions suffer these phenomena regularly , or when it points to the need , among other things , to support national action in terms of prevention , response and repairing damage , public information , scientific research , civil protection and solidarity at Community level .
As far as coordination is concerned , the report proposes cooperation between Member States and between the latter and third countries to implement the measures referred to .
However , despite supporting the creation of a ' European Civil Protection Force ' as a ' centralised prevention and management instrument ' - a policy we disagree with - it states that this ' only makes sense on the basis of improved national civil protection schemes , and of better instruments for coordination between Member States ' , which in our opinion raises the question again as it should be raised .
in writing . - ( PL ) Our fellow member Mr Cornillet has presented us with a very thorough report , noting that earthquakes have a negative impact on social and economic cohesion in the regions .
We should remember that severe earthquakes also occur frequently in the countries and regions of the European Union , especially in southern Europe and by the Mediterranean Sea .
For this reason we need to ensure that the necessary prevention and rapid reaction capabilities are in place to deal with any such disaster .
It is important to initiate social education and information campaigns throughout the EU and to provide education and training to the staff of the relevant technical authorities in the Member States , and this should include training at regional and local levels as well as for all the specialists involved in earthquakes .
In addition we must take into account the role to be played by the many national , regional and local authorities and ensure that instructions exist for effective protection of essential infrastructure , such as access to telecommunications infrastructure , power networks , hospitals , bridges , ports , airports and so on .
In future , cohesion policy should give thorough consideration to the damage caused by earthquakes and this should be taken into account in the framework of a new financial instrument for the protection of the population .
I also believe that issues of coordination , cooperation and flexibility in the activities of authorities at Community , national , regional and local levels should be included in the debate , as these create considerable problems when dealing with natural disasters .
( LT ) Today we have voted in favour of the resolution , drawn up on basis of the report by Mr Cornillet , on a European Consensus on Humanitarian Aid .
I would like to thank the rapporteur and confirm once again my approval of this important document .
We are well aware of the fact that the European Union - and here I am thinking of the Commission and the Member States - is the leading provider of humanitarian aid .
The EU contribution for 2006 amounted to only EUR 2 billion .
I completely agree with the opinion that the EU should determine where to set the limit for the new level of humanitarian aid .
On the other hand , the EU has to define its position in view of the new international initiatives and the implementation of the reform initiated by the United Nations .
As a member of the Committee on Budgets , I would like to point out the third problem that the EU needs to solve , namely improving the coordination of Community and Member States ' resources with a view to making them easily accessible for the victims of humanitarian disasters .
I hope that Parliament 's concrete and precise position will facilitate the achievement of our common objectives and help find consensus on the subject of humanitarian aid .

( NL ) Mr President , I am glad to hear there is a European consensus on humanitarian aid and of course no reasonable person objects to aid for countries that do really need it .
But we must also be honest and admit that there is manifestly no European consensus on a code of conduct as regards dictators .
The UK 's intention to boycott the EU-Africa summit if Mugabe attends is simply being ignored by other Member States , and humanitarian tragedies - as we all know - very often arise as a result of wars or criminal misrule , as is the case in Zimbabwe .
The enduring truth is that Africa is the scene of bloody conflicts and that Africans spend more on arms than they receive in development aid .
It is equally true that states with a democratic system , where rulers and government are not above the law , hardly ever go to war with one another .
If dictators like Mugabe are allowed to take part in a European summit , that totally undermines Europe 's credibility on human rights and democracy .
It is because of this ambivalence that I abstained in the vote on the Cornillet report .
in writing . - ( PT ) Irrespective of our support for various aspects of humanitarian aid which are stressed in the report , we cannot endorse a ' consensus ' on the EU 's principles , objectives and strategies for the delivery of humanitarian aid in third countries that calls for the promotion of ' the right , or indeed the duty , of intervention in cases of serious violation of IHL and / or human rights ' , considering that ' coercive measures , including military intervention , may only be used as ' a last resort ' .
We know the results of such a policy of ' good intentions ' , i.e. the aggression and military occupation of Iraq by the USA and its allies and the resulting hundreds of thousands of deaths .
As has been said , so-called ' humanitarian intervention ' very often conceals other real objectives that use and manipulate it according to the interests and unscrupulous calculations of the major powers and multinationals , calling the basic principles of international law into question .
We believe that the resolution of the serious problems affecting millions of human beings involves , among other things , respect for the sovereignty of all peoples and countries , the peaceful resolution of international conflicts , meeting the urgent needs of the economically poorest countries on a basis of friendship and solidarity , and their effective development .
in writing . - ( PL ) The rapporteur Thierry Cornillet is right to emphasise the need for the Community and the Member States to extend the debate on political strategies in humanitarian operations to the relevant Council forum by creating a new special working group .
The creation of such a group ( e.g. COHUMA , that is , the working group of the Council on Humanitarian Aid ) would help to develop coherent methods that would enable rapid and systematic activities in this area .
It was also quite right to point out that the frequency of natural disasters has increased and that their effects are becoming increasingly significant , which means there is a need to strengthen intervention .
For these reasons I agree with the proposal that the EU should increase its rapid reaction capabilities .
The readiness and ability to react will certainly follow on from improvements in coordination and early warning mechanisms as well as stores of appropriate materials and reserves on the international level .
in writing . - ( DE ) Humanitarian aid is often very difficult to deliver because of adverse circumstances or security problems .
This makes good harmonisation and coordination of aid activities all the more important .
Efforts to achieve that objective , however , must not in any way be used as a pretext to make European institutions even more bloated , nor can either an EU civil-defence agency nor an EU rapid-response force provide effective protection in the event of natural disasters .
Moreover , consideration must be given to yesterday 's criticism from the Court of Auditors , which identified a ' material level of errors ' in various areas , including the EUR 5.2-billion budget for food aid , humanitarian aid and the part-funding of non-governmental organisations .
Since the present report , in my view , is not a suitable basis for the resolution of all these problems , I have voted against it .
in writing . - As a strong supporter of humanitarian aid projects when they are timely , well targeted and effectively resourced , I voted in favour of the report on humanitarian aid .
However , I have serious objections to many of the formulations that are used .
It is unfortunate that there are references to the so-called Reform Treaty - the revived EU Constitution - to which I am fundamentally opposed .
It is unrealistic to imagine that humanitarian aid can be free of all political considerations ; the report itself is a very political document , advancing the EU agenda .
In any case , priorities , scale of assistance , and delivery of aid in a way that avoids the clutches of abhorrent regimes are all political questions .
Apart from many other objections to EU involvement in military matters , it is a distraction from a clear focus on humanitarian aid .
The EU is not a unique humanitarian actor .
It should focus on adding value to the humanitarian efforts of our nations through improved coordination of effort in particular areas and in ensuring that there is proper control of its resources and evaluation of their impact .
( DE ) Mr President , I regard this Framework Directive for Soil Protection as a serious mistake which jeopardises the competitiveness of European agriculture and food supplies in Europe .
What image do the supporters of this directive actually have of our farmers ?
Let me tell you : they believe that we need a fat bureaucratic directive , that we need to map 420 million hectares of farmland , wield the threat of horrendous fines and finally create priority areas for soil protection before farmers will take proper care of their soils .
I say to you , however , that this image is completely divorced from reality .
Soil is a farmer 's most precious asset .
Any farmer who does not treat his soil with care will not be a farmer for long .
Most of the soils in the EU are cared for ; they are worth preserving and are nurtured by our farmers .
I regard this directive as an example of ivory-tower bureaucracy , and I hope we can rectify this mistake quickly before any serious damage is inflicted on our agriculture .
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
As the MDF MEP , I have voted in favour of the creation of the European Soil Protection Directive because I am convinced that it is necessary .
Without an appropriate amount of good-quality soil , European agriculture too will be jeopardised .
I trust that , if this legislation is created , an opportunity will open up for us to work using Union resources on cleaning soil from pollution and protecting its quality .
However , at this point I would like to draw the attention of the Member States to the fact that this is possible only if the Member States also take their duties seriously .
In my home country , for example , the action mostly amounts to the preparation of plans , and their implementation drags along .
There is a national remedial programme in Hungary , but not a word about consistent implementation of it .
The government does not guarantee the necessary resources .
EUR 18 million is earmarked for the future , which is risible in comparison with the scale of the problem .
At this rate , we would need more than 220 years to finish cleaning up the soil pollution we know about today .
Let us be more serious , please ! Thank you .
( DE ) Mr President , I voted to reject the Commission 's proposal .
The proposal breaches the principle of subsidiarity .
Soil has no cross-border aspects , which is why this matter can be regulated equally well or even better in the Member States than at European level .
Many countries already have soil protection legislation .
The Commission 's proposal takes scant account of that .
In the final vote I also voted against the report and most of the compromises , although I do believe that the report adopted by Parliament is a marked improvement on the Commission 's proposal .
There were improvements , for example , with regard to the identification of potentially contaminated sites .
The redraft offers greater flexibility in the application of the criteria enumerated in Annex II .
In general , however , there are still many provisions that make this directive an elaborate bureaucratic and expensive instrument .
One good thing is that the criteria listed in Annex I will at least be non-binding now .
Another is that the directive recognises the special character of agricultural land use .
The cons outweigh the pros , however .
On the question of funding , for example , we ought to have spelled out more clearly that the Soil Protection Directive will have no impact on the Community budget and that no new funds will be set up to implement the directive .
Only the existing support mechanisms are to be used .
For these reasons I have voted against the directive , and I hope that the Council will now make the necessary corrections .
( CS ) Mr President , some time ago this Parliament asked the Commission for a directive on soil protection .
Commissioner Dimas gave it to us five years later .
We do not need it any more , and that is no secret .
We have other Directives on the protection of specific , transnational problems relating to soil .
The Commission ignores the fact that many countries - and the Czech Republic is one example - have their own legislation and good systems in place to protect soil from further erosion and degradation .
What some countries ( including Flanders ) need is a common strategy and enhanced coordination .
Thanks to an enormous effort by the rapporteurs , Parliament was able to vote for the reworked Directive , which will probably not cause too much harm because it will at least make it possible to maintain national legislation where it already exists .
In his presentation yesterday , the Commissioner did not show any understanding for a sensible solution painstakingly negotiated by the rapporteur in Parliament .
By not being receptive to Parliament 's hints , the Commissioner is helping to bury his own Directive .
He as good as asked me to vote against his report .
I believe that the Council will behave in a similar manner .
( PL ) Mr President , I am convinced that the clauses that we have approved are absolutely necessary and that they will help to improve the state of the environment and also people 's health .
The soil is a finite and non-renewable natural resource .
It deserves special protection because of its social , economic , environmental and cultural functions .
I share the view that soil protection should be subject to regulation at Community level in order to guarantee a minimum level of protection in all the Member States of the EU .
I look very positively on the proposal to create publicly available national inventories of polluted locations .
An inventory should be drawn up of locations where the soil may have been contaminated in the past .
Guided by the principle of providing assistance , help should be given to EU Member States to return contaminated soil to cultivation and to assist in the removal of dangerous compounds that remain in it .
The introduction of proper regulation restricting soil degradation and ensuring sustainable soil usage , while at the same time returning degraded areas to cultivation will undoubtedly constitute a step forward as regards protection of the resources of the natural environment .
I also believe it to be particularly important to harmonise legislation in Member States as regards the issue of soil protection .
( DE ) Mr President , all the Austrian PPE members advocate an ambitious set of measures to protect soil , but they must be adopted at the right political level .
We consider the proposal and the report to be in clear breach of the principle of subsidiarity , which is why we have voted against many of the amendments and also against the report in its entirety .
In spite of the sterling work of the rapporteur , Mrs Gutiérrez , who drew many of the fangs in the proposal , we take the view that this report overshoots by far the proper bounds of EU legislation .
The Member States should , however , be urged to involve themselves deeply in this area because soil is the basis of all economic and agricultural activity .
It must also be said that the Member States are responsible for funding their own programmes .
( DE ) Mr President , I have voted against this so-called soil protection directive because I find we lose any credibility if we talk every day about eliminating red tape and then we create this bureaucratic monster of a directive .
Unlike air and water , soil is not a cross-border issue but a national matter .
We need this directive like a hole in the head .
The Commission and President Barroso ought to have withdrawn this draft .
President Barroso speaks eloquently of eliminating red tape , but his actions do not match his words .
Where I come from , people like that are called Dampfplauderer - patter merchants .
For 46 years I have been tilling my soil .
My soil is more fertile now than it was 46 years ago .
I am all for a European soil protection regulation , but one that protects my soil from European bureaucracy .
( PL ) Mr President , I voted in favour of the directive .
The implementation of the provisions of the directive will allow economic use to be made of degraded areas , while at the same time protecting greenfield sites from being used for industrial and commercial purposes .
This directive will also make it possible to classify soils in accordance with an evaluation of their plant and animal production capacity , with particular attention being paid to the production of high quality food .
I would like to emphasise the importance of preparing a European strategy to recognise and resolve problems associated with soil degradation .
The considerable diversity of different types of soil means that , irrespective of the steps taken by individual countries , a European strategy is required , based on prevention and increasing awareness of the need for protection of the soil as well as a description of existing risk factors , in order to solve this problem on the European level .
We have chosen to vote in favour of the report even though a number of EU countries already have fully functioning legislation in the area of soil protection .
We supported Amendments 106 , 107 , 108 and 110 which read as follows :
' Member States which already have specific national legislation in place to protect their soils shall be exempted from the obligations under this Article , on the condition that their legislation secures at least an equivalent level of protection . '
Even though the directive can be seen as superfluous in certain Member States , we have hopes that it can bring about an improvement in the large number of Member States which currently lack functioning legislation for the protection of soil .
We also hope that the Member States which have functioning legislation in this area can work together with Parliament in the ongoing negotiations to ensure that the directive does not entail unnecessary duplication of administrative work for them once it has entered into force .
Carbon storage is of great significance in connection with the reduction of greenhouse gases .
The overexploitation of the soil involving the combustion of carbon is causing considerable pressure .
That is therefore an issue that requires an international initiative .
The June Movement is therefore in support of the EU 's dealing with soil protection in the Member States .
It is very good that the European Parliament has endorsed the examination of the possible use of the ' polluter pays ' principle under Article 22 , and the assessment of land use under Article 28 , given its great significance in connection with carbon sequestration .
Both proposals are the initiative of Mr Bonde .
in writing . - On balance , I voted in favour of the Gutiérrez-Cortines report as I believe her text has substantially rewritten the soil proposal to restore subsidiarity , remove duplication of obligations and introduce a voluntary code of conduct for agriculture , without imposing further red tape .
It also recognises , very validly , the important role of farmers as the custodians of the soil .
It is important that the soil proposal both protects peatlands as valuable habitats under threat , while at the same time allows for the appropriate extraction of peat as a raw material .
It is not clear whether Amendment 36 of the Gutiérrez-Cortines report ( on the adjustment of the list of functions in Article 1 ) allows this and I urge the Commission and or Council to clarify this in their considerations .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the Gutiérrez-Cortines report on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a framework for the protection of soil and amending Directive 2004 / 35 / EC because I consider soils to be a vital resource that must be protected to mitigate the effects of climate change and to ensure that the activities of future generations can take place in a safe and healthy environment .
I therefore believe that this proposal contributes to effective soil protection insofar as it defines the objectives on which there is no Community and / or national legislation .
According to their specific situation , however , Member States will have to decide what their priority measures should be , in compliance with the principle of subsidiarity .
in writing . - ( PT ) We understand the importance of protecting soil , firstly for agriculture , which will need to produce more food and will require more water .
Protection of soil is therefore essential to safeguard food production and to guarantee sufficient clean water for future generations , since the earth has a social function that no private interest should threaten .
Soil is a platform for human activities , including cities and infrastructure , but also for nature and landscapes .
Its protection is therefore crucial to the preservation of our cultural heritage and natural resources .
The proposal tabled by the European Commission , however , is not the most appropriate because of its partial vision , the conditions it imposes and its scant regard for agriculture .
The European Parliament has amended it significantly , with proposals in support of the principle of subsidiarity , recognising the importance of agriculture and stating that ' each Member State , in accordance with its climate , soil characteristics ( ... ) may decide upon its own agricultural policy in relation to the soil ' , and recognising the different approaches towards soil protection .
It nevertheless retains aspects on which we have reservations .
Hence our final vote to abstain .
in writing . - ( PT ) I consider the existence of a framework directive on soil protection to be extremely important , since soil is a non-renewable resource that provides vital services for human activities and the survival of ecosystems , particularly when climate change is an increasingly worrying issue , and when there is as yet no specific European legislation on soil protection .
I therefore support the Gutiérrez-Cortines report and vote against all the proposed amendments that seek to reject the Commission proposal or significantly weaken the report .
in writing . - ( FR ) The geological and climatic conditions within the European Union differ widely from one country to another , and sometimes indeed within the same country .
There are something like 300 different types of soil .
Nevertheless , the European Commission is bent on regimenting soil use right across Europe , and the Committee on the Environment actually wants more regimentation .
I support subsidiarity and I oppose over-regulation .
That is why I voted against this indigestible and pointless report .
There is no need for a framework directive on soil protection .
The soil situation in the Member States varies .
The problem areas included in the directive are of a national character and are therefore best managed at national level .
The soil protection which is needed is already governed by existing EU and national legislation .
The proposal will only lead to increased bureaucracy and more complicated rules for the parties involved .
Detailed provisions and exhortations are typical EU ideas which lead to increased costs and irritation with the EU machine .
Some of us in Sweden question the compatibility of the directive with the EU 's work to simplify rules and want Sweden 's Parliament to examine the proposal in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity .
We have therefore , as a matter of principle , chosen to reject the proposal in its entirety .
in writing . - Amendment 112 : I am rejecting the Commission proposal , as a Soil Framework Directive would simply mean increased bureaucracy and duplication of regulations without bringing about any additional improvements to soil protection .
A wide range of measures exist under the CAP reform , as well as under the reform of environmental legislation , and these will bring about benefits for soil protection .
in writing . - ( DE ) Soil is a vital asset .
As a non-renewable resource , it is of the utmost importance in sustaining biodiversity , as a source of raw materials and also as a storage and filter medium for nutrients and water .
Soil , however , is not something that crosses borders , nor can it be shifted by the European Union .
Protecting our soils is in the best interests of those who own land and therefore falls within the responsibility of the Member States .
This application of the subsidiarity principle must remain intact .
There is no justification for ignoring all the existing European legal provisions and the dedication of farmers right down to the present day and to enact new provisions running parallel to the European directives , national statutes and cross-compliance rules that directly or indirectly affect the protection of soil .
Among the numerous soil-related directives and regulations enacted by the EU are such instruments as the Nitrates Directive , the Water Framework Directive , the Emissions Trading Directive and the Plant Protection Products Directive .
The bureaucratic commitments that could hit the Member States and the farming community is in stark contrast to the common efforts to eliminate red tape .
In addition , the precautionary measures envisaged in the draft directive impinge on every aspect of the law as it relates to agriculture .
I consider a European soil protection directive to be superfluous and inexpedient , and I have voted against this proposal .
in writing . - ( DE ) Healthy soils are the basis of human health and wealth .
They must be protected .
We cannot be content with the current state of soils in all parts of the EU .
Nevertheless , wanting to regulate this problem paternalistically and bureaucratically at European level is a step too far .
Soil , which is already protected by the directive concerning integrated pollution prevention and control ( the IPPC Directive ) and the Habitats Directive , does not migrate , as we all know , from one country to another , although the same cannot be said for water , which is a potential factor in soil pollution .
That , however , is already covered by the Water Framework Directive and the Groundwater Directive .
If we now add a soil protection directive , the result will be duplicated regulation and costly bureaucracy , which nobody wants .
Open coordination and sharing of experience on best practice would be a better approach .
Adopting a framework directive on soil protection would be putting the cart before the horse .
It is unthinkable that countries which already have exemplary legislation on soil protection should have to invest a great deal of time and money re-examining their entire territory for possible risk areas .
I tried to engage in damage limitation in this vote , but I am afraid I did not succeed .
I was therefore unable to vote in favour of the report .
I want to know that I can still look our farmers in the eye .
in writing . - With my fellow Labour MEPs , I voted against this proposed directive .
While we supported the general thematic strategy on soil protection yesterday , as it stands , the directive on soil protection is over-prescriptive .
It does not take into account existing and well-functioning legislation that is already in place in the Member States .
in writing . - Despite my stated opposition to a proposal for a Directive on Soil Protection , I voted in favour of this report at the final vote .
I have already placed my opposition to such a Directive on the record in relation to the Thematic Strategy for Soil Protection .
I do not believe that there is a need for additional legislation relating to soil protection .
We already have a range of legal instruments in place to ensure the protection of soil , and until these pieces of legislation are fully implemented and the effects are fully analysed I do not believe that further legislation in this area is either necessary or desirable .
However , the amendments proposed by the rapporteur go some way towards reducing the level of overlap between this new proposal and existing legislation and this is to be welcomed .
in writing . - ( NL ) Soil protection is very necessary in order to prevent the destruction of natural soil systems , erosion , contamination and desiccation .
Without measures of this kind it becomes impossible to grow plants in densely populated areas where soil use is intensive .
In many places in Europe I see wasteland which has lost all value for nature and human use .
Yesterday , along with a majority of this House , I voted for the Prodi report which spells out the need for proactive measures to protect our soils .
Today we are looking at what those measures should be .
I am in favour of encouraging Member States which have not yet taken the necessary measures on their own initiative to remedy the omission now .
Their failure to act affects not only them but neighbouring states too , for example in producing erosion debris which causes rivers to silt up and flood .
But EU rules must in no event mean that Member States which already regulate these matters properly have to face more bureaucracy or obstacles to dealing with them efficiently .
I support amendments to the effect that those applying equal or higher standards must be free to do so .
But it is irresponsible to reject , delay or limit the soil protection package in the way the largest group in Parliament is proposing .

in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the Gutiérrez-Cortines report because it proposes positive steps forward for the protection and sustainable use of soil - a non-renewable resource which it is vital to preserve , and the quality of which is crucial if we are to ensure adequate levels of food production and access to clean water .
The European Parliament has called for clearer identification of contaminated sites where dangerous substances , present as the result of human activity , constitute a significant risk to health and the environment .
National or regional lists of such sites will be compiled and they will be available for the public to consult .
Each Member State will have to prepare remediation strategies so that the number of contaminated sites can be limited , and sustainable agricultural policies will be encouraged , taking account of national soil characteristics , so that clean soil can be preserved .
In adopting this report the European Parliament is underscoring the need to protect the earth 's resources and use them more wisely .
in writing . - This is yet another example of the one-size-fits-all approach which gives the European Union a bad name in our Member States .
With more than three-hundred types of soil in the European Union , how can we expect to cover them all by means of a single directive ?
Surely this is a prime example of an area in which we should allow Member States to determine their own legislation on the basis of their own soil types .
It is very disappointing that , with all the scientific expertise at its disposal , the European Commission has produced a legislative proposal which fails to take account of simple scientific facts .
If the United Kingdom suffers floods and Greece suffers a heatwave during the course of one summer , it is obvious that the impact of those weather conditions on the soil in those Member States will be entirely different .
The only real consequence of this proposal will be to tie up the agriculture industry in yet more red tape and burden it with yet more expense .
It is frustrating that , yet again , the agricultural community will have to pay for the pursuit of useless uniformity .
in writing . - ( FR ) I welcome the adoption by the House of Cristina Gutiérrez-Cortines ' report , urging the introduction of a single , coherent European policy for soil protection .
Soil protection has become a priority for the EU because Europe 's soils are becoming more and more degraded .
The factors to blame are rampant urbanisation , an increase in the number of contaminated sites ( to more than 2 million at the most recent count ) and intensive farming practices over the last 50 years , with abusive use of pesticides and nitrate-based fertilisers .
In my view , the 225 MEPs who voted to reject this directive were either driven by nationalist fanaticism or , at the very least , have lost touch with ordinary people 's concerns !
Europe can offer genuine added value in the matter of soil protection , an issue on which only nine Member States have their own legislation .
I would add that the directive leaves the Member States a considerable freedom of choice , with two precise targets to be achieved within generous deadlines : within , respectively , five years and seven years from transposition of the text , they must compile a list of contaminated sites and adopt a national remediation strategy .
I think there can be no doubt that this constitutes respect for the principles of flexibility and subsidiarity !
in writing . - I am afraid I will be voting against this report because it is my view that a framework on the protection of soil is not needed .
I voted for rejection initially because I believe this issue should be left to Member States under the subsidiarity principle .
What we have before us is a piece of legislation that is disproportionate , has little flexibility and merely repeats what is already covered in other directives .
It tries to cover desertification on the one hand and cleaning up soil on the other - a wide remit indeed - but ends up being a report that covers neither adequately ; but creates problems in how it will be implemented .
In my own region where local authorities are trying to recycle soil , this proposal would make that so difficult that the viability of the whole operation is put in question .
Sorry to say , I think this is a poor and unnecessary piece of legislation , and I will vote against in the hope that I can save farmers , horticulturalists and local authorities from a bureaucratic nightmare .
in writing . - ( DE ) I reject the framework directive on soil protection , because it is a gross breach of the principle of subsidiarity and is therefore unacceptable as European legislation .
Even if the European Parliament votes in favour , I shall take my fight to the Federal Government with a view to ensuring that the Federal Republic of Germany challenges this directive before the European Court of Justice .
in writing . - ( FR ) In line with the vote in the Committee on Legal Affairs , I believe that the Commission has exceeded its brief here and that the European Union does not need to issue new instructions to the Member States .
It is a matter of national responsibility .
I see it as an artificial exercise to seek to issue identical prescriptions to countries with extremely diverse legal traditions and environmental circumstances .
The Commission should therefore review its proposal and identify specifically those situations where European legislation is called for .
in writing . - ( DE ) I reject the framework directive on soil protection , because it is a gross breach of the principle of subsidiarity and is therefore unacceptable as European legislation .
Even if the European Parliament votes in favour , I shall take my fight to the Federal Government with a view to ensuring that the Federal Republic of Germany challenges this directive before the European Court of Justice .
in writing . - ( PL ) Mr President , the justification for the Commission 's proposal to the European Parliament is a new comitology procedure that significantly increases the powers of the European Parliament .
It is a regulatory procedure combined with scrutiny .
The rapporteur 's view , which deserves to be supported , is that the new procedure will apply to matters in regulations concerning securities prospectuses , such as measures relating to exemptions from the obligation to publish a prospectus , the format of the prospectus as well as third country equivalence .
This is the basis for the amendments tabled on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs in the plenary vote .
The report under consideration also gives additional impetus to the idea of significant progress in the harmonisation of regulations for European financial and stock markets .
This is due in large part to the inexorable process of globalisation and partly to the Financial Services Action Plan from 1999 .
At the same time it confirms the sound choice made at the beginning of the 1990s in countries such as Poland , where the reconstruction of capital markets was based on European standards , which is now simplifying the harmonisation of regulations across the European Union .
in writing . - ( PT ) In 2006 the decision amending the previous 1999 decision laying down the rules for the exercise of implementing powers conferred on the Commission was finally adopted after years of negotiations between the Council , the Commission and the European Parliament .
The regulatory procedure with scrutiny was thus introduced .
This must be used for adopting measures of general scope which seek to amend ( by deleting or supplementing ) non-essential elements of a basic instrument adopted in accordance with Article 251 of the Treaty , i.e. under the codecision procedure .
This is therefore a new comitology procedure that must be applied to a list , drawn up by the Commission , of 25 instruments that have already been adopted and that must be adapted , including the present Regulation on the Schengen Borders Code .
I therefore support the technical proposals introduced by the rapporteur , Mr Cashman , to take into account the specificity of the Schengen Borders Code since it constitutes a development of the Schengen acquis .
in writing . - ( DE ) The Schengen acquis is a particularly sensitive area in which we must be able to respond to any contingency .
Organised human-trafficking gangs are constantly on the lookout for new gaps in our defences through which they can flood the EU with migrants .
For this reason there must be no overhasty enlargement of the Schengen area .
Steps must be taken beforehand to ensure that the Member States concerned have fully mastered the task of protecting their external borders .
Since this is extremely doubtful in my opinion , I have voted against the Cashman report .
( DE ) Mr President , I voted in favour of the Hegyi report because we have repeatedly criticised the democratic deficit that exists with regard to genetically modified organisms .
We know that a proper decision for or against the authorisation of GMOs has scarcely ever been taken by the Council or the Committee of Permanent Representatives .
It has always been more or less the same story of the European Commission exercising its responsibility for risk management by authorising GMOs against the will of the EU population and in spite of the reservations of many Member States and experts .
The European Commission cannot be allowed to have the final say .
Its decisions must be subject to scrutiny by the European Parliament .
Although Mr Hegyi 's report goes in the right direction by insisting on a binding parliamentary right of codecision on GMO authorisations , we reject the negotiated compromise , because it leaves the undemocratic comitology procedure in place .
There can really be only one solution , namely codecision rights for the European Parliament in all matters relating to GMO licensing .
I therefore find it rather regrettable that we have not made the most of this vote and grasped the opportunity at long last to exert more pressure against the continued existence of this democratic deficit .
in writing . - ( PT ) It is true that the long-term consequences of GMO technology are still unknown .
There are contradictory scientific statements , and many people are afraid of the possible dangers and risks .
Precautions must therefore be taken and their use in agriculture must not be insisted upon .
Directive 2001 / 18 / EC concerning the deliberate release into the environment of genetically modified organisms is in force .
This directive covers the experimental release of GMOs into the environment , in other words the introduction of GMOs into the environment for experimental purposes ( such as for field testing ) and the placing of GMOs on the market ( products containing or consisting of GMOs ) , such as for cultivation , import or processing into industrial products .
We believe it is important as a minimum to have wider control of GMO technology , at least in relation to procedures , as the European Parliament now intends , but we stress the need to exercise caution , whether in relation to agriculture or processed foodstuffs .
in writing . - ( DE ) 70 % of the European population are opposed to genetic engineering . In Austria people are even more afraid of toxic residues in food products than of terrorist attacks or bird flu .
Besides the suspicion of a link between genetically modified organisms and increasing incidences of health problems , there is more and more evidence that the use of genetic engineering will cause farmland to degenerate into wasteland as well as making farmers dependent on multinational conglomerates .
in writing . - Conservatives voted in favour of this report but have regrets over the approach the Council has taken during the parliamentary process .
In early stages of drafting the report , a great deal of undue pressure was placed upon Parliament by the then Presidency of the Council .
This we find unacceptable , given Parliament 's role as scrutineer of legislation .
in writing . - ( PT ) This directive is extremely important because of growing concerns regarding money laundering and its role in funding international crime and terrorism .
A Community approach is therefore required to create uniform rules , close loopholes and strike a balance between the need to control and requirements concerning the protection of the internal market and the free movement of capital .
I support this initiative , which seeks to update Directive 2005 / 60 / EC on money laundering , particularly as regards all the implementation measures listed in Article 41 of that directive .
This is therefore yet another case of updating the legislation in force in line with the new regulatory procedure with scrutiny under the Comitology Decision .
This will give the European Parliament greater control over the implementing powers conferred on the Commission .
We have chosen to vote in favour of the proposal in its entirety .
It is important that international standards are introduced and respected in order to protect the financial system against crime and money laundering in general , while at the same time the Member States ' own measures must not be incompatible with the rules of the single market .
However , we find it repugnant that through the frequent use of the concept of terrorism the EU is seeking to extend its power at the expense of the Member States .
Money for terrorism is a tiny part of money laundering .
The large sums go to other kinds of well-organised crime .
in writing . - ( PT ) The proposal submitted amends the provisions of Directive 2005 / 60 / EC on the prevention of the use of the financial system for the purpose of money laundering and terrorist financing , which imposed a time limitation on the implementing powers conferred on the Commission in this area .
According to the recent decision on the exercise of the Commission 's powers , this limitation has been removed , but the European Parliament retains the right to scrutinise the implementation of acts adopted under the codecision procedure .
It is therefore now clear that any amendments to this directive must be submitted for consideration to the European Parliament as well as to the Council .
This should not mean , however , that national parliaments are excluded from the legislative procedure or are restricted merely to transposing directives adopted in this area at Community level .
And what is more , as the ' Reform ' Treaty seeks to establish , gradually transforming justice and internal affairs into a future common policy , which we obviously reject .
Finally , we must highlight the inconsistency of the European Union , which promotes total freedom of movement of capital and tax havens at the same time as it champions the fight against money laundering .
in writing . - The justification for this legislation is to protect the EU financial system from money laundering and terrorist financing .
The UKIP would always seek to cooperate internationally on these matters , however , the EU has no agreed competence on defence .
Moreover as an organisation that has been unable to get its own accounts signed off for thirteen years the EU Commission cannot be considered to have any expertise whatsoever on finance or to be a fit body to put forward legislation on control of the financial system .
We Swedish Social Democrats voted in favour of the report because we consider that there is a need to increase knowledge about BZP , which is a synthetic drug , and to make the substance subject to control measures and criminal sanctions .
However , we voted against all proposals which aim to prevent the introduction of decisions on control measures and criminal sanctions , as that is contrary to the precautionary principle .
in writing . - ( PT ) Since 2005 listed companies have been required in certain circumstances to draw up their consolidated accounts in compliance with international accounting standards .
These standards were developed by a London-based private organisation ( the International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation / International Accounting Standards Board ) and were subsequently incorporated into Community legislation by means of a regulation .
Despite certain reservations , this resolution accepts the Commission 's proposal ( amending that regulation ) to endorse a standard ( IFRS 8 ) which in turn incorporates a US standard ( SFAS 131 ) into EU law .
This is accepted , as stated in the resolution , even though the impact assessment carried out by the Commission did not take sufficiently into account the interests of users as well as the needs of small and medium-sized enterprises located in different European countries and enterprises operating only locally .
We therefore cannot support this resolution .
Mr President , I requested explanations of votes on the EU-Russia Summit resolution .
I regret that some important paragraphs have been sacrificed for some strange reason , in order to have a shorter resolution instead of having a longer resolution but covering important issues .
I think it is very important to call on the Commission and the Council to pursue joint initiatives with the Russian Government aimed at strengthening security and stability in the common neighbourhood , in particular by means of enhanced dialogue over Ukraine and Belarus and joint efforts to finally resolve the frozen conflicts in Nagorno-Karabakh as well as in Moldova and Georgia by guaranteeing the full territorial integrity of those states and , as far as Transnistria is concerned , by withdrawing the remaining Russian troops , who if necessary should be replaced by a force of international monitors .
( CS ) I emphatically voted against this motion for a resolution on the outcome of the 10th EU-Russia Summit .
The Russian KGB regime is seeking legitimacy .
I refuse to become a puppet and I feel ashamed for all those who are becoming Russia 's puppets due to ignorance and cowardice , especially in order to gain minor economic advantages .
Russia is not Europe 's partner .
I completely reject the opinion that Russia is our partner on the issue of Kosovo 's independence .
Why does this House attach so much importance to the partnership ?
Russia continues to throw the bodies of Chechens from helicopters above Chechnya , keeps thousands of opponents of the regime in prison , institutes illegal court proceedings against politicians from the Other Russia and detains Mikhail Khodorkovsky in prison illegally .
Who and when will we find out the truth about the death of Anna Politkovskaya ?
When is Russia going to stop threatening human rights activists ?
Why have we not been invited to observe the Russian parliamentary elections ?
Why does Putin not want us , his partners , to be there ?
They put up with us in Morocco as well as in Palestine .
Someone who breaches the fundamental principle of solidarity , helping Poland in relation to free export , equal export conditions , is considered a partner by this House .
Russia is holding us hostage .
If we do not support a democratic and stable Russia , but we do we support a secret service regime instead , then we are our own worst enemies .
Finally , our country has the right to be free to contribute to Europe 's safety , to protect Europe from a possible attack by Iranian forces .
How can we ask the US not to jeopardise peace in Europe through its policy , while we make allowances for the Russians ' more than obvious support for the Iranian regime ?
This resolution is an example of perfidy and weakness .
As we Czechs know , being weak in relation to Russia really does not pay off .
I emphatically reject this resolution , if for no other reason than as an expression of respect for the legacy of the Czech political prisoners , of all whom had opposed the occupation .
Mr President , after having voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on the EU-Russia Summit , I still regret that the amendment I proposed as a new recital was rejected by the rapporteur .
Therefore I quote it now , ' whereas Russian Federation did not fulfil any commitments of those undertaken by its accession to the Council of Europe in 1996 and two years ago bluntly denounced already signed new border agreement with EU Member State Estonia , thus leaving this sector of EU-Russia border unregulated up to now ; whereas the actual legislation of Russia Federation still contains aggressive positions as that on social privileges for its military servicemen in a case of losses caused or injuries got during armed actions in Baltic States , or that about procedures of accession of foreign states or their parts with Russian Federation ' .
I am convinced that those positions will be reconsidered by this House later .
in writing . - I supported this resolution with a degree of reluctance .
Russia and its leader Vladimir Putin have proved difficult of late in a number of areas , especially energy .
Nevertheless , the one issue on which I have some sympathy is their response to the highly contentious US plan to deploy Theatre Missile Defence in the EU supposedly to defend against a scarcely credible threat from Iranian nuclear-tipped ICBMs , but which equally poses threats to Russia 's own defence .
I therefore regret that Amendment No 3 , which I voted for , by the Green Group , was defeated by 242 to 362 .
in writing . - ( PT ) A great deal could be said on this resolution about the recent EU-Russia summit , and we will therefore only mention certain examples concerning its aims .
For example , at the same time as it glosses over the US Administration 's initiatives and profound responsibilities in promoting a new escalation in the militarisation of Europe - with the support of NATO members , it should be noted - it considers that the ' declarations made by the Russian authorities ' and the ' [ ... ] inappropriate threat to pull out of the Treaty on Conventional Forces in Europe have raised serious concerns about the preservation of peace and stability on the European continent ' .
It more or less directly stresses the essential aspects , for example , which are that Russia has allowed EU companies to buy strategic stakes in Russian companies , the importance of improving the climate for investment in Russia ( to the joy of major EU financial groups ) , and ' equal access to markets , infrastructure and investment ' on the basis of the principles of the ' Energy Charter Treaty ' .
And in line with the above examples , it maintains the political pressure on the Russian Federation , even seeking to promote intervention instruments , while ignoring the unacceptable situation of the most basic rights of the Russian-speaking population in Latvia , an EU Member State .
in writing . - The European Parliamentary Labour Party supports this resolution and its aim to build a strategic cooperation with Russia based on common values , democracy and respect for human rights .
In particular we support calls for a positive Russian contribution to finding a sustainable political solution on the issue of Kosovo .
We voted in favour of Amendment 3 , as there are concerns which should be raised regarding any further build-up of conventional or unconventional weapons on the European continent , and we support continuing bilateral discussions between the US and Russia on this issue .
in writing . - ( PL ) Mr President , the EU-Russia summit in Mafra illustrates the change in relations since the 1990s when the partnership and cooperation agreement , which expires in 2007 , was born .
Three principal factors have affected these relations .
First of all , European Union enlargement , marking a definitive emancipation of a whole group of countries from the Russian sphere of influence , which the former empire is unwilling to accept .
Secondly , the authoritarian nature of the Putin presidency , which has put back the democratisation of Russia .
Although there is wide acceptance of it in Russia and while it provides a basic economic order , the EU cannot remain passive in the face of instances of violations of human rights , which creates an additional area of friction .
Thirdly , the situation in the energy markets , which makes it easier to use Gazprom for political purposes and has also made European countries more sensitive to the issue of energy security .
Taking the above background into consideration , the resolution proposed by the Group of the European People 's Party and European Democrats provides a balance of criticisms of Russia with hopes for a warmer diplomatic climate , fortified with principles reflecting our system of values .
Particularly worthy of notice are the points about respect for human rights as well as a demand , which is important for Poland , for the suspension of the impasse as regards Polish agricultural exports to the Russian market , which is a confirmation of the much-desired solidarity between European Union countries in relations with Moscow .
in writing . - I voted for the joint motions for a resolution arising out of the EU-Russia Summit , where Parliament , among other things , called on the Russian Government to create , together with the European Union , the necessary conditions for a rapid start to the negotiations on a new Partnership and Cooperation Agreement between the EU and Russia .
Other issues covered included Russia 's pending accession to the WTO , human rights issues in Russia , the climate for investment and ongoing concerns over the upholding of the Conventional Forces Europe Treaty .
in writing . - ( PT ) The 18th anniversary of the fall of the Berlin Wall came after the EU-Russia summit , which was held after this report was discussed but before it was put to the vote .
Eighteen years later , what used to be Eastern Europe is now a democratic area in which the market economy is an established feature .
Russia , meanwhile , is far from democratic and far from being a reliable partner .
In relation to energy , Kosovo , the Caucasus , Central Asia , Ukraine , Moldova or on the Iranian nuclear issue , Russia 's contribution to the solution has been found wanting .
In the same week the European Council on Foreign Relations presented a report stating that the Russians are making the rules in relations between Russia and the European Union , and that Europe has shown a lack of unity and of strategy , in some cases not appearing to have put memories of the Soviet era behind them , while in others being overly pragmatic .
It then rightly suggests that EU strategy should encourage Russia to respect the rule of law .
Even though it is not a liberal democracy , Russia must be a predictable and reliable state , and Europe must work hard to that end .
We consider the freedom to disclose information to be an important principle .
Civil servants should , without risk of reprisal , be able to provide information , obtain information in order to exercise their freedom of expression and freedom to disclose information , have the right to anonymity and an investigation ban which means that authorities and other public bodies are not allowed to investigate who has provided information under the freedom to disclose information .
in writing . - I strongly disagree with the Atkins amendment ( Amendment 1 to paragraph 15 ) to the Committee on Petitions ' report by Carlos José Iturgaiz Angulo .
The Ombudsman 's Special Report regarding OLAF concerns the allegations made by the Office against a journalist who covered the story regarding its investigation into allegations made by Mr van Buitenen .
Regardless of whether Mr van Buitenen 's allegations are right or wrong , we should defend the right of journalists to report on matters of public interest , even those who work for newspapers which are not very supportive of our views .
The Ombudsman 's Special Report found that OLAF acted incorrectly in making accusations against a journalist .
The Petitions Committee agreed to request an own-initiative report on this issue in order to pressure OLAF into accepting it had acted incorrectly .
By voting for the PPE-DE amendment , we will be failing to defend the independence of journalists doing their work , failing to support the Petitions Committee in its work , and failing to support the Ombudsman in his work .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 13.10 and resumed at 15.00 )

Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Situation in Pakistan ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the Council and Commission Declarations on the situation in Pakistan .

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as we know , the European Union has observed recent developments in Pakistan with great concern , particularly the events leading to the establishment of the state of emergency on 3 November last , and consequently to great social unrest and numerous arrests , including the Chief Justice , who is currently under house arrest .
Have no doubt that this is a serious backward step in the structure of the rule of law and the democratic process in Pakistan , which I would say destroys any hope the Pakistani people and the international community in general may have entertained of strengthening the legitimacy of democratic institutions in Pakistan .
This is why the Presidency issued a statement on 6 November on behalf of the Union expressing our profound concern regarding the introduction of the state of emergency and the suspension of the Pakistani constitution and fundamental freedoms .
On 4 November , two days previously , the Heads of Mission in Islamabad and the High Representative , Javier Solana , had expressed their concern at the course of events .
Our words , the words of the EU , were thus added to the many others reiterating how important it is to reinstate the Constitution , restore civil order , guarantee the independence of the judiciary and the freedom of the mass media , release all political prisoners , journalists and defenders of human rights and create the conditions required for the legislative elections to take place as planned , i.e. in January 2008 .
We have no doubt that any nation 's stability and development can only be guaranteed in an atmosphere of total democratic credibility .
We are seriously concerned by reports of numerous arrests , the boycott on freedom of information , repression of the essential freedom of expression of citizens and attacks on professional people , such as judges , lawyers , journalists and human rights activists .
At the same time , however , we appeal strongly for all parties to exercise the utmost restraint and to work together to seek a democratic and peaceful solution to the present crisis that will allow a rapid return to normality .
Although recognising the challenges currently faced by Pakistan in relation to its security situation and the Pakistani people 's sacrifices and efforts in combating extremism and terrorism , the European Union firmly believes that the solution to these challenges cannot involve an interruption in the democratic process .
We cannot , however , fail to acknowledge the ally that we have always been able to count on in this battle against extremism and terrorism .
We must therefore ensure that Pakistan remains committed to the battle against this global threat , in which international cooperation is an essential tool .
Finally , the Union hopes that the current climate of uncertainty will be resolved swiftly and peacefully and calls upon President Muscharraf to honour his pledge to remove his military uniform and abandon his position as Chief of Staff .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , Pakistan is on the agenda of this plenary for the third time within a few months .
This bears witness to the very difficult transition the country is currently going through .
The imposition of emergency law by President Musharraf on 3 November in his capacity as Chief of Army Staff has sent a deeply worrying signal to Europe and the wider world and has damaged the course of democracy in Pakistan .
Before the emergency was imposed we had witnessed some encouraging developments , with hope for a more inclusive political process and stronger democratic institutions , but regrettably this has now been put in question and today we ask ourselves whether this situation is still reversible or whether it is not too late to restore confidence and conditions in advance of the parliamentary elections .
President Musharraf , in his televised address on the night of 3 November , told us that he was suspending the Constitution because of threats to the nation due to a visible ascendancy in the activities and incidence of terrorist attacks .
There is no doubt that Pakistan is currently facing a very serious threat of religious extremism and violence as recent events in the North-Western Frontier Province and the attack on Ms Bhutto 's convoy on 18 October in Karachi have clearly demonstrated .
But what we are also witnessing now is the arrest of thousands of lawyers , journalists , political party workers and human rights activists , including such distinguished persons as Ms Asma Jahangir , the Chair of the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan , or Mr Aitzaz Ahsan , President of the Supreme Court Bar Association .
These are people who stand for an open and tolerant Pakistan .
They are not terrorists and it is wrong to detain them .
They should be set free immediately .
I would regard the drastic action taken against Pakistan 's judiciary as particularly serious .
Rule of law is at the heart of any democratic process and the functioning democratic system cannot be sustained without an independent judiciary .
The statement by the Presidency , just mentioned also by our President on behalf of the EU , is therefore very clear , and this remains our position .
Last Sunday President Musharraf announced at a press conference that he hopes parliamentary elections can be held in Pakistan by 9 January 2008 .
This would be a step in the right direction but there are a lot of remaining problems .
When can we expect the state of emergency to end ?
How can we have free and fair elections when print and electronic media are censored , other civil rights and liberties suspended and the independence of the judiciary has been undermined ?
How will parties be able to campaign when freedom of assembly is curtailed and party leaders like Benazir Bhutto are kept under house arrest ?
These issues are not at all clear at this stage .
To end this uncertainty it is of fundamental importance that a firm date for elections should be announced as soon as possible , along with a clear timeframe for ending the emergency .
For these elections to have any chance of being at all democratic and transparent , it will be essential for all restrictions on political rights and fundamental freedoms to be lifted .
And , as things stand , at present it seems it will not be possible to deploy an election observation mission .
Certain minimum conditions laid down in the Commission communication on EU election assistance and observation for the holding of democratic elections are not met .
However , if the emergency rule was lifted rather quickly and conditions were significantly improved soon , I might yet be able to review the situation .
In any case I have made the necessary preparations for possible deployment of an EU election observation mission to Pakistan should the conditions noticeably change for the better quickly .
But , as I say , I am very much concerned as to whether this is likely to happen .
There have been calls to suspend or review our aid to Pakistan , and some EU Member States have taken steps or are considering some action in this respect .
The European Commission 's support to Pakistan focuses , I would like to remind you , on key issues such as poverty reduction and education , including in the North-West Frontier Province and Baluchistan , which are the most disadvantaged provinces in Pakistan .
Therefore , I think we will need to consider how best to proceed but , given the nature of this assistance , I think we have to reflect very carefully on that .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , the truth is that the situation is very worrying : suspension of constitutional guarantees , state of emergency , detention of many members of civil society , including lawyers such as Mr Ahsan , who is the President of the Supreme Court Bar Association , and of opponents , house arrest of the opposition leader Mrs Bhutto .
What do we do in this situation ?
We have learnt that the Deputy Secretary of State at the US State Department , Mr Negroponte , will shortly visit Pakistan and that one Member State , the United Kingdom , has joined the United Nations in its call for the President to renounce his leadership of the army and lift the state of emergency within ten days .
What can we , as the European Union , do ?
I believe that as a first step we must act with utmost caution .
I believe that the representative of the current Presidency has noted , very correctly , that Pakistan is a vital partner in the fight against terrorism and also a country with nuclear weapons .
I therefore believe that on the one hand the European Union must ask the Government to re-establish as far as possible - because we must not lose sight of the fact that terrorism is a factor in Pakistan , a major factor - to re-establish to some extent order and stability and constitutional rights and freedoms , and to release those people who have been unlawfully detained .
Furthermore , Commissioner , I would ask you to marshal your considerable capacities and efforts to ensure that free and fair elections can be held and , on the basis of the guarantees you referred to in your speech , that the European Union is present and has a presence in the process in Pakistan which is so very important for the stability of the region and all relations between that region and the European Union .
Therefore , Commissioner , we have great confidence in your capabilities , great confidence in your diplomatic action , great confidence in your efforts and we hope that they will genuinely have a successful outcome which will allow the European Union to have a presence in the electoral process .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , I would like to thank the Council and the Commission , especially the Council for its tough declaration on 8 November .
I do not think that anyone would doubt that the situation in Pakistan is very serious and very volatile .
It is perhaps hard to register that everything that has been going on has really only taken place in the last ten days or so , since the state of emergency was declared .
Several Members here met General Musharraf some months ago , both in Brussels and later in Islamabad , and we received a number of assurances .
He was adamant that he would follow the constitution and that free and fair elections would take place .
I welcome his announcement that elections can take place by 9 January , but I share the Commissioner 's apprehension and beg the question : in the light of what has gone on and the present emergency measures - the suspension of certain television channels and other human rights - are free and fair elections possible in less than eight weeks ' time ?
Whilst I refer to the Commissioner , I would also like to draw her attention in particular to our paragraph 14 of this resolution where we invite the Commission to consider expanding aid to Pakistan for education , poverty reduction , healthcare and relief work , but channelling the funds through secular NGOs rather than directly to the government under these circumstances .
We have no issue with the Pakistan people .
We recognise that Pakistan is a key ally of the West , as Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra said .
We recognise the important role they played in many , many areas and that they have also been victims of terrorism .
But I do not think , colleagues , that means we should stand aside and ignore what is happening at the moment .
My group also wanted to have a paragraph in about possible sanctions , inviting the Council ...
( The President asked the speaker to speak more slowly )
I thought I was speaking such clear English that they would manage perfectly but I will , of course , slow down .
I am also inviting the Council to consider targeted sanctions , which is what the Socialist Group would have liked to have done but we did not get any support for it : travel bans perhaps , the freezing of assets .
But we hope all of this will not be necessary and we hope that Pakistan can still come back from the brink , that the state of emergency can be withdrawn and that General Musharraf will step down as Chief of Army .
Mr President , my apologies for going too quickly .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , Pakistan is a vital ally for the European Union .
Today we find that Pakistan finds itself at a crossroads .
But I believe that it wants to engage with us and we have re-established a recent history of engagement with Pakistan , which I understand is progressing reasonably successfully .
But we must not forget the historical context in which we find ourselves today .
I know Pakistan reasonably well and by far the biggest issue and problem facing Pakistan internally today is the terrorist threat coming from across the border in Afghanistan .
Afghanistan is a common global problem .
We in the West turned our backs on Afghanistan some years ago .
It is important that we do not turn our back on Pakistan today .
Pakistan has been at the forefront of this battle , sometimes carrying a very heavy burden on behalf of the international community , a heavy burden sometimes carried on weak shoulders , a burden the people of Pakistan have carried , absorbing so much violence and carnage which would otherwise have made its way into other parts of the world .
The solution is not to isolate liberals and liberal values and to take away those liberal values from the people of Pakistan .
Today I see that the Commission has again called for the release of prisoners who are currently being held and I support that call .
This includes people like the Chief Justice of Pakistan , and indeed Mr Aitzaz Ahsan , who is a leading lawyer in Pakistan .
The President of Pakistan must - and these must be our baselines - end the state of emergency immediately .
He must reinstate the Constitution .
He must reinstate the Supreme Court and he must move towards free and fair elections .
President Musharraf should recognise that we have not turned our back on Pakistan .
We remain engaged .
It is now time for him to roll back from his current position , to acknowledge our core values , to make them shared values .
In a distinct way , despite the desperate situation , he has a unique opportunity even now to deliver power to the people of Pakistan , the true custodians of that power .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - Mr President , I too recognise the importance of Pakistan to all of us in the fight against terrorism and it has been an ally to all of us in that fight .
However , I do not believe for one minute that it justifies in any circumstances what has happened in Pakistan in recent weeks .
Any deviation from the general democratic process cannot be a solution to solve political problems within Pakistan .
One of the things that really worries me about this is why he did it : because he was afraid that he was not going to get the decision from the Supreme Court that he expected or that he wanted .
It is a fairly trivial matter in one way and it seems that he has gone to extreme measures in his dealings with the people in Pakistan , with the judiciary in Pakistan , in the way he has dealt with it , which is extremely dangerous .
I welcome the fact that he has given a commitment that he will hold elections , but the international community must not allow him to turn his back on this commitment .
The state of emergency in Pakistan must be lifted immediately and the Government of Pakistan must respect the boundaries of its Constitution .
The scrapping of the Supreme Court did immeasurable damage to the separation of power systems within Pakistan .
It is a very , very poor example for the General to have undertaken .
I fully condemn the wholesale arrest of political opponents of the General , which include 3 000 peaceful protestors and civilian and human right activists .
The European Parliament today must send a very strong message out to General Musharraf that his recent actions violate all respected international conventions and he is moving Pakistan in a very negative and very dangerous direction .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , like many others , I think we are here with a deep sense of regret and a certain feeling of anger that , once again , we are having to discuss the situation in Pakistan .
I would agree with virtually everything that has been said this afternoon .
We are in a serious situation , not least because this is a nuclear state and the risk of a failed nuclear state is one that should make us all feel very nervous indeed .
People are right to say that the power to step back from the brink here is basically with President Musharraf and his supporters .
This idea that there is a state of emergency but the elections should go ahead undisturbed does not hold water .
It is certainly not an undisturbed election if the leaders of the other political parties are under house arrest or in jail .
If there is no freedom of the press , if people cannot even get satellite dishes because imports of those have now been banned , then there are no circumstances for free and fair elections whatsoever .
It is clear that we want the release of all those political prisoners , that we want freedom of the press and we want the judiciary to be able to operate freely because , if all those with stated commitments to democracy are locked up , who else is left out on the streets ?
The message that is being sent by the actions of the Government in Pakistan at the moment is therefore extremely worrying for a state that says it is committed to democracy .
I would agree with what Mr Robert Evans has said .
We do need to have certain sanctions ready for use if the deadline of 22 November set by the Commonwealth and the UN is not observed and we do not see President Musharraf stand down as military leader or , indeed , an end to the state of emergency .
We should be supporting Amnesty International 's Day of Action tomorrow to remember the political prisoners held in Pakistan , and we certainly need to be looking at aid and the way in which it is spent .
Pakistan has had USD 10 billion dollars of aid from the USA in about the last five or six years , mostly for anti-terrorism measures , and not for the maintenance and development of education .
Mr President , I have seen that the entire western world , with the United States at the forefront , is demanding an earlier election in Pakistan .
They want an election before the opposition is out of prison and Mr Ahsan , President of the Supreme Court Bar Association , is released from house arrest .
The consequences will certainly be felt in Pakistan .
There will also inevitably be political instability and a negative impact on the economy of a country that is in a bad enough situation already .
The crisis is likely to have other repercussions at regional level , and wider developments affecting stability throughout Asia .
I find it impossible to disassociate developments in Pakistan and Kashmir from those in Afghanistan .
I propose that the EU should insist on securing Pakistan 's considerable nuclear arsenal , if necessary through the UN , at least until the country returns to its former political and , if possible , democratic state .
( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , for years now we and the rest of the western world have thought of Pakistan as an important ally .
The threat of terrorism and the Pakistani Government 's promises and hardline rhetoric with regard to stopping this threat have also been words of assurance to the EU .
There have , however , been too many drawbacks associated with this alliance and mutual solidarity .
Now at last it is time to open our eyes .
The state of emergency declared by General Musharraf on the third day , a crack in Pakistan 's constitution , is just the tip of the iceberg , which we gave warning about here in July and October .
The society has been gradually militarised over the years , and the litmus test for the state of human rights , freedom of religion and the rights of minorities , has shown that these are restricted .
Instead of Pakistan getting itself ready for the triumphal march of democracy this year , there have been clear signs of a hardening dictatorial system of government .
The arrests of members of the opposition , the disruption of the work of the Supreme Court , the refusal to allow one opposition leader into the country and the house arrest of another , the detention of a UN representative , and the violence used by the authorities against peaceful demonstrators all show that Pakistan is on the brink of a precipice .
Commissioner , the EU should now send the strong and united message that it is popular democratic power and a society that respects human rights , and not an army , which is the strongest barrier to the rise to power of radical groups .
We understand that the country has internal threats to its security and that there has to be a response to these , but democracy is not a threat to security .
Democracy is also precisely the answer in the struggle against talebanisation .
The EU must dare to speak up and say that we see the building of a stable and democratic society as being crucial to our alliance .
The first step for Pakistan 's stability is to guarantee that the Supreme Court can work independently and in peace .
Then there are the parliamentary elections in January .
The supply of international assistance to the authorities in the investigation into the bomb attack in October would show our concern .
A society which is at least officially constitutional , with long democratic traditions and where the people have a genuine desire for democracy , peace and stability , will not give up that easily .
Pakistan is , therefore , full of hope .
( CS ) Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the long-term experience of many countries shows that the rule of law and democracy are the best and most effective way of preventing extremism , instability and chaos .
Seen from this angle , President Musharraf 's decision to declare a state of emergency is a serious mistake and gaffe .
Pakistan is not a country without democratic traditions : on the contrary , as seen from the courageous and responsible conduct of Pakistani judges , lawyers , journalists and other representatives of non-governmental organisations , civil society has deep and strong roots in Pakistan .
However , this civil society needs help .
We therefore appeal to President Musharraf to end the state of emergency , to release all political prisoners and to restore all the rights and freedoms guaranteed by the Constitution , including freedom of movement , speech , association and assembly , so that truly democratic , free and transparent parliamentary elections can be held at the beginning of next year .
Mr President , the last couple of weeks have been a rollercoaster of shocking events in this turbulent and troubled country .
The imposition of martial law in the guise of emergency rule is an underhand attempt to destabilise Pakistan for the personal ambition of one man .
President Musharraf justifies his actions as an attempt to stop the country from committing suicide , but it is not that the country is committing suicide but that the actions and deeds of a dictator are killing the country .
It is totally unacceptable that the leader of the opposition , Benazir Bhutto , has been put under house arrest and banned from political activity and that other activists and the media and independent judiciary have all been muzzled .
While recognising that there are real threats from extremists within the country , I believe that General Musharraf 's actions will only embolden the extremists instead of eradicating them and will serve only to weaken the democratic and moderate voices within the country .
Some say that Pakistan is on the brink of collapse .
We must prevent this by giving a strong response .
Moderate people in Pakistan are feeling frustrated and angry and they are disappointed by Europe 's soft response .
Therefore I call upon Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner and the Council to give an unequivocal , clear message to the President about the severe consequences if the suppression of the constitution , of politicians , of the media and of the judiciary does not end immediately .
( NL ) Mr President , almost all the previous speakers have made the point that the declaration of a state of emergency in Pakistan and the way in which it was done is totally unacceptable .
It is unacceptable that Musharraf should show such a cavalier disregard for democracy .
Moreover , this state of emergency aggravates a serious problem still further because in a manner of speaking it opens up a second front , that of Islamic terrorism .
As you know , there is already plenty about Musharraf 's regime to criticise : it is ineffectual in its measures against the Taliban , for example , and groups associated with Al-Qaeda which are operating along the border with Afghanistan .
Well , declaring a state of emergency has opened the door to terror organisations of this kind and the situation can only get worse as a result .

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , firstly I would like to thank the European Parliament for scheduling this debate , which , in view of the situation in Pakistan and the cooperation we have had with that country in such an important battle against extremism and terrorism , is very opportune indeed .
We cannot and will not remain indifferent to a country like Pakistan .
This debate also shows that the three institutions , Parliament , the Council and the Commission , share the same fundamental and immediate objectives , i.e. the rapid and complete restoration of the rule of law and democratic freedoms in Pakistan and the holding of free and democratic elections .
This is the goal that unites us and the goal that we must all work towards , particularly the three institutions , in the area of our respective competences and powers .
I would also like to say that in the capacity of the Presidency we also understand , as the Commissioner has said here , that any measures that might lead to a possible suspension of cooperation affecting a population which is already suffering many shortages must be considered and examined with care .
The people of Pakistan have already suffered enough and must not suffer further .
This too is a question that must be considered with some care , should it arise .
Whatever the case , our objectives are now clear and defined , and I can assure you that the Presidency and the Council will take all the initiatives and measures deemed appropriate to respond to developments in the situation .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I think it has been shown very clearly that we all feel that what has happened is very difficult to understand .
It is very serious .
We are all concerned , because the imposition of emergency rule has greatly endangered the strengthening of democratic institutions and the building of a more inclusive democratic process .
It is therefore of fundamental importance that civil and political rights are fully restored , media restrictions withdrawn and essential improvements made to the framework and conditions for elections .
Stability and development can only be achieved with democracy and the rule of law .
We therefore have to reflect further on the question of a possible election observation mission .
As I said , we might be able to send a smaller team of advisers to follow the process under the current circumstances .
If not , as I said , the state of emergency would have to be lifted very quickly and civil liberties restored .
With regard to aid , let me say that we had already substantially increased our aid to Pakistan , particularly in the fields of education and rural development .
Therefore , as I said before , I think at this stage we must sit back , wait for a moment , and judge very carefully .
Of course we should not endanger the poor people in Pakistan , but we have to go about things in the right way .
To wind up the debate I have received seven motions for a resolution tabled pursuant to Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 15 November 2007 .
Written declarations ( Rule 142 of the Rules of Procedure )
in writing . - Pakistan is a vital ally in the war on terror .
As a result it has faced enormous internal pressure and threatened instability .
President Musharaff has responded to this situation by declaring a state of emergency .
He argues that an abnormal situation requires abnormal actions .
His response is in part understandable but quite wrong .
The way to fight anti-democratic forces is with democracy .
He should end the state of emergency , announce a date for elections and a date on which he will give up his uniform .
He should then call for an open and wideranging debate about the future of Pakistan .
I am convinced such a debate would reveal that the vast majority of Pakistanis reject extremism and fundamentalism and wish to live in a country at peace with itself , at peace with it 's neighbours and on good terms with the West .
Council 's strategy for the Bali Conference on Climate Change ( COP 13 and COP / MOP 3 ) ( debate )
The next item is the debate on
the oral question on the Council 's strategy for the Bali Conference on Climate Change ( COP 13 and COP / MOP 3 ) , by Guido Sacconi , on behalf of the Temporary Committee on Climate Change to the Council - B6-0379 / 2007 ) , and
the oral question on the Council 's strategy for the Bali Conference on Climate Change ( COP 13 and COP / MOP 3 ) , by Guido Sacconi , on behalf of the Temporary Committee on Climate Change to the Council - B6-0380 / 2007 ) .
author . - ( IT ) Mr President , Minister , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am sure that I do not need to remind you of the importance of the Conference of the Parties in Bali which is now imminent and in view of which we have asked for further information on your strategy , on the line that you intend to take .
As the European Union , we are independently committed to an extraordinary effort , if I may put it that way , even though we know that it does not represent the ultimate solution .
Our shared goal is to keep global warming within two degrees of levels in pre-industrial times , fully aware that this is a high-risk threshold , and that it will be necessary for some areas of the world , for some parts of Europe , to make provision , as planned , for a policy of adaptation .
If we really want to pursue this difficult goal , however , we know that a new international treaty is absolutely crucial .
As we know , the European Union 's burden of responsibility is limited ( 14 % of global greenhouse gas emissions ) .
A new international treaty taking account of the changes that have taken place since Kyoto , in particular the extraordinary and explosive growth of the Asian giants : indeed , Bali is a crucial step in that direction , and while it will not be the place at which agreement is reached , it will be the place at which negotiations will start and it will therefore be very important for Bali to come up with a clear negotiating mandate , with precise deadlines , with a view to conclusion by 2009 .
In recent months , the world context has changed from the political , economic and cultural point of view , from the IPCC reports whose final synthesis will be released at the end of this week , and is to be presented in Valencia , to the award of the Nobel Prize to Al Gore and the IPCC 's scientists .
A great deal has changed in recent months and we can therefore be optimistic , albeit in a critical and vigilant way .
I would therefore like to sum up the purport of the resolution which we have drawn up and which we are sure will be adopted in this House tomorrow by a large majority ; it is an offering , an offering to the negotiators to help them to take a tougher line as these negotiations are being launched .
I would like to thank Mrs Hassi who , with the other rapporteurs , has managed to provide a synthesis , to prevent the whole thing from becoming an overdressed Christmas tree .
The focus is very much on those negotiations and that is how we put it before you .
author . - ( FI ) Mr President , I wish to express my thanks for the excellent levels of cooperation with the shadow rapporteurs of the political groups in the negotiations on this resolution .
Climate change is happening now , and it is advancing more quickly than predicted .
A dramatic indication of this was that at the end of last summer a million square meters of the ice in the Arctic Ocean melted , an area the equivalent of Finland , Sweden and Norway combined .
The message the scientists are sending out about the advance of climate change and the urgent need to cut emissions is becoming an ever more alarming one .
It is also echoed in the advance information on the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change meeting in Valencia this week .
It is important that there is no gap left between the Kyoto Protocol and the next climate agreement .
That is why the post-2012 treaty must be ready no later than 2009 .
At Bali the EU must do all it can to achieve a negotiating mandate to allow global warming to remain under two degrees .
The leading role assumed by the EU is crucial to this .
We are showing the way with our own measures to reduce our own emissions , but also by coordinating international negotiations .
It is vital to get all the industrialised countries involved , including the United States of America , although that will not be enough to save the climate .
It is just as crucial to get big developing countries , such as China and India , to accept limits on the increase in their emissions .
This is perhaps the hardest challenge in the history of international diplomacy .
We have to understand that if China , India and other similar countries accept limits to their emissions , it will mean a huge change in their way of thinking and the way they do things .
We have to be prepared to give them something back in return .
In other words , we also have to provide financial assistance for the breakthrough in clean , climate-friendly technology in these countries .
I would like to remind everyone that Nicholas Stern estimated that 1 % of global gross domestic product each year would be needed to protect the climate .
After the Second World War the United States delivered 2 % of their GDP in the form of Marshall Plan aid .
It was important to get reconstruction under way after the war , but it is still more important to prevent a comparable catastrophe as a result of climate change .
We must therefore also be prepared to pay for climate protection .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the time is approaching when the Indonesian island of Bali will welcome delegates to the 13th Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Climate Change , who will be asked once again to use their experience and negotiating skills to make history .
In light of the first period of compliance with the Kyoto Protocol , from 2008 to 2012 , the worrying scientific information that has emerged meanwhile on recent developments in relation to climate change highlights how urgent it is to find a collective and effective response to this challenge , since the very future of our planet is at stake .
In this context Bali is the final opportunity to launch negotiations on a global and comprehensive agreement on the post-2012 climate regime .
We are aware of the difficulties of this judicial process .
The European Union will go to Bali with the same sense of purpose that has guided it over the last 15 years , during which we unhesitatingly and unambiguously took on the role of leader of the international community in this great global challenge .
The European Union 's major objective at the Bali Conference on climate change will relate to the process itself , i.e. to ensure that a global and comprehensive negotiating process is set in motion .
I would also like to inform you that the EU considers the following aspects to be essential for creating an effective and appropriate post-2012 framework : firstly , to continue to develop a common perspective on the problem so as to achieve the Convention 's major objective ; secondly , to reach agreement on the adoption of firmer commitments by the developed countries as regards global emission reductions ; thirdly , to facilitate the provision of new equitable and effective contributions by other countries , including incentives created by new types of flexible commitments to reduce the intensity of greenhouse gas emissions associated with economic development ; fourthly , to expand the carbon market , particularly by reinforcing innovative and flexible mechanisms ; fifthly , to reinforce cooperation in the areas of research , development , dissemination , forecasting and transparency in the technological sector ; and finally , to intensify efforts to adapt , particularly as regards risk management tools , financing and technology .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the figures speak for themselves .
We were on the front line in Kyoto in making greater commitments than were asked of us , and today the EU and its Member States have clearly defined ambitious targets that again put us on the front line in combatting climate change .
As the President-in-Office of the European Council emphasised in New York , climate change is now undeniably one of the greatest challenges facing humanity , and has moved from the realm of theory to become an effective and widespread concern for the people of the entire world .
This is a global challenge that requires a global response , the effectiveness of which will depend on the international community 's collective action .
That is why we insist that every effort must be made to negotiate the global comprehensive agreement , as I said , under the United Nations Framework Convention on climate change , which represents and must continue to represent the central and essential reference framework for all actions and initiatives to be taken in this area .
It is therefore time for other states to assume their responsibilities and to play a real and proportionate role in the global battle against climate change .
Encouraged by the debate between the Heads of State and Government at the recent Lisbon Informal Summit on Europe and globalisation , which clearly showed that climate change is an EU priority area , and also by the Environment Committee 's 30 October conclusions on the preparation of COP 23 , we will go to Bali committed to contributing actively to achieving a result that can be translated into concrete , perceptible progress on the future of the climate regime .
Bali represents not the end but rather the beginning of a journey , the ' road map ' that has been talked about so much in recent years .
It is a complex and difficult challenge , but one that can be achieved and that cannot be put off .
The EU for its part is prepared to lead this challenge , since that is what our people want .
Mr President , thank you for the opportunity we have had today to exchange views on the EU 's position at the UN Conference in Bali opening on 3 December .
The Commission and the European Parliament made a decisive contribution towards adopting an ambitious European policy on climate change .
It took a leading role on the international scene and a constructive position with regard to our main partners among developed and developing countries .
I look forward to continuing this close and fruitful cooperation in Bali , where Parliament will be represented by a strong delegation .
The question submitted by the Temporary Committee on Climate Change concerns the most important issues we will be facing in Bali .
One such issue is how to secure the support of our main partners for starting negotiations , with a view to concluding an international agreement that will aim to ensure that global warming is limited to 2 ° C.
The Bali Conference will undoubtedly be a milestone in the international endeavour to combat climate change .
Bali will be a first practical test of the international community 's determination to translate political declarations into action .
There are many encouraging signs .
Climate change is now a first priority in international policy ; it is an issue of direct concern to Heads of State or Government around the world .
A month ago , the first meeting of its kind , called by UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon in New York , sent out a very powerful message : climate change is now recognised by all leaders throughout the world as an issue requiring urgent and decisive action by the international community .
The recent meeting in Bogor also confirmed that there is a shared view among a steadily growing number of countries that an agreement must be reached in Bali on starting official negotiations aimed at concluding an agreement on climate change for the period after 2012 .
The discussions so far have also shown that there is a convergence of views on the main points to be included in the agreement for the period after 2012 .
Of course , some would prefer clusters ( reduction , adaptation , technology , funding ) to establishing the main points of agreement at Bali , which is the position held by the EU .
It is nevertheless true that the EU has to large extent managed to set the agenda for the Bali Conference .
The EU strategy on climate and energy , approved by the European Council in March 2007 on the basis of a related motion from the Commission , has had a decisive effect on the aims and level of ambition of the Bali Conference as well as the architecture of the post-2012 agreement on climate change .
The EU strategy has formed a basis for a series of multilateral and bilateral discussions .
At the end of this month , the EU will discuss the issue of climate change as a matter of priority at the EU-China and EU-India summit conferences .
It is up to our partners in the developed countries to respond to and cooperate on the targets set by the EU , acting at all times on the basis of scientific data .
The developed countries must continue to take the lead by making ambitious commitments to reduce emissions in absolute terms .
We have the economic and technological means to limit greenhouse gas emissions .
If we and the other developed countries do not take the first steps , how can we expect the rapidly developing , emerging economies to take action , especially on the scale required ?
Nevertheless , the forecasts for emission increases worldwide leave no doubt that the developing countries must contribute .
We are not asking them for the time being to commit themselves to emission reductions in absolute terms .
However , with our help the developing countries must slow the rate of increase in their emissions .
Thus on a global scale , at some point in the next 10-15 years , once we have reached a peak in CO2 emissions these can begin to decrease in absolute terms .
This is the only way we can keep the increase in the average temperature of the planet within the limit of 2 ° C. In this context , we must focus on specific proposals to strengthen funding and investments in clean technologies and the transfer of these technologies to developing countries .
We therefore support the initiative of our Indonesian hosts to invite finance ministers to a meeting on climate change and funding , to be held in Bali during the Conference .
To retain its leading role internationally , the EU must above all achieve results within its own territory .
The Commission will approve the package of measures on climate and energy at the beginning of next year and will plan the necessary measures for achieving our targets , namely a unilateral reduction in emissions of 20 % , or 30 % if an international agreement is achieved .
This package of measures will include proposals on the allocation of responsibility and obligations among the Member States in order to improve the EU Emissions Trading System and achieve the targets for renewable energy sources .
Measures to be taken at Community level must also play a part in reducing emissions .
One such area is our forthcoming proposals on CO2 and motor vehicles , as discussed in the European Parliament at the October plenary session .
The Commission will propose a legislative framework for achieving the Community target of 120 g / km by 2012 .
The Commission will also present the legal framework for capturing and storing CO2 , with the necessary guarantees on environmental protection .
Bali is only the start of the negotiation process , as the President said earlier .
We must now prepare and secure the widest possible international support for the way ahead that we have planned .
The EU will intensify bilateral contacts with major partners and will take full advantage of the forthcoming summits as well as all the important international meetings .
As I have said before , despite encouraging signs internationally , there are nevertheless serious differences of opinion .
For instance , there is disagreement on how to combat climate change , and in particular the type and nature of the targets .
The US is continuing to oppose binding targets .
Targets of this kind are of fundamental importance if we wish to ensure the effectiveness of our agreement and the strengthening of the global CO2 market .
We shall continue to cooperate with all those in the United States who can help towards bringing about a change of attitude at federal level .
In the United States itself , a very lively dialogue is already being conducted on the issue of combating climate change .
From various sections of the United States we are receiving clear messages and appeals for decisive action in the run-up to the Bali Conference .
Through your various contacts with colleagues in other parliaments around the world , with representatives of industry and with civil society , we are counting on the support of the European Parliament in promoting the EU 's ambitious aims regarding the issue of climate change .
We need this support in our efforts to strengthen international cooperation on climate change .
( Applause )
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FI ) Madame President , first of all my sincere thanks go to Mrs Hassi for her cooperation on this resolution .
Obviously this is perhaps going to be one of the most important , if not the most important , conferences on climate change .
Unfortunately , not much progress was made in the last five conferences .
Now at last the time has come to decide upon concrete measures for the period after 2012 .
What all the earlier conferences have had in common is that , instead of souvenirs in the shape of real breakthroughs , we have seen a pat on the back for the EU for leading the way in its unilateral actions and environmental aspirations , and then off we go again for another year .
The problem is that global measures are needed urgently for what is a global climate problem , although they have seemed difficult to produce .
For example , a year ago Nairobi failed to show any indication that there would be commitment from any of the important new countries to emissions cuts from 2013 .
We have therefore had to hope that negotiations outside the Kyoto Protocol framework will result in emissions cuts among the world 's four largest polluters , the United States of America , China , India and Russia .
Perhaps the most tangible challenge for developing countries is the notion of solidarity .
At one time no one could have foreseen the extent to which emissions would start to increase , and now around half of all emissions come from the developing countries , mainly China and India .
Of course their citizens have a right to economic growth , but it is in everyone 's interests that that growth be as clean as possible .
The negotiating situation is thus awkward , but then also is the practice .
It may tempt companies operating in global markets to continue to invest in places where there are not proper environmental standards or emissions limits .
For people in the developing world , however , there is no solidarity in having their environment contaminated .
Furthermore , to move emissions is not to cut them .
The outcome , then , is that three out of every four emissions are increasing rapidly .
How do we move forward from this situation ?
Will there be time to decouple industrial production from country-specific restrictions and instead produce a worldwide scheme for the industrial sector and an international carbon economy ?
The priorities should be energy content , eco-efficiency and low-emission technology and its development .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PT ) President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I will begin by sincerely congratulating the rapporteur , Mrs Hassi , for her opening text and for her capacity to generate commitments on this complex issue .
The text to be put to the vote reflects the genuine effort made by the various political groups to send a clear , effective and mobilising message to Bali .
This is the only way to ensure the conditions for achieving the central objective , which is to transform the Bali meeting into the departure point for all global partners to assume clear and quantified policy commitments for combating climate change by 2009 .
Everyone has had to make sacrifices and adjustments .
The objective will have been achieved if this text is widely approved by Parliament .
That will give democratic legitimacy to the EU 's pioneering spirit in the area of the environment and climate in the eyes of the whole world .
This pioneering spirit has created added responsibilities , however , particularly as regards the quality of the specific proposals presented , which must meanwhile include both reductions and adaptations .
Account must be taken in particular of the fact that the greatest adaptation costs are now falling upon the poorest regions of the world that have contributed least to the problem and which are least equipped to resolve it .
The proposals must meanwhile ensure that the various international reduction responsibilities are distributed equitably , proportionally and fairly .
Environmental commitments will have to be adjusted to the development process the poorest countries and regions are entitled to , including access to normal standards of well-being and comfort , whether for the less developed countries or for the huge populations in the emerging economies .
While the pioneering European approach is a duty , it should nevertheless also be seen as an opportunity to gain environment-related technological and innovative comparative advantages .
This will only materialise , however , if environmental concerns and commitments gradually become the rule of operation of the global economy .
If not , the EU 's good practices will distort competition and disappoint its citizens .
In this context Parliament makes the practical suggestion that national commitments should be complemented by the exploration of global sectoral commitments with a view to creating benchmarks and internationally accepted good practices for all sectors of industry and services involved in international competition .
This is a very ambitious agenda , but the EU must assume the responsibilities corresponding to its role of positive leadership which is so very important for the survival of the planet .
Madam President , Minister , Commissioner , the start of negotiations for what will become the new Kyoto Agreement in Bali in December is , of course , extremely important .
Parliament is preparing itself though this debate and a resolution , and the Council has also prepared itself through a resolution .
What is still lacking , I believe , is clearer cooperation between the EU 's various institutions .
A big responsibility rests here with the Portuguese Presidency .
The European Union must speak with one voice in Bali .
An important element is how the situation of developing countries is to be managed and how they are to be able to combine economic development with environmentally friendly technology .
They need our assistance .
Not only in fine words , but they need money , methodological development and access to new technology .
We need to focus our efforts on various policy areas and the aid must be changed so that it is also climate friendly .
Part of the solution also depends on the second point I intended to mention in the debate - forests .
Large areas are being devastated today and we all know what that means for the climate .
But it is also a catastrophe for the people who live in these areas when their livelihoods disappear .
A method of working must be developed in which we pay developing countries and ordinary families to look after and take care of forest areas .
Sustainable production is extremely important .
A completely untouched forest is good from the point of view of biodiversity , but a rotting forest emits large volumes of methane gas .
What we need is a growing forest where the final product is taken care of in a way that locks in the CO2 and other greenhouse gases .
Bali will be a big , difficult and chaotic meeting .
The best we can do is prepare ourselves well so that the actual start of the negotiations is good .
For that this debate is an excellent tool , but we must also make preparations together with our friends through a strong transatlantic dialogue and dialogue with China and India .
We know that 25 states emit 83 % of the gases we need to stop and , Commissioner , Minister , a true friend is a person who asks how you are doing and also stops to listen to the answer .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - Madam President , can I too congratulate Mrs Hassi on her work and contribution to this debate .
I also want to congratulate Al Gore , the former Vice-President of America , for being recently awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for his sterling work in highlighting the need for international action to arrest climate change .
Receipt of this prize is an international recognition that climate change has risen to the top of the international political agenda .
It is international action that is now needed , so that we can all collectively ensure that carbon dioxide emissions are substantially reduced in the near future .
I thus fully support the 20 / 20 and 50 / 50 EU commitments to reduce carbon emissions .
Bali represents a real window of opportunity for us to agree an official mandate and framework in order to secure clear and firm international commitments for post-2012 .
In Bali let the foundations of the building blocks and road map commence , based on : a shared vision ; firm commitments from developed countries ; the expansion of the use of carbon markets ; the strengthening of cooperation on technological research and the reduction of deforestation .
Also , let us not forget that the EU needs to deliver here at home and to lead by example .
Therefore , I look forward to President Pöttering 's proposal in February on how this House , the European Parliament , can itself reduce its carbon footprint .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , it has become standard practice in the European Union , as we heard again today from the President-in-Office of the Council , to speak of a leading European role in the international effort to combat climate change .
When I cast my mind back to March and the decisions taken at the summit to set targets of a 20 % reduction in CO2 emissions , a 20 % increase in energy efficiency and a 20 % renewables quota by 2020 , that does indeed sound like a leading role .
I find it highly regrettable that negotiations with the Member States on the energy package did not progress far enough for us to underpin these summit decisions in Brussels prior to the Bali conference .
If the countries with which the EU intends to negotiate in Bali take a look behind the European scenes and see the arduous nature of the negotiations with the Member States on energy efficiency and renewables , they will realise that the whole business has been nothing short of a tragedy .
I believe it is an ominous sign when we demand giant strides on the global stage but are only prepared to tiptoe forward cautiously at home .
It is not as if a lack of technology were a problem for us .
Our problem is that we totally lack the political courage to effect the sea change that was discussed in March in our energy and resource policies .
I have to say that , when the Reul report was adopted at the last Plenary part-session , I was horrified to hear that we were back to talking about nothing but coal and nuclear-power options , and it fills me with utter shame that Europeans should now be offering African countries nuclear power as a solution to climate problems .
I believe some Europeans must have taken leave of their senses .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , the text before this House is the result of collective work by the Climate Committee .
That committee , set up on ad hoc basis with a mandate of great importance , has undertaken major consultation and discussion initiatives , and has drawn up an instrument which Europe can use to play a major role in the thirteenth Conference of the Parties in Bali .
The crux of the policy proposal is clear and forceful .
What is needed is a political and multilateral approach which is based on the UN , and takes account of the IPCC and major changes not just in technology but also in the social model .
Technology transfers , cooperation and a new environmental and development approach are needed .
The proposal of 3.20 % by the Commission and the Council is only a starting point in this sense , albeit a positive one .
Our thinking needs to be wide-ranging and forward-looking , and frankly the future cannot involve a return to technologies of the past which are old , dangerous and controversial , such as nuclear technology .
We also need to start thinking about innovative proposals that we ourselves have put forward in our parliamentary debate and which are now being taken up in a more authoritative way by leading figures such as Chancellor Merkel .
I am speaking of the per capita calculation of emissions , which we have proposed , together with Mr Prodi , and which is very important in the light of the current situation in which there now seems to be an inequality in emissions and in which those emissions all have to be reduced in an egalitarian way .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , may I make the following points on behalf of my colleague , Hans Blokland .
To begin with I must thank Satu Hassi most warmly for all the important work she has done to arrive at the resolution now before us .
In view of the upcoming Climate Change Conference in Bali it is important to record the European Parliament 's position on climate policy as concisely as possible , and Satu Hassi has done just that .
Now that the European Union is focusing hard on climate policy , it is time for other parts of the world to follow suit , including those countries which have not yet ratified the Kyoto Agreement .
In Bali the European Union should demonstrate its credentials as a leader , not paternalistically but in a spirit of cooperation .
I see the Bali conference as a perfect opportunity for us all to sit down together and consider what action is needed on climate policy after 2012 .
It will take joint efforts worldwide to preserve the quality of our world and safeguard our future .
( DE ) Madam President , allow me to extend a warm welcome to Stavros Dimas .
We look forward to our discussions with you in Bali about the path that Europe intends to pursue in the field of climate policy .
I see the pursuit of climate policy as a challenge for all of us .
It is not the preserve of misty-eyed environmentalists or of liberal merchants but a challenge to which we must all respond together , and the Temporary Committee on Climate Change is starting to do just that .
Not everyone appreciates this yet , but we have nevertheless made a good start .
Bali is a milestone - no doubt about that .
A post-Bali gap , which would also be a post-Kyoto gap , would be a disaster , not only for the environment but also in terms of economic policy , because industry cannot invest without hard and fast data .
It is also a matter of where we stand at the present time and what we actually have to offer in Bali , for we must have something to offer , otherwise we cannot expect other continents to join us in a common effort to solve the problem .
This is why it is right and proper that we should be committed to making offers here . Three times twenty per cent amounts to a great deal , and we would be happy to hit these targets .
I still see major obstacles ahead , to be sure , but we shall make it .
Besides , precisely because we need to set a good example , I do believe we shall arrive at a European environmental foreign policy that serves to influence the search for answers to questions such as why these huge conflagrations break out across the globe , producing more CO2 than all of Europe 's power stations put together .
I believe Europe has to get involved here , and we are well on the way to doing so , and then Americans within the United States - not necessarily through their government - will be given a positive stimulus to move forward too .
That is precisely where we are heading .
I regard climate change entirely as a golden economic opportunity .
If we do not take it , others surely will .
( FI ) Madam President , the credibility of the leadership shown by the European Union in the area of climate policy will be measured in December in Bali .
The result must be global will in the shape of a clear mandate to prevent the earth 's temperature from rising by more than two degrees .
The European Union has already made its own decisions .
If the goal is to be achieved , however , it will take the commitment of all the industrialised countries , the United States and Australia for example , to quantitative cuts in emissions .
We can no longer afford to have the sort of debate we have had up to now as to whether we should reach this target through technological development or by setting binding targets .
We need both .
Only binding targets and adequately stringent emissions targets , however , will make companies switch to cleaner and more environmentally friendly technology .
We have to remember , as has been said here , that to get all the parties to adopt the treaty will take solidarity , especially with the developing countries , which are the worst off of all .
We also need , however , to reach a clear negotiating position with developing countries , such as China and India , on quantitative reductions in emissions in the future .
Again I would like to thank all those who have been involved in drafting this resolution for Parliament , and especially Mrs Hassi and the groups ' negotiators .
You have done some excellent work .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , a word of welcome to Commissioner Dimas , who will be on the front line in Bali .
Global warming is an urgent , very serious and genuinely global problem in respect of which a global consensus is urgently needed .
That makes it necessary immediately to put forward proposals to control greenhouse gas emissions which are more equitable and more widely accepted than those of the Kyoto protocol based on the principle of ' grandfathering ' , i.e. ' whoever has polluted most , can continue to pollute most ' .
That is unacceptable .
For that reason I think that we have to put forward a bolder proposal .
I tabled an amendment , as has already been pointed out , which can be summarised in slogan form as ' one person , one right of emission ' , something suggested by Germany 's Professor Lutz and also welcomed by Chancellor Merkel .
If every person is to be given the same right of behaviour , the same access to natural resources , it is important for Parliament to support this process which , from the point of view of the emissions trading mechanism , could bring the developing peoples a quantity of resources of an order of magnitude greater than that of international cooperation and easier to control . In return , that would also require a commitment to respect carbon deposits such as the equatorial forests .
The principle of equity should provide a baseline for a gradual improvement that has to start from a baseline if emission figures admissible in 2050 are to be calculated .
It is therefore crucial for ' grandfathering ' to be gradually reduced .
It is precisely because the matter is so serious and urgent that we have to set matters in motion so that that final outcome can be swiftly achieved .
Madam President , one of the most effective strategies the EU can employ in Bali is to lead by example .
The first piece of new European climate legislation to be decided upon since the March Council is the inclusion of aviation in the Emissions Trading System .
So the outcome of that is vitally important , not only in itself but for the signal that it sends to others at the Bali Conference about whether the EU is genuinely serious about its climate change commitments .
So far , frankly , the outlook is pretty grim .
The Commission 's initial proposal was hopelessly weak and the fact that the Council has been unable to reach a common mandate for a first reading agreement sends extremely negative messages .
I therefore urge both the Council and the Commission to raise their game substantially and quickly .
Success in Bali also depends critically on whether equity is at the heart of any new agreement .
That is why proposals must be based on convergence towards equal per capita emission rights , such as the approach known as ' contraction and convergence ' .
I urge the Council and Commission to follow that approach .
Finally , I would caution against an over-reliance on carbon-offsetting mechanisms .
As a colleague of mine memorably pointed out , carbon offsets are about as useful as an anti-smoking campaign that pays someone else to stop smoking in the developing world while you continue cheerfully puffing away .
It is irresponsible and critically ineffective .
- ( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , the remit of the Bali Conference is to promote an ambitious and realistic post-2012 framework .
There is no room for further delay .
Global warming must be addressed immediately and drastically .
Ecology and economics can and must coexist .
The ensuing benefits will greatly exceed the financial cost .
However , this requires a broader agreement , with specific commitments to reduce emissions , and not mere wishful thinking .
Commitments must be made to combat emissions from international air and sea transport .
There is a need to capture greenhouse gases through sustainable forest management and a change in production standards and consumption , as well as through land use .
However , in order to achieve this , the Commission must remember forgotten aims relating to the bold promotion of renewable energy sources .
It must promote more ambitious targets and demonstrate a stronger political will .
This is what we expect , Mr Dimas .
( SL ) The European Union is a world leader in combating climate change and developing new environmentally friendly technologies .
But for how much longer ?
Awareness of the need to reduce human impact on the natural environment is growing in a large number of countries .
This is being followed by strategies , plans and measures , even in countries in which environmental protection was , even recently , not a priority .
Take for example China , which a delegation of the Temporary Committee on Climate Change visited recently to familiarise itself with the situation there .
Although as a developing country under the Kyoto Protocol China does not have to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions , it is becoming aware of the problem of global warming and has already begun to take action .
It has adopted a national climate change program in which it has , amongst other things , set itself a large number of ambitious targets .
All this demonstrates that we cannot rest on our laurels if Europe is to retain its global influence .
I therefore call upon the delegation in Bali to put forward Europe 's position in the fight against global warming accordingly and with a single voice .
In my view , a sufficient reduction in warming is possible only if we succeed in setting up a global market in carbon .
Price , that is to say money , is an extremely effective mechanism for attaining goals in human society .
In seeking to reach an agreement on global measures we cannot forget about implementing our own targets .
We must steadily develop our own policies and continue to introduce innovations in energy , transport and other sectors which also cause greenhouse gas emissions .
Only with effective and successful implementation at home will we be successful in our negotiations and cooperation with third countries .
I hope that the delegation in Bali will have a very successful visit and successfully put forward the positions set out in our resolution .
( NL ) Madam President , next month in Bali the European Union must bring its full political weight to bear in order to make the conference a success .
To that end we very much need the support of the developing countries and also of countries like China and India .
To date those countries have contributed very little to climate change , but they are seriously affected by its repercussions .
Europe must offer help to those countries and reach out to them so that they can adjust to climate change , and we must invest in technology transfer .
I am optimistic that in 2009 we can really get down to brass tacks and conclude a good agreement which the United States can also sign up to .
But if the rest of the world does not follow Europe and agree binding targets , we shall need a plan B and even a plan C.
Plan B would be to set worldwide targets for reductions in every sector of industry , and if that does not work plan C would be to slap import levies on products from countries that refuse to implement the climate policy .
The proposed resolution is a good one and it merits our full support .
My compliments to Satu Hassi and the shadow rapporteurs .
( ES ) Madam President , an average per capita emissions level has been proposed for everyone but be aware that what may be fair in social terms may end up being impossible in ecological terms .
Environmental objectives must incorporate countries such as China and India , they must incorporate equity .
However , environmental convergence between North and South must take place quickly and the level of emissions must be very low if it is to be an effective measure rather than smoke and mirrors .
At the same time we should consider fiscal and commercial measures to slow trade both in highly polluting products and in products which have been manufactured using dirty technology .
External climate protection of this kind may provide a response on the part of the European Union to the growth of emissions in our products from Southern countries and we can collect the income generated and then invest it in clean technologies in the South .
( SV ) We will soon be deciding how we will be able to combat global warming after 2012 when the Kyoto Agreement comes to an end .
We have a very good basis .
We need reductions of up to 80 % by 2050 , assistance for developing countries to reduce their emissions , measures against the meat industry , which is responsible for almost one fifth of global emissions of greenhouse gases , more flexible patent laws which make it easier to spread green technology , certification of biofuels to avoid them coming into conflict with food supplies , and the conservation of the world 's forests .
As has been said , this is all wonderful .
What is missing and what we must do in the future is to take measures against the constantly growing flows of traffic within the EU , EU subsidies and the fact that markets tend to be given priority when the EU legislates and implements .
There are eleven amendments , most of which I think are good and strengthen the thrust of the resolution , which is that it is the rich world which is responsible for climate change and must therefore take the lead in radical reductions .
I am troubled by Amendment 7 , which aims to use nuclear power to combat the greenhouse effect .
We should not replace one environmental problem with new problems .
( SV ) Madam President , it is almost 15 years since the Climate Convention was signed at the Rio Conference and yet the fact is that climate emissions are rising faster today than ever before .
This shows how inadequate international cooperation has been so far .
The EU must continue to take a leading responsibility through measures at home - everything from tougher requirements for the cars of tomorrow to increased aid for alternative sources of energy .
But ' domestic action ' is not enough .
Mr Florenz asked what we can offer the rest of the world .
That is a good question .
I believe we can offer three things .
First , clean environmentally friendly technology to all developing countries which are in a phase of modernisation , not least China and India .
They are fully entitled to their development , but they do not need to repeat our mistakes .
Providing support for technology and knowledge must be a priority in the EU budget .
They gain from it , but we also gain from it .
It is equally important for us to accept our historical responsibility and provide support for adaptation measures to all the low-income countries which will be greatly affected by storms , floods and extended droughts .
The money which has so far been put aside in various adaptation funds and the initiative recently taken by the Commission , the ' Climate Alliance ' , is not enough .
It is absurdly small .
The need is hundreds of times greater .
Third , as Mrs Ek underlined , it is important to pay attention to the role of forests , not least tropical forests .
We must give the forest owners an incentive not to chop down forests but to preserve them .
Climate policy does not stand and fall with Bali , but success in Bali will , of course , improve the chances of achieving a final agreement in 2009 .
In order to facilitate this I assume that the Commission and the Council will listen to Parliament , not least with regard to the need to do much more with regard to technical cooperation , adaptation measures and forest issues .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , at their spring summit the Heads of State and Government took good decisions on the fight against climate change .
Their decision on greenhouse gases provides for a 20 % reduction in the 1990 emission levels in Europe by 2020 .
It was also agreed at the spring summit that the reduction target would be raised to 30 % if other industrialised nations committed themselves to cutting their greenhouse-gas emissions .
The EU should therefore make every effort to encourage other industrialised nations to sign up to the post-Kyoto agreement .
I should like to refer to another specific point , namely transport , for it is important that we should succeed in securing the inclusion of transport in the post-Kyoto agreement .
In Europe alone , transport produces 21 % of all greenhouse gases .
International aviation in particular was not covered by the Kyoto Protocol , because the ICAO , the International Civil Aviation Organization , gave assurances that there were plans to create a global system .
This pledge has not been honoured in the period since 1997 , and I am afraid we are still waiting for aviation to be incorporated into the Protocol . I hope that this step can be initiated in Bali .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , there is a serious climate problem .
No one is denying that .
The political issue , however , is how we approach the effort to solve the problem .
I must say that we have had great difficulties with the present report as regards the manner in which the problem is being addressed .
Problems are not solved by describing doomsday scenarios and speaking of human-rights violations or by adopting a disheartening tone instead of proposing solutions .
The aim must be to search realistically and objectively for solutions , weighing up diverse arguments .
In this respect I find it regrettable that we have not been prepared to countenance divergent assessments regarding the causes of climate trends and changes .
I am all for the inclusion of ambitious goals , but it is also essential to ensure that they are achievable , otherwise our climate policy will be ineffectual .
It is also wrong to establish taboos and say that the subject of coal and the development of clean-coal technology or the subject of nuclear power are off limits and that the only answer is renewable energy .
Such an approach completely fails to address the problem .
What is needed is a comprehensive debate in which all aspects are examined in detail and in which we are all open to a variety of instruments and to information from a wide range of sources .
I believe we should also consider , as part of that debate , what impact we can achieve with what resources .
How do we maximise the impact ?
We should also reflect on costs .
I believe we should not only focus on the way in which national political decisions are taken but also consider , as one or two colleagues have said to me , how the development of technology can be spurred on and supported .
I do not see any sense in holding today 's debate and then , two or three hours or two or three days later , discussing Lisbon strategies and the like in the same chamber .
These two debates must be rolled into one if we want to fight climate change and mitigate its effects .
In my view there has been only a limited opportunity here to voice the critical comments that we aired in our deliberations in committee .
I hope that the next time , when we deal with the full report from the Committee on Climate Change , we shall have a chance to put forward a rather wider spectrum of arguments .
( DE ) Madam President , I should like to add my voice to the numerous compliments that have been paid to the rapporteur for this good and objectively presented report , which also received the support of a good majority of the Committee on Climate Change .
It goes without saying that we expect results and a clear mandate for Bali .
This must include shared but differentiated responsibilities for the industrialised nations , the states with emerging economies and the developing countries .
This resolution also indicates clearly that we expect results by 2009 .
In the legal instruments the European Parliament adopts - and speakers have already referred today to the inclusion of aviation in emissions trading as well as to CO2 emissions from motor vehicles - we must send very clear political messages to the rest of the world , to the other continents .
That is an essential condition if we are to bring all countries on board .
- ( EL ) Commissioner , allow me first of all to congratulate you on your efforts in this important international issue of climate change .
Mr President , the fight against climate change should inspire the creation of a new development model .
This model will redefine the existing policies in the direction of environmental protection , linking economic activity with respect for natural resources and social welfare .
The EU should play a leading role and ensure that the negotiations do not end in a broadening of the flexible mechanisms of the Kyoto Protocol .
The aim in Bali should be an agreement with an environmental perspective .
The agreement should also make use of the opportunities for technological innovation , economic development and job creation .
For example , transition to a low-carbon world economy , by linking carbon markets to emissions trading systems , would be a move in the right direction .
The Bali Conference should be an opportunity to formulate a comprehensive proposal for the post-2012 period with binding , long-term targets .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this is a debate of unquestioned importance that we have had regularly here in the European Parliament .
The issue of climate change and the European Union 's preparations for the Bali Conference have been a recurring theme during these monthly sessions that I have attended .
That clearly highlights the importance Parliament rightly attaches to it , and only this morning climate change was on the agenda once more in connection with our debate on globalisation .
In my opening speech I referred to the six fundamental objectives the European Union is taking to the Bali Conference .
These are clear and defined objectives which I assume are well understood and fully endorsed , and naturally our aim will be to achieve them all .
I also stated very clearly , however , that this is a difficult , complex and politically delicate process , but we will obviously do our utmost to reach a conclusion .
Some fellow Members have suggested that the EU may not have been the leader it has often claimed to be in this process .
I cannot share that opinion , because if there is a bloc , organisation or entity that has shown practical signs of having ambitious targets , of seeking to go further and of showing a real concern for a problem that affects our citizens , then that entity is the European Union .
We have established our own emission reduction goals that cannot be and have not been equalled anywhere in the world , and we have also made significant efforts to save energy , to invest in renewable energies , etc .
We must therefore be proud of our efforts and of our work and must not slacken them .
Finally , I would also like to say that I have taken note of the recommendations and suggestions made in Mrs Hassi 's resolution .
Some of those suggestions were referred to here by Mrs Ferreira , and the Council will certainly bear the recommendations in mind .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , first of all I would like to thank the speakers in today 's debate for their positive contributions .
There is an emerging consensus that global efforts are needed to win the battle against climate change and that Bali must set out the process and content of the post-2012 climate agreement .
The European Union will intensify its bilateral contacts with key partners to gain support for this line .
However , we also need to look beyond Bali .
Let us not forget that Bali is just the start of a negotiating process .
Making sure that we get on the right track in Bali is , of course , fundamental .
But we will need to step up our efforts to forge common views and develop common solutions with all our partners over the coming months and years .
The EU-China and the EU-India summit , as well as the EU-Asia summit , all this November , are the next steps to generate even more convergence and political momentum for the post-2012 international climate agreement .
As regards the United States and Canada it will be vital to continue but also to go beyond contacts with the Federal Government .
The international carbon market partnership ( ICAP ) with US states and Canadian provinces , which I signed on behalf of the European Union in Lisbon on 29 October , brings together partners who are actively pursuing the implementation of carbon markets through mandatory cap and trade systems .
I look forward to continuing these discussions with Members of the European Parliament in the run-up to Bali , and thank you very much for your support .
I have to underline that without the continuous support of the European Parliament we would not have had an energy and climate-change package earlier this year and without your support we do not have any hope of achieving a better result in Bali .
So please come in Bali with high ambitions and try to help us as you know how to do .
I am now closing the debate , and I have received a motion for a resolution , in accordance with Rule 108 ( 5 ) , on behalf of the Temporary Committee on Climate Change .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow - Thursday .
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is questions to the Council ( B6-0382 / 2007 ) .
The following questions were presented .
Subject : ' Revolving door ' immigration policy
Some political figures and specialists have raised the possibility of achieving an agreement between the Member States which would combine the monitoring of the Union 's external borders with a new ' revolving door ' immigration policy to allow legally established immigrants in the Union to return to their countries of origin without fear of encountering a closed door when returning to the EU .
Does the Council consider this approach feasible , and would it be possible to set up this policy using straightforward intergovernmental cooperation , or would it be necessary to establish new institutional mechanisms to achieve this end ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) As the honourable Member will know , in May 2007 the Commission presented to the European Parliament , to the Council and to the Committee of the Regions a communication on circular migration and mobility partnerships between the European Union and third countries .
In its communication the Commission considers circular migration to be a useful means to be developed at Community level to ensure more effective management of migration flows .
In the June 2007 conclusions on extending and enhancing the global approach to migration , the Council in turn stressed that legal migration opportunities , including well-managed circular migration , could potentially benefit all partners involved .
The Council believes that all well-managed circular migration opportunities should therefore be explored in close cooperation with all the relevant parties , with a view to the adoption of Council Conclusions not later than the end of 2007 .
The need to examine these circular migration opportunities , based on the Communication from the Commission of 16 May 2007 , was also reiterated in the conclusions of the June 2007 European Council .
The Council is currently examining the issue of the adoption of specific instruments and measures to facilitate circular migration , and the issue of finding out how such measures may be implemented .
The Commission has not as yet proposed any specific measures .
( ES ) Mr President , I believe the Portuguese Presidency is devoting a fair amount of attention to this matter , I believe the reply was accurate .
I am aware that the Portuguese Presidency is coming to an end because this half-year is fairly short , but I do not know whether you think it will be possible for a specific proposal to be formulated before 31 December , or whether you will encourage the Commission to submit more specific proposals , especially with regard to the institutional aspects , whether the mechanisms we have today are sufficient or whether it would be appropriate to establish an institution of some kind to facilitate circular migration of this nature .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Mr President , I would like to thank the honourable Member for his kind words .
The presidencies are indeed always a little shorter in the second half-year , whether fortunately or unfortunately I am not sure , because of the summer holidays .
We would in fact like to make further significant progress on this matter by the end of the year , but we are also obviously dependent to some extent on the initiatives the Commission wishes to present to allow us to do so .
That would be our intention and our desire .
At this time I cannot guarantee that , however , but if possible and if we have the opportunity , we will certainly take it .
( ES ) Mr President , I share the view of the Presidency of the Council on the revolving door policy for immigration and the new ideas on blue cards to attract immigrants of high calibre .
I would , however , like to ask the Presidency of the Council if it is convinced that we will be able to contain the huge inflow of immigrants to the European Union we have each year , in view of the fact that there are countries in the world whose level of development is so poor and so low .
( PT ) The question I would ask on circular immigration is whether there should not be a special mechanism to provide for such immigration , particularly in terms of providing training in the countries affected .
I am thinking of doctors and nurses from Malawi who are in the UK , for example .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) In May 2007 the European Parliament and the Council approved three decisions : the decision creating the European Refugee Fund 2008-2013 , the decision creating the External Borders Fund 2007-2013 , and the decision creating the European Return Fund 2008-2013 .
In June 2007 the Council also approved the decision creating the European Fund for the integration of third country nationals 2007-2013 .
These four decisions are an integral part of the general programme ' Solidarity and Management of Migration Flows ' .
In line with the objectives laid down by the European Council , the objective of this programme is the fair sharing of responsibilities among Member States with regard to the financial burden arising from the introduction of the integrated management of the EU 's external borders and the implementation of common asylum and immigration policies .
The European Refugee Fund complies with the obligations set down in Article 63 ( 2 ) ( b ) of the EC Treaty on the adoption of measures promoting a balance of effort between Member States in receiving and bearing the consequences of receiving refugees and displaced persons .
The Council also seeks to promote solidarity by other means .
The Council Conclusions of 18 September 2007 on reinforcing the EU 's southern maritime borders , for example , encouraged Member States to provide support on a bilateral basis to Member States facing particular pressure , stating that such support can be provided at the level of return operations , reception conditions , case working expertise or voluntarily undertaking to take responsibility for asylum seekers , refugees , beneficiaries of subsidiary protection or unaccompanied minors .
That was a comprehensive statement of the theoretical position on burden-sharing .
We know what the instruments are , but I have to ask you candidly , when it comes to Malta , Lampedusa and the Canaries , what is the implementation ?
Do you feel that , over the last six months , Council members , including those in Western Europe , have taken seriously their burden-sharing commitment regarding these places , which are in an emergency situation ?
Some of our colleagues here know it and see it every day .
Nobody is identifying Portugal as being in any way apathetic on this issue , but what about the Council actively carrying out burden-sharing ?
Is it being implemented ?
Please give us your candid response .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) I am very pleased to answer the honourable Member , and obviously I am speaking on behalf of the Portuguese Presidency in accordance with its thinking on this issue .
The honourable Member knows that migration and migration flows , especially illegal migration flows , particularly from regions to the south of Europe , represent a new problem that we did not have to face just a few years ago .
We must obviously , therefore , react to this new and unfamiliar phenomenon and must take appropriate measures .
As is always the case , however , those measures , that reaction and the instruments referred to are taking shape gradually , just as our awareness of the importance and gravity of this problem is taking shape gradually .
I have to say in this regard that the keyword in this issue for the Portuguese Presidency and for Portugal as a Member State is solidarity .
Just as we all understand that when other issues affect one or two Member States they must be seen as a problem for everyone , so too in connection with illegal migration the appropriate word is also solidarity , since we are aware that these phenomena often affect individual States in particular .
It is true that quite often all we do is talk , and it is true that we must and should do more than just talk .
However , the current awareness that the issue concerned is a global problem that affects everyone and that is everyone 's responsibility is a first step .
Naturally we are confident that gradually and realistically , but also with the necessary urgency , we can continue to refer to ' solidarity ' while turning it into concrete actions and measures .
That is the Presidency 's role , and that is what Portugal must do as a Member State .
You will also understand that it is not up to a single Member State or a single Presidency to influence all events and all measures , as might perhaps be desired .
But I can assure you that there is a heightened and increasingly strong awareness that we must share that responsibility and give effect to that solidarity .

( MT ) With all due respect , President-in-Office , I am not convinced by your reply , as while the Council of Ministers are thinking about it , there are people drowning in the Mediterranean and there are Mediterranean countries that cannot cope with the emergency ; that is why I am not convinced .
I am going to ask you something specific : Malta made a proposal in the Council on the division of the burden , on burden sharing . It asked that any immigrants saved from the sea outside EU waters - in Libya 's waters , for example - should be divided among all the EU countries .
What was the Council 's reply , I would like to know .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Mr President , I do not know if this is possible or within the regulations , but when the question is introduced I would like to know exactly which of the honourable Members is the author , because obviously my answer will be addressed firstly to them .
As I am sure you know , the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on common standards and procedures in Member States for returning illegally staying third-country nationals lays down specific rules for the treatment of such nationals .
Article 13 of the proposal for a directive provides for safeguards as to the conditions of stay pending the return of all persons covered by the directive .
Article 15 , which establishes the conditions of temporary custody , defines the treatment to be afforded to third-country nationals pending their return .
Article 15 ( 3 ) states that particular attention must be paid to the situation of vulnerable persons , and specific provision is made for minors .
As you also know , the European Parliament and the Council are currently examining this proposal for a directive .

- ( EL ) Thank you , Mr President ; allow me to repeat Mr Moraes 's comments : you are theoretically answering our questions very well and in detail .
However , what is the responsibility of the Member States when we do not yet have your analyses ?
Are there any international treaties and are they being applied equally to all Member States , or do some Member States , for special reasons , provide more or less ?
What is the responsibility of the accession countries that serve as transit routes for illegal immigrants , mainly women and children ?
During yesterday 's sitting I mentioned to the Commissioner that even a 14-year-old illegal transporter of clandestine immigrants had been arrested .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Mr President , honourable Member , in the four years that have elapsed since the European Security Strategy was adopted in December 2003 , the European Union 's foreign and security policy has developed dynamically .
We have reacted successfully to the threats identified in the European strategy , following the main thread that informed our approach .
We have had to be more active , more coherent and also more competent .
The new threats of terrorism , the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction , regional conflicts , degeneration of the state and organised crime have been met by many concrete actions that reflect the range of instruments currently available to the European Union .
These include diplomatic action , civilian and military missions and trade and development activities .
We have endorsed effective multilateralism , supporting and increasing our cooperation with the United Nations in crisis management , the war against terrorism and non-proliferation .
Our operations in relation to European security and defence policy are our most visible contribution to global peace and security and demonstrate our willingness to take on global responsibilities .
Since 2003 we have initiated 16 crisis management operations , four military and 12 civilian , in various parts of the world .
These European security and defence policy operations cover three continents and range from purely military operations , including reform of the security sector and institutional development , to police missions to ensure the rule of law .
From Aceh to Ramallah , from Kinshasa to Sarajevo , the EU is putting the main catalysts for peace and stability into place .
The pressures on the Union are increasing , however .
We have just decided in principle to lead a military mission to Chad and the Central African Republic to help to draw a close to the regional consequences of the Darfur crisis .
We are also prepared to lead a police mission to ensure the rule of law in Kosovo .
From the Western Balkans and from Eastern Europe to the Mediterranean , we have worked actively for peace and stability in our neighbourhood using all the means at our disposal .
I believe that the work done by the High Representative Javier Solana , EU enlargement policy , the Barcelona process , the European Neighbourhood Policy just debated here , the EU 's special representatives in Bosnia-Herzegovina , the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , Moldova and the Southern Caucasus and the peace process in the Middle East , as well as the EU 's role as a member of the Quartet for the Middle East and the Troika for Kosovo , plus the other ESDP missions I have referred to here reflect our determination to create security in our neighbourhood .
- ( EL ) Thank you for your answer , Mr President .
I really feel that the European security strategy is proving more successful in missions outside the European continent than in meeting challenges arising within the EU .
I believe that situations such as that in Kosovo , the management of an emerging crisis , the policy of conditionality in FYROM , a candidate country whose political system is seriously ailing , and the Russophobia , whether justifiable or not , that preoccupies our colleagues from the countries of the former Eastern Europe - all these challenge us to form a more coherent and effective European security strategy .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) We have just had a discussion here in this plenary session on the European Neighbourhood Policy intended precisely for our partners on this continent .
I presume that a general conclusion was that , despite the difficulties that might exist and the improvements that could be introduced , this European Neighbourhood Policy that forms part of our strategy has worked well and has ensured that many of our partners and neighbours can enjoy stability , economic progress and economic and social development .
For well-known historical reasons , many of our partners are naturally now experiencing what could be called stages of transition , democratic consolidation and consolidation of the rule of law , and as is so often the case , these processes are not exempt from difficulties , upheavals or problems .
And this is perhaps true of some of those countries .
We recently spoke about Georgia , when I said here that I chaired the Association Council with Georgia some three weeks ago and had the opportunity to inform our Georgian colleagues that in the area of the economy , for example , we were pleased to note that significant progress had been made in terms of economic development , despite the problems that country has with Russia .
We must therefore be prepared for the significant progress that we expect and want , but for well-known reasons we must also sometimes expect backward steps that we sincerely hope will only be temporary , and we hope that the States and countries will rapidly return to progress and towards reinforcing the rule of law .
I must therefore tell the honourable Member in all sincerity that , although we European Union citizens sometimes tend to be very modest with regard to the capacity of our achievements and to the achievements themselves , we must be a little more friendly towards ourselves , as it were .
I think that we have achieved something despite the difficulties .
Given what the Treaties of the Union say and the content of the Reform Treaty on the issue of security and defence , and given what the President of the French Republic said here yesterday and the fact that France will be taking on the Presidency next year , could the Council tell the House if it envisages that there will be a common defence policy within the European Union in the lifetime of this Parliament , or in the next Parliament , and when it thinks that might come about ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Mr President , honourable Member , the December 2005 European Council decision to grant candidate country status to the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia was recognition of that country 's reform achievements .

The European Council stated that further steps towards EU membership would have to be considered firstly in the light of the debate on the enlargement strategy , as provided for by the conclusions of the 12 December 2005 Council , which concluded with the ' renewed consensus ' on enlargement that was achieved at the 14-15 December 2006 European Council ; secondly , of compliance by the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia with the Copenhagen criteria ; thirdly , of the requirements of the Stabilisation and Association Process and the effective implementation of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement ; and finally , of the need for further significant progress to respond to the other issues and criteria for membership included in the Commission 's Opinion and implementation of the priorities in the European Partnership .
In its interim reports the Commission has examined developments in detail .
Following the assessment of the situation in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , as set out in the Commission report of 2006 , in its session of 11-12 December 2006 the Council regretted that the pace of reforms observed had slowed down in 2006 .
On 14-15 December 2006 the European Council reiterated that each country 's progress towards the Union would continue to depend on its efforts to comply with the Copenhagen criteria and the conditionality of the Stabilisation and Association Process .
The Council called for the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia to accelerate the pace of reforms in key areas and to implement the priorities identified in the European Partnership in order to move ahead in the accession process .
The fourth meeting of the Stabilisation and Association Council between the European Union and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia took place on 24 July last .
Particularly important among the messages set out in the Union 's common position for the Stabilisation and Association Council was its insistence that stability and the regular functioning of democratic institutions were fundamental aspects of the political criteria essential for ensuring progress towards European integration .
Institutions such as the Government , Parliament and the President must function and cooperate effectively .
They must also play their differentiated roles and interact as laid down in the Constitution .
A constructive political climate must be established and maintained so that the country can concentrate on the reforms necessary to make progress towards the Union .
Further efforts must also be made to establish confidence between the ethnic communities at all levels .
The Union recalled that sustained implementation of the Ohrid Framework Agreement was a key element of the political criteria .
Every effort must be made to achieve the broadest possible political agreement on the associated reforms , in full compliance with the letter and spirit of the agreement .
The meeting also recalled the importance of making progress in the areas of justice and internal affairs , particularly in combating organised crime and corruption .
At the same time the Council also recalled that regional cooperation and good neighbourly relations were an essential part of the process of EU integration .
Finally , I wish to state that the Council is examining very carefully the Commission report published on 6 November , which will be the subject of conclusions at the General Affairs and External Relations Council in December next .
( DE ) Thank you , Mr President-in-Office , for your very comprehensive reply .
I have only two brief supplementary questions .
Firstly , do you think it conceivable that a date for the opening of accession negotiations will be set in the course of next year ?
Macedonia 's applicant status dates from more than two years ago , and it is surely high time to think about a date .
My second supplementary question is this : what approach is being adopted ?
Are attempts being made to link Macedonia 's accession with that of other countries , such as Serbia , or is this country really being dealt with separately from any others ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Mr President , honourable Member , the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora , or CITES , provides the international legal framework for the conservation of tigers and other endangered species .
The EU and its Member States are strong supporters of CITES , both politically and financially .
In recent years the EU has laid particular stress on the need for greater concentration of effort in the practical application of CITES controls in order to reduce illegal slaughter and trade and to guarantee sustainable trade of species .
To underscore this need , the Commission published Recommendation No 207 / 425 / EC of 13 July 2007 , identifying a set of actions for the enforcement of Council Regulation ( EC ) No 338 / 97 on the protection of species of wild fauna and flora by regulating trade therein .
Meanwhile , the species ' pantera tigris ' is listed in Annex A of Commission Regulation ( EC ) No 1332 / 2005 of 9 August 2005 , and is also listed in Annex I of CITES , which means that specimens of that species can only be moved in exceptional circumstances , subject to rigorous criteria .
If those criteria are to be met and any decision to authorise trade is to be possible , assurances must be forthcoming that the activity is not detrimental to the state of conservation of the species .
We would also draw your attention to the need for international cooperation and in particular for capacity building to facilitate the implementation of policies for the conservation and sustainable use of wild flora and fauna in States where such species are found .
The EU thus supported the decisions relating to Asian big cats , approved at the 14th meeting of the parties to CITES at the beginning of this year , with the aim of intensifying application and conservation efforts .
We are , furthermore , also prepared to provide assistance to India and to the other States of the distribution area in implementing these decisions .
We recognise that the effective implementation of conservation measures requires the participation of the local population .
We have stressed the need , through CITES , to ensure the support and cooperation of local and rural communities in managing wild fauna and flora resources , and consequently in combating illegal trade in them .
I thank the Presidency very much for that , and I will read the documents mentioned .
However , the problem is that the situation regarding tigers is a crisis .
There are probably only 3000 left in the wild .
They could be extinct in the wild by 2020 .
The main problem is poaching , which is driven by the lucrative illegal trade in tiger skins and parts , said to stretch to Eastern Europe .
The Indian forestry authorities say they are unable to cope with poaching gangs , due to chronic underfunding .
Can the EU help with that ?
Have we got specific projects ?
A Chinese official said recently that it is very hard to resist pressures to open the tiger trade .
Surely the key is education on the one hand , but also giving local people an economic stake in maintaining higher levels .
What is the EU actually doing in terms of specific projects ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) The honourable Member will note that I have referred extensively , at length and in detail to the international legal and judicial framework in which the European Union exists and operates .
I have also naturally expressed the Council 's willingness , readiness and commitment to do its utmost within that international framework to ensure that the measures it provides for are effectively applied .
I have also said very transparently that we also recognise that we must work together with local populations that have direct contact with those endangered species .
The battle against poaching and similar illegal activities is not an easy one , as people with experience of these situations know .
They are aware that it is a difficult yet necessary battle , an assessment with which I agree .
The whole of European public opinion is with you , because what has been seen recently in connection with the illegal trade in endangered species shows that people are much more aware of the need to draw attention to these issues than they used to be .
The pressure of public opinion and the attention paid to it in connection with these situations is therefore now much greater than it was .
You can therefore obviously count on that public awareness , which is also necessary to ensure that we , the EU , and our Member States are able to act more effectively .
As I said , we must recognise that it is a difficult battle .
Mr President-in-Office , you have made it very clear that you and the Council as a whole are committed to the protection and conservation of the tiger .
The Indian Prime Minister equally has , in a number of statements , made his passionate commitment to defending the tiger clear .
As we are engaged in a bilateral negotiation with India to create a new bilateral treaty between the EU and India , do you think this is a subject we could include in that treaty and that we could go beyond our current commitments under CITES to help with education , training , conservation - the sort of measures that Baroness Ludford was talking about ?
( DE ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , my question has to do with this issue but relates to a slightly different aspect .
I believe - and you rightly referred to this - that questions such as the one under discussion arouse strong feelings among the general public .
On the other hand - and you also referred to the legal position - are we in the European Union really justified in arrogating legislative or contractual powers to ourselves on every issue that deeply concerns anyone in the EU ?
Or should we not exercise a little restraint in these matters ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Very well , I must confess , Mr President , that I did not fully understand the second question , perhaps because of delays in the interpreting .
As regards the question of the tiger and dialogue with India , I must say in all sincerity and frankness that it is a specific question , on which I have not reflected , but on which we will reflect in the future , and I therefore take note of the honourable Member 's suggestion .
In our bilateral dialogue with India - an EU-India Summit is to be held - we may also discuss this issue of protected species and how we can better protect endangered species .
I must confess that because of the interpreting , I believe , I could not understand your second question .
( DE ) Thank you very much , and my apologies for having spoken so quickly .
I was consciously trying to avoid overrunning .
I mean it is important that we deal with such concerns when they matter to the people of Europe .
On the other hand , we should also be aware of the legal limits of the Union and take care to respect these limits as far as we can .
The approach you have proposed seems interesting , but we should not leave ourselves open to the accusation that the Union is claiming competence for all global matters .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Mr President , honourable Member , in the conclusions adopted in May 2006 , the Council welcomed the Commission 's White Paper on financial services policy from 2005 to 2010 .
The Council particularly welcomed , and I quote : ' the ideas put forward with respect to the growing importance of the external dimension in financial services - namely to deepen and widen regulatory dialogues with third countries and work towards the further opening of global financial services markets ' .
On the Portuguese Presidency 's initiative , on 9 October last the ECOFIN Council examined the state of play regarding macroeconomic , financial and regulatory dialogues with the Union 's principal partners - the United States , Japan , Russia , India and China .
The importance of these strategic dialogues was stressed during the discussion .
Such dialogues make it possible to reinforce convergence , cooperation and mutual understanding between global partners , thereby helping to facilitate access to the respective markets and to promote macroeconomic and financial stability , particularly in financial services .
The dialogues have led to significant progress concerning convergence and equivalence of accounting standards .
The Council supports the work carried out by the Commission , and considers that financial market globalisation requires increasing effort to achieve convergence and cooperation at international level , in line with the Commission and the Council 's strategic vision on the need to reinforce the Lisbon Strategy 's external dimension through the promotion of and an international approach to regulatory cooperation and the convergence and equivalence of standards .
Stress was also laid on how important it is for the European Union to ensure a coherent approach in this area , and it was considered that information on the development of such dialogues should continue to be forwarded to the Council on a regular basis .
I would like to thank the Council Presidency for its reply .
Is this Council Presidency aware that there is a school of thought that says that the developing world could greatly benefit from having a financial services sector ?
Given Portugal 's experience in Africa in particular , could I ask the Council President , if he does not have the response there in his brief , if he would cause this issue to be examined and pursued , because it may well be a way of assisting not just the developing world but in having global interchanges , which would be of great benefit to this part of the world as well .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) The honourable Member is right , I do not have a written answer in my brief to give you , but I will give you my opinion .
In this respect we had a very interesting discussion this morning on globalisation , when we also discussed financial services and questions related to the turbulence on some financial markets .
One issue I consider to be fundamental in relation to Africa and which is closely linked to the Europe-Africa Summit concerns Africa 's position in globalisation : should Africa be a full partner , as we believe it should , in the problems and challenges raised by globalisation , should Africa be an active partner and should it have effective instruments at its disposal so that it really can be a full partner in globalisation , or do we on the other hand want an Africa which is condemned to war , insecurity , underdevelopment and poverty ?

In this context , therefore , the financial or other instruments , initiatives or mechanisms that could actually put Africa with all of us , with the European Union and with other major emerging blocs , on the agenda of the talks , debate and theme of globalisation can only be welcomed .
Thank you , President and President-in-Office for being on overtime as we all are ; we appreciate that .
What do you think are the obstacles to greater progress in this area , and do you think that , as things stand , enough is being done ?
Because what we are talking about is consumer confidence in the financial services sector , both within Europe and outside .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) This issue , the conduct of these dialogues and so on in this specific area , which is part of the question I was asked , has been directed by and is the responsibility of the Commission .
I also have to confess that I am not a financial specialist and therefore do not have the detailed knowledge required to give you a technical answer .
You are asking for a technical answer and I cannot give you one .
I can give you a political answer that will outline a new reality , a new problem and a new challenge , but also a new opportunity .
This problem should be and has now been examined and has been developed to an unprecedented extent .
We in the European Union too must naturally seek appropriate answers when problems arise , and the necessary instruments must also be at our disposal when it is a case of developing and making progress .
I cannot tell you specifically what obstacles may have arisen or may arise , though I can give you an idea , as I have , of what the EU 's policy and the Council 's responsibilities in this field have been .
Finally , I can say that it gives me great pleasure to be able to extend my stay here with you , particularly since this mandate is coming to an end .
I only have one more opportunity to be with you , so I must make the most of this experience .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will receive written answers ( see Annex ) .
Question time is closed .
( The sitting was suspended at 19.45 and resumed at 21.05 )

Membership of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Recovery plan for bluefin tuna in the Eastern Atlantic and the Mediterranean ( debate )
The next item is the report by Iles Braghetto , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council regulation establishing a multi-annual recovery plan for bluefin tuna in the Eastern Atlantic and Mediterranean - C6-0110 / 2007 - .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , firstly I would like to express my thanks to the rapporteur , Mr Braghetto , and to the Committee on Fisheries for this report , which raises the issue of the recovery plan for bluefin tuna .
The Eastern Atlantic and Mediterranean bluefin tuna is a key stock for the Community .
As confirmed by scientific advice , this bluefin tuna stock is now at high risk of collapse .
All the states involved in this fishery have agreed to the need for urgent measures to ensure the sustainability of the bluefin tuna stock and of the fishery .
I am convinced that the recovery plan adopted by the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas in 2006 represents a realistic chance for the gradual recovery of bluefin tuna if it is fully respected .
Therefore , decisive and effective action is immediately necessary at Community level .
The speed of the implementation of the ICCAT recovery plan is an absolute must , both for conservation reasons and to safeguard the common fisheries policy 's credibility and the credibility of the EU fishermen themselves .
The objective is to have the proposal agreed at the November Council .
During discussions held in the context of the Council preparations , many changes were introduced to the original proposal , some of which go in the direction of your suggested amendments .
I am sure that we are in agreement on the objectives of urgently taking measures to eliminate overfishing and to ensure strict compliance with ICCAT measures , in order to bring the bluefin tuna stock to sustainable levels .
This will , at the same time , improve the profitability of the fishing industry in the long term .
Apart from the benefits to industry , there is also an international political commitment that we are obliged to fulfil .
Turning now to the report , I appreciate and share the Fisheries Committee 's view that the Community needs to address the excess fishing effort of its fleet .
The Commission also considers that the annual fishing plan is an effective instrument to avoid overfishing because of the overcapacity of the Community fleet .
In this context , the Commission can accept Amendments 1 , 2 , 7 and 8 concerning the establishment of annual fishing plans to ensure a balance between the fishing effort of the Community fleet and the quotas .
A relevant provision on this issue has been introduced in the Presidency compromise .
In addition , the Commission asks the Member States concerned to include in their operational plans a reduction of their fishing capacity , either temporary cessation or scrapping , to ensure that their quotas for 2008 and the following years are fully respected .
I recognise that we are asking the industry to make considerable sacrifices , but these are necessary to ensure the long-term sustainability of the fisheries , fleets and coastal communities concerned .
The choice is between short-term sacrifice and the collapse of the stock .
Moreover , I totally agree with you that , in order to alleviate the socio-economic impact that will be caused by the reduction in fishing activity , it is necessary to ensure financial compensation for the industry .
A provision on the related financing measure in line with Amendment 5 has also been introduced in the Presidency compromise .
I am aware that there are other concerns .
I share many of those concerns and know that they too will need to be addressed .
With respect to Amendment 3 , let me state first of all that I am well aware that the number of cages for tuna fattening has increased greatly since 1990 and that their capacity exceeds the total sum of the TAC available .
ICCAT has now adopted a strict regulation in order to ensure the sustainable development of farming activities for bluefin tuna .
The next step will be to regulate the number of farms .
The Commission fully supports the adoption of the recommendation made by the ICCAT Working Group on Capacity in July 2007 .
This recommendation proposes the implementation of a freeze on boat fishing capacity and farming capacity for bluefin tuna .
We need to wait for the final results of the ICCAT discussion being held in Antalya this week .
That is the reason why the Commission cannot accept , at this stage , the amendment concerning the limitation of farming capacity .
On the derogations relating to fishing areas and minimum size , I would like to remind you of the context within which such derogations were accepted by ICCAT .
All contracting parties have agreed these derogations as part of the package on the recovery plan .
These derogations were granted for artisanal fleets and for some seasonal fleets because their impact on catches is insignificant .
In addition , these derogations include a series of strict conditions , such as a limited number of vessels , limited catches and designated ports .
Having said that , the recovery plan may be revised in 2008 on the basis of new scientific advice or weaknesses detected in its implementation .
At this stage , the Community has a responsibility to ensure that the recovery plan is incorporated in Community legislation to ensure its full implementation .
In this context , I cannot accept Parliament 's amendments on the deletion of the derogations , that is Amendments 4 and 6 , or Amendments 12 and 13 on the renaming of the plan , the modification of the EC quotas and the introduction of a new payback system .
These amendments are not in line with the recovery plan adopted by ICCAT and the ICCAT rules on payback .
Similarly , I cannot accept Amendment 10 regarding traps , since the proposal does not include measures to address this issue .
For the first time , the recovery plan regulates trap activity and this will , in future , enable an evaluation of the impact of this fishing activity on the stock .
Regarding Amendments 9 and 11 relating to the harmonisation of sanctions and the possible closure of a national fishery of a Member State where it fails to respect its reporting requirements , let me say that , whereas we fully understand and share the spirit behind this proposal , we cannot accept the amendment in this context , as the proposal does not include measures that address the issue .
The issue is one of general policy and the Commission will examine it in the forthcoming 2008 reform of the control framework of the common fisheries policy .
We consider that documentation and transmission of information to the Commission at set times is a crucial element for the success of the bluefin tuna recovery plan , and it is also a prerequisite if we are to monitor the uptake of the EU quota in real time .
The Commission has therefore opened infringement procedures against all seven Member States which take part in the bluefin tuna fishery for shortcomings in data transmission .
In conclusion , let me state that we are deeply concerned about the overshoot of the quota by some Member States , which undermines the credibility of the Community at international level and jeopardises the success of the bluefin tuna recovery plan .
At the meeting of the Compliance Committee , which took place in Antalya on 8 and 9 November , the contracting parties - notably the United States and Canada - criticised the lack of compliance with ICCAT rules .
As expected , the European Community was severely criticised for overshooting the TAC in 2007 .
At the same time , the contracting parties acknowledged the difficulties for the European Community fleet in adapting to the reality of the recovery plan , which entered into force in 2007 , and welcomed the European Community proposal on a specific payback regime .
The Compliance Committee has adopted a specific recommendation concerning a payback system for the overshoot of the EC quota in 2007 , which comes to 4 440 tonnes , based on an EC proposal .
In accordance with this recommendation , the overharvesting of the European Community 's quota in 2007 will result in a yearly deduction of 1 480 tonnes from its annual quota for the period 2009-2011 .
In addition , the Compliance Committee agreed that the figure for the European Community was provisional and may be subject to review and eventual adjustment as a result of ongoing investigations .
This recommendation will be adopted by ICCAT during its plenary session on 18 November .
Nevertheless , we have to reassure the ICCAT parties that the European Community will do its utmost to ensure that quotas allocated to the vessels of our Member States are scrupulously monitored by those Member States and by the European Commission , in order to ensure respect for the quota set for 2008 and the forthcoming years .
Following the adoption of this regulation , the Commission is resolved to work closely with the Member States to ensure and closely monitor the full implementation of the bluefin tuna recovery plan .
The Community Fisheries Control Agency will also play an active role .
The agency has started the preparatory work for the coordination of control and inspection activities by Member States , with a view to having everything in place for the 2008 bluefin tuna season .
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the purpose of the European Commission 's recovery plan for bluefin tuna , set in motion by ICCAT , is to respond to scientists ' concerns regarding the critical condition of the stock brought about by overfishing .
The plan has been criticised in a variety of ways , illustrating the fact that scientific experts and fishermen hold differing views regarding the need for stocks to be protected .
It does , however , offer an appropriate response to those needs that have been highlighted , providing , as it does , for a steady reduction in the catch quota of up to 20 % between 2006 and 2010 , an increase in minimum size to 30 kg , the limitation of fishing periods and the stepping up of control measures to combat illegal fishing .
In detail , some elements of the plan were strengthened during the Committee 's work , with proposals to :
make provision and ask for fisheries plans to be submitted by Member States under the fisheries agreements , even in the case of fish stocks which are in good biological shape , since one of the main problems is a fleet capacity which exceeds the quotas available ;
establish a balance in each Member State between its quotas and the capacity of its fattening farms ;
remove the derogations relating to fishing areas and minimum sizes : these conflict with the views held by all scientific experts and with the opinion of the majority of the Member States .
Moreover , these derogations are not justified from the biological point of view , since the Mediterranean and the Atlantic are populated by a single stock , and are severely distorting competition , leading to more intensive fishing in the areas concerned , including by vessels which do not traditionally operate there , and reducing the effectiveness of checks ;
urge Member States to respect their requirements to report data and information to the Commission , closing national fisheries if no catch data are provided by Member States ;
draw up a plan to reactivate traps in the Atlantic and to recover traps which are no longer active in the Mediterranean in order to preserve a sustainable and highly selective method of catching tuna ;
make provision for financial compensation from the European Fisheries Fund to be paid to fishermen during the closed season in order to safeguard and protect the socio-economic balance of fishery enterprises and fishermen ;
harmonise penalties in order to prevent discrepancies in the way in which the Member States implement this regulation .
Lastly , the infringement procedures opened in recent months against some Member States for their failure to respect the 2007 catch quotas are undoubtedly called for and necessary , but the short period for the entry into force of the current provisions during this year should also be borne in mind .
Bearing in mind also that stock management is particularly complex , especially in areas in which there is strong competition with other non-EU fleets , in particular in the Mediterranean , there is a need for improved respect of the principle of reciprocity to ensure that the aims set out by ICCAT are fairly pursued .
Those measures will be effective only if their principles and their provisions are applied by both the Member States and non-EU countries .
In conclusion , Mr President , I should like to offer my particular thanks to all those colleagues who have taken part in this work .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , although I share the view that this recovery plan is not as ambitious as it should be , the truth is that it is the result of a hard-won compromise at the ICCAT and I believe that by approving it we are taking a huge step forward and for the first time sending a very clear message to the persons responsible for the over-fishing of this species .
In any event , as far as the European Union is concerned , the serious status of the bluefin tuna is down to certain Member States which have allowed and even encouraged excessive growth of their Mediterranean fleets and by the Commission which , while fully aware of that abuse and the continuous under-reporting of catches , has not lifted a finger to remedy the situation until now .
This failure to take responsibility is what has led to the closure of the fishery to all Member States because of the scandalous news in August that two countries had fished the European Union 's entire quota .
On that ground I believe it is important for the plenary sitting to endorse Mr Braghetto 's report , which includes my amendment , so that henceforth the Member States will be required to submit a fisheries plan in advance stating , first , the maximum number of vessels and secondly , that the country 's fishing effort is in line with its quota .
The Commission has indicated that it is in favour of incorporating the fisheries plan and we hope that the Council will also lend it its support .
I regret , nonetheless , that the report has not made provision for any exceptions for fleets which have since time immemorial fished the Atlantic taking a negligible amount of the Community quota with much more selective gear .
The people involved in these traditional fisheries are therefore forced to pay for the sins of unrestricted avarice on the part of the purse-seine fleets of the two Member States I referred to above even though they have had no part in it .
This is an injustice which I also hope this Parliament and the Council will rectify .
Finally , all that remains for me to do is to ask and urge the Commission to take all the measures necessary so that when distributing the Community quota for next year due compensation is made to the Member States which have been forced to stop fishing because the quotas to which they were entitled have been used up by others and that the appropriate tonnage is withdrawn from the quotas of those responsible so that it can serve as genuine and effective recompense .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , I take a very positive view of the Commission proposal to transpose the recovery plan for bluefin tuna agreed at ICCAT into the legal order and I agree with the Commissioner that the measures it contains , if applied correctly , will allow a gradual recovery of stocks both in the Atlantic and the Mediterranean .
The plan - and this is a very important factor for me - has taken into account the specific features of traditional fisheries by extending to them terms and conditions which will prevent their activity from being penalised , while at the same time striving to combine conservation of the resource with socio-economic aspects .
On that matter I would like to inform the Commissioner that from the outset my country sought a degree of flexibility over the minimum size to be applied to the traditional fleet and for that reason asked for a given percentage allocated to the traditional fleet to be included in the under-30kg quota of that fleet .
The Commission listened to that request , understood that small traditional fishermen could not be made to pay for a situation brought about by large industrial fleets , and agreed to include that measure , although it reduced it to 2 % in the plan .
However , Commissioner , the place in which it incorporated it , namely point 6 of Annex I , raises doubts as to the geographical scope of application .
Restricting the measure to Atlantic fisheries would mean quite simply ordering the disappearance of the traditional Mediterranean fleet , a fleet which does not even have the capacity to travel to the Atlantic fishing grounds .
At issue here is an historic fleet which has been operating for centuries without causing problems to the stock ; any decline is down to excess capacity in the purse seine fleet of the Mediterranean .
Commissioner , the measure should apply to the fleets of all countries which are involved in the fisheries , not only those which have Atlantic fleets .
Algeria , Tunisia or Turkey also have the right to use some of their quota to protect their traditional fleets against competition from industrial fleets and I do not believe that this exception , minimal as you know it to be , will do anything at all to reduce the effectiveness of the recovery plan .
That is why I am asking the Commission to take account of the doubts raised by the inclusion of the measure under point 6 of Annex I and why I am asking the Commission representatives to make every possible effort during the ICCAT meeting currently under way to clarify that that 2 % of catches may be made by traditional fleets both in the Atlantic and in the Mediterranean .
As regards the report we are debating today , I would like to inform the rapporteur that my Group is again opposing the removal of exceptions both to the minimum size and to off-limits areas , exceptions which , as the Commissioner has said , were agreed at ICCAT .
For the same reason we oppose , and will oppose tomorrow in the vote , the new amendments tabled by the Group of the Greens .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I should like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Braghetto , on his excellent work in the Committee on Fisheries , making it possible for to us to table a balanced text for tomorrow 's vote , which , based to some extent on previous experience , amends the regulation on bluefin tuna recovery in a way which undoubtedly improves it .
The removal of the derogations to the fixed quotas for tuna catches , some of which had originally been maintained , and for catches in the Eastern Atlantic and in the Adriatic , is in my view one of the major successes of this parliamentary procedure .
Those derogations were not adequately justified from the biological point of view , since the Mediterranean and the Atlantic are populated by a single tuna stock , and they could even severely distort competition since they could lead to more intensive fishing in those areas not subject to restrictions .
Checks would also be more difficult and would undoubtedly be less effective .
I agree with the rapporteur that financial compensation needs to be paid to fishermen during the closed season and I also welcome the proposed plan to reactivate traps .
Illegal fishing , considered to be one of the major scourges undermining the protection of bluefin tuna stocks , also needs to be vigorously combated .
Although the proposal for a regulation tackles the problem of checks more incisively than in the past , ongoing discrepancies in the way in which the various Member States apply the legislative provisions should , in my view , be ironed out .
In my view , improved cooperation between states is needed to harmonise national legislation on implementing measures and that is the direction that my amendment takes .
In my view , a further problem also needs to be resolved : managing bluefin tuna stocks in the Mediterranean requires a global strategy agreed with the other non-ICCAT countries which fish in the Mediterranean .
I am thinking , for instance , of the Japanese fleet , as otherwise the goals pursued by the regulation will come to naught .
I therefore hope , by way of conclusion , that the vote will endorse the text agreed by the Committee on Fisheries .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , I too would like to begin by acknowledging the work done by our colleague Mr Braghetto in this report .
However , as I mentioned at the time during the Fisheries Committee discussions , on the basis of the reports being drawn up by a large number of scientists , environmental organisations and even some areas of the sector , I believe the title of the report should be changed .
Instead of referring to a supposed regulation of the recovery plan for bluefin tuna , we should call it the non-recovery plan or , better still , the plan for the annihilation of tuna .
Let 's be clear about this : when the misnamed recovery plan was adopted at ICCAT a year ago in Dubrovnik the Scientific Committee warned even at that stage , and I quote , ' Generally speaking the preliminary results indicate that it is unlikely that the measures adopted , although a step in the right direction , will fully achieve the objective of the plan ' .
It added , ' If implemented perfectly and if future recruitment is approximately at the level of the 1990s and is not affected by the recent level in the reproductive biomass , there is a 50 % probability of recovery in 2023 under the current regulations ' .
In other words , in the event either of less than perfect implementation or of recruitment which falls below recent levels in line with the reduction in the reproductive biomass , or both , the objectives of the recovery plan will be difficult to achieve .
I reiterate that the basis for my speech is scientific reports .
As if that were not enough , the plan , which has already been implemented provisionally in 2007 , has gone so badly in practice that the European Union has exceeded its quota by 26 % , which , in an unprecedented move , has forced legal proceedings to be taken against all the countries which failed to comply with the rules , especially France and Italy .
I am of course concerned to know how another country , Spain , was able to export almost 9 000 tonnes of tuna in 2006 when it only declared having captured 4 700 tonnes , as organisations such as Greenpeace or Adena have noted .
Finally , it would also be interesting to hear what measures the Commission and governments intend to take to control and even reduce the size of the fishing fleet , given that it would be difficult , to say the least , to believe it possible to reduce catches when our vessels are increasing in number and quality , vessels which in the majority of cases are living off European subsidies .
Perhaps the ICCAT meeting being held at the moment in Antalya , Turkey , which my colleagues Marie-Hélène Aubert and Michael Earle are attending , will be able to provide us with some answers .
To my mind , however , the immediate conclusion is both simple and alarming : all the indications are that the situation with regard to the stock is very much worse than the most optimistic forecasts .
Some even say that we have already gone past the point of no return .
In other words , given the circumstances , I find it difficult to believe that the current plan should be called a recovery plan rather than something else .
Mr President , can I , first of all , also add my congratulations to the rapporteur on this report .
To achieve recovery in any recovery plan is always difficult .
This is no different from many of the others establishing a multiannual recovery plan , but this time it is for bluefin tuna .
I , like everyone else , sincerely hope that the programme will be successful .
I have only had one experience and that was with the cod recovery plan in the Irish Sea .
During those years the fishermen in that area did not receive any compensation for not being allowed to fish during that period .
I believe two wrongs never make a right : if you have conservation then I believe you must also be prepared to pay compensation - I do not believe there is any alternative .
It is fine to ask for sacrifice but sacrifice also comes at a price .
I recognise that this report is extremely sensitive for fishermen who come from the Mediterranean and those who fish in the Atlantic .
So , from an economic and social perspective , it is going to be extremely difficult for them .
In such circumstances , this will also be a very painful regulation for the fishermen on the ground in this region .
However , the preservation and the protection of species of bluefin tuna are paramount .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , I also want to congratulate our rapporteur , Mr Braghetto , on the excellent work he has presented , and I would like to begin by saying that the most striking example of the inability of the current common fisheries policy to ensure the sustainability of this activity is the situation we are now facing with bluefin tuna in the Eastern Atlantic and in the Mediterranean in particular .
This was recently recognised in a very interesting study commissioned by the Directorate-General for Fisheries , which Mr Borg took the trouble to make public , a gesture I would like to thank him for now .
The fact is that the tough measures we are now seeing in this area , with the total closure of fisheries before the end of the year , an attempt to decommission a substantial part of the fleet and the prospect of a total paralysis of activity , even if it perhaps does not achieve its objectives , are a direct consequence of a view of the common fisheries policy in which management decisions are dissociated from their application and control , and in which the fishing communities and authorities ' responsibilities have been eroded by an exclusive European competence that has nevertheless not been exercised by the party that advocated it .
Environmentally sustainable but economically less profitable traditional pole-and-line fishing gear had to compete with modern technologies and extremely sophisticated resources that were incomparably more profitable in the short run but environmentally unsustainable , and some discriminatory measures against the latter type of vessel are finally only emerging now .
I would like to endorse and stress my total support for what my colleague Mrs Miguélez said here , to the effect that it is essential to favour traditional fishing methods .
The imminent threat of the commercial extinction of bluefin tuna fishing should make us all reflect on what needs to be done urgently in connection with the common fisheries policy as a whole .
- ( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I agree with most of Mr Braghetto 's positions on restoring tuna stocks .
I think we all want seas with satisfactory fish stocks .
However , let me express two concerns .
Firstly , there are plans to establish a system whereby fishing boats would submit a detailed tuna fishing plan , to ensure greater control .
I believe the situation created by this fishing plan would be feasible only for large tuna-fishing vessels that exclusively catch tuna , not for small craft intended for tuna and other fish .
We all want to control tuna fishing but do not wish to exclude nations with small craft .
Besides , there is a strong fishing tradition here .
Secondly , I refer to Amendment 3 , which links the capacity of the fattening units to the national quota .
The breeding of red tuna in the EU is carried out in countries other than those with large quotas .
My country , for example , is not one of the favoured countries in terms of quotas .
On the other hand , we have comparative advantages in terms of tuna breeding .
Why should we reduce the capacity of our units to the level of our quota ?
To conclude , let me now mention the unacceptable fact that tuna fishing was prohibited in September , because two EU countries were catching quantities that should have sufficed for all Member States together .
These countries must be subject to the appropriate sanctions .
On the other hand , the countries deprived of their fishing rights this year should be the first , next year , to receive the percentage they were deprived of .
Meanwhile , we should find ways of checking fish catches promptly .
( FR ) Mr President , allow me to begin by thanking the rapporteur , Mr Braghetto , for the excellent job he has done .
As the ICCAT negotiations are still ongoing , we do not yet know what fate has in store for our fishermen next year .
What we do know is that something very serious happened this summer and that we shall have to undertake a thorough review of the arrangements for monitoring catches .
The Commission , I am glad to say , has that task in hand , although I fear that some of the measures proposed last month for eliminating illegal fishing will not go down too well with the Council .
I hope that , whatever happens , the Community Fisheries Control Agency will succeed in introducing proper coordination of European efforts to carry out the necessary checks , because the national monitoring systems are not working .
It is all very well for our Spanish , Portuguese and Greek friends to sound off about the behaviour of the French and Italian fleets and the failure of monitoring in those two countries .
Everyone knows the true picture !
We are all aware that every country has concealed the illegal activities of its own fishing fleet for too long .
That is why - like it or not - we need tougher control at European level , and that is why I am convinced we need a European coastguard .
We also need to discuss sanctions for this overfishing .
It is very likely that ICCAT will decide to penalise the Community , and then we in turn would have to penalise those Member States that are at fault .
The French Government has made loud noises about refusing to compromise and has warned that heads could roll .
Personally I hope these sanctions - which would not have been necessary if the monitoring systems had been effective - will be tough but fair and balanced .
I also hope that those engaged in traditional tuna fishing - which has less impact on stocks - will not be punished for the faults of others .
Lastly , since the experts have clearly established that European fleet capacities have been disproportionate to the bluefin tuna stocks , I want to take this opportunity of asking the Commissioner what resources are to be allocated to retraining those fishermen who will have to go out of business .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all I would like to thank the honourable Members of Parliament for the interesting points they have made .
What has emerged from this debate is recognition of the fact that we share a common objective , which is that of effectively addressing the precarious situation of bluefin tuna .
The best way of addressing the poor stock status is to implement the ICCAT recovery plan .
I thus thank Parliament for its proposal regarding national fishing plans , which is an effective tool for addressing compliance on overcapacity .
On the issue of derogations , the Commission cannot modify the contents of the plan adopted by ICCAT .
All the contracting parties have agreed to those derogations .
Let me remind you that the derogations were granted for artisanal fleets and for some seasonal fleets because their impact on catches is insignificant .
Furthermore , those derogations include a series of strict conditions , such as a limited number of vessels , limited catches and designated ports .
Having said that , the recovery plan may be revised in 2010 on the basis of new scientific advice or weaknesses detected in its implementation .
As regards the point made by Mrs Miguélez Ramos , who wanted a further extension to the two specific instances in the Atlantic and in the Adriatic , these are specific , small and inconsequential cases .
To extend them to cover other areas necessitates a change to the ICCAT recovery plan agreement .
That certainly cannot take place this year .
We do not want to reopen the ICCAT plan .
A revision is scheduled for 2008 but , given the criticism of the two derogations , I believe it will be extremely difficult to extend them even further .
Overcapacity will be addressed through the national plans to be submitted by the Member States , which will have to balance capacity with catch .
In addition , in our discussions in the Council , we have managed to introduce enhanced control measures to allow for better compliance .
Furthermore , in 2008 we will be concentrating our efforts on the reinforcement of controls in general .
We are also insisting that , under the European Fisheries Fund , funds are committed for the decommissioning of vessels in those Member States where there is overcapacity , in particular with regard to bluefin tuna fisheries .
On the question of ensuring that other fishing vessels comply with ICCAT regulations , which is to say fishing vessels belonging to third countries , the ICCAT provisions apply to all ICCAT partners , and we expect all of them to adhere to the terms and conditions of the bluefin tuna recovery plan .
If they do not , we will take this up with them within ICCAT and bilaterally .
If they refuse to honour their commitments , then we will consider other measures that can be taken .
Regarding the question of overfishing by two countries , I have already said that we support the national fishing plans , and this features in the Presidency compromise , which I hope will be endorsed by all Member States at the November Council .
The amounts overfished have to be repaid , and this was agreed to in Antalya .
The result will be a yearly deduction of 1 480 tonnes for the period 2009-2011 .
Compensation with regard to states underfishing will take place with effect from 2008 .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon on Thursday .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( IT ) The Braghetto report contains much for us to think about as regards the implementation of the bluefin tuna recovery plan .
That plan imposes major restrictions on fishing , in view of the need to protect stocks of an endangered species .
There is nevertheless a risk that the initiative will not be effective if the European Union fails to adopt measures to counteract its socio-economic impact .
All credit is due to the report for highlighting this gap and proposing appropriate instruments for effective implementation of the recommendations from the Commission and ICCAT .
As regards socio-economic aspects , tuna fishing is a traditional activity and is the sole source of income for thousands of families : if it were to be shut down completely , fishermen would have to receive financial compensation from the EFF .
Member States must also apply penalties for illegal fishing , which is the real cause of stock impoverishment .
There is little point in clobbering honest fishermen if there are no instruments to stop predators at sea .
Lastly , reciprocity must be demanded from non-EU countries : there is no point in sacrificing our fishermen to protect the species if the other countries , and I am thinking here of Libya and Turkey , as well as China and Japan , do not apply equally severe restrictions in their seas .
While they would have a competitive edge over European fishermen , the problem of tuna impoverishment would not be resolved .
Quarterly statistics on Community job vacancies ( debate )
The next item is the report by Alexandru Athanasiu , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on quarterly statistics on Community job vacancies - C6-0090 / 2007 - .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the objective of this regulation is to establish a legal framework for the collection of quarterly statistics on job vacancies .
Quarterly data on job vacancies , broken down by economic activity , are needed by the Commission and by the European Central Bank for economic and monetary policies .
They allow monitoring of short-term trends in the labour market and help to assess the business cycle .
Owing to its importance , this statistic was included in the set of principal European economic indicators defined in the 2002 communication from the Commission to the European Parliament and the Council on Eurozone statistics .
Quarterly data on job vacancies is the only one of those indicators for which a legal basis has not yet been developed .
The proposed legal act will provide for a mechanism to guarantee a harmonised set of timely job vacancy data across all Member States .
I understand that there was a discussion on several issues addressed by the legal act proposed by the Commission , and some changes were introduced .
The amendments proposed in the Parliament report include the changes introduced by the Council , and the text proposed to you today for adoption reflects the compromise achieved between the three institutions involved - the European Commission , the Council and the European Parliament .
There is also agreement across the three institutions that the legislation should come into force as soon as possible .
This opens the way for adoption of the regulation at first reading .
I am grateful to the rapporteur , Mr Athanasiu , for his good cooperation and his understanding on this matter .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , representatives of the Council and the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by thanking my colleagues , who entrusted me with this report , and the shadow rapporteur for their respective contributions .

Obviously , in the society we live in , data collection has become an essential tool of analysis .
Data about job vacancies are used not only to gauge the health of the economy but also to determine and shape certain policies .
Nowadays , statistics about job vacancies have a direct impact on financial markets .
Ratings agencies await these figures and use them to inform the advice that they give .
Statistics , Mr President , are , if I may say so , a demanding subject .
It is worth quoting G.O. Ashley 's famous comment : ' Like other occult techniques of divination , the statistical method has a private jargon , deliberately contrived to obscure its methods from non-practitioners . '
In working together on this text in the Employment and Social Affairs Committee , my colleagues and I sought to highlight three aspects .
Firstly , there is the political aspect of the regulation : reasserting once again , even in the context of a statistical tool like this , the concept of free movement for European citizens and unconditional , unlimited and unhindered access to employment .
Then there is the social aspect : making it easier for all the people of Europe to find suitable employment and to access information about job vacancies throughout the European Union .
Lastly - and we have the Commission and the Council to thank here - there is the technical aspect of data quality .
We are talking about a system that has harmonised procedures and has effectively updated arrangements for statistical information gathering , in other words an improved approach to obtaining precise data .
As you know , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we previously had no more than a gentleman 's agreement - that is to say a voluntary basis for statistical information gathering .
Accurate analysis depends , however , on the collection of these data being compulsory and consistent .
That is why a regulation is a better legal basis than a directive because the provisions of a regulation , unlike those of a directive , are identical throughout the Union : the Member States have no power to apply them incompletely or selectively and no choice as to the methods of pursuing the stipulated aims .
One of the aims of the Lisbon Strategy is to bring more people onto the labour market , and at the same time more jobs need to be created , hence the need for the best possible system of information on labour supply and demand .
Quality of information can be the key to success , and we all know today that information is power .
That applies in economics as elsewhere , and that is why it was deemed necessary to develop and publish a structural indicator for job vacancies , capable of measuring just how narrow the job market is and where the skills shortages lie .
The Commission and the European Central Bank also need quarterly data on job vacancies in order to monitor fluctuation in the number of vacancies in particular sectors of the economy .
Job vacancy figures are part of a series of major European economic indicators and they are needed for evaluation of prevailing conditions on the EU labour market and within the euro area under the EMU Action Plan .
Mr President , I will conclude by quoting Abbé Pierre , who said that many politicians are familiar with poverty only through statistics , and no one has yet shed tears over statistics .
We ought to need no convincing of the necessity for a technically more effective mechanism for gathering all the statistics that are required .
As politicians we can do our job by making it easier for people to find suitable employment .
These statistics will enable us to facilitate their efforts .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , firstly I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Athanasiu , whom I have had the opportunity to meet several times over the last few months , and who is now presenting the results of what I consider to be a fine job .
I have monitored the content of the report under discussion today and negotiations with the Commission and with the Council since June this year , and on behalf of the PPE-DE I can now safely say that a high-quality and very sound compromise text has been reached .
Should Parliament adopt the amendments to the Commission proposal in this plenary session , as I hope it will , we know that the Council has already said that it will also adopt the same amended proposal for a regulation .
I believe this report will turn out to be a useful tool for identifying EU sectors and regions where workers are needed , and therefore for promoting solvency and better management of training .
I would also like to draw attention to what I believe is an important aspect : the content of this report does not represent a greater bureaucratic burden or more inconsequential legislation , since in its current version it avoids the duplication of initiatives and the inclusion of tools already in place .
Meanwhile , the report also represents a good compromise between the need to provide information for statistical purposes and the need to ensure that enterprises , mainly small and medium-sized ones , are not overburdened with unnecessary bureaucratic procedures .
I therefore believe that all the conditions have been met for it to be adopted now at first reading , and that is the decision I recommend to this House .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , having all of four minutes tonight , which is 400 % more than I normally have to play with , I have to avoid becoming too talkative .
So I will get on with it .
Despite the exceptionally technical nature of this proposed regulation , its value to Europe and the Member States should not be underestimated .
The relaunch of the Lisbon Agenda for more and better jobs in 2005 gives rise to the need for accurate , timely and comparable statistics on job vacancies in Europe , by region and by economic activity .
It is crucial if we are to plan for the needs of the labour market and the needs of those entering the labour market .
I welcome the fact that , in this instance , we are negotiating a regulation rather than a directive , as this ensures speedier implementation once it is approved .
And , of course , it is directly and equally applicable to all Member States and there is therefore no likelihood of different definitions or interpretations arising from one Member State to the next .
There is no need , for instance , to transpose it into national law , thus avoiding the delays that this can entail .
This is an excellent example of how the EU can add value to the work of Member States that could not possibly be achieved by them working on their own or even together .
Nevertheless , it has taken two years for this piece of legislation to reach this stage and I hope therefore that an agreement can be finalised with the Council and that it will be approved at this first-reading stage .
I know that in Ireland we do not produce job vacancy data , but work by the Central Statistics Office is under way .
The CSO is highly regarded and it is hoped that , within a year or so , Ireland will be able to participate fully in the system .
I welcome too the proposal to include personal services , farm vacancies etc . , employers with fewer than 10 employees , and the nature of the employment contract .
I think this is particularly important in view of the growing concern about the casualisation of employment and the fears in some quarters arising from the move towards flexicurity .
I do hope that an agreement can be reached and that we can get on with the job of establishing common statistics right across the European Union .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , first of all I would like to congratulate the rapporteur for his excellent work on this proposal for a regulation on the collection of quarterly statistics on Community job vacancies .
First of all , let me say that high quality , up-to-date and relevant statistics underpin good policy decisions .
This is particularly true at EU level , where we are dealing with 27 different countries all trying in this particular context to achieve the Lisbon objectives .
Indeed , any help or assistance that can be given to Member States to achieve these objectives - that is to create more and better jobs - in my opinion will be well worth the effort .
I fully support the idea that , while the information required can be compiled by the Member States themselves under this regulation in order to ensure comparability of data , we still need the Commission to coordinate the harmonisation of the statistical information .
And I am satisfied in this context that we do need a regulation - rather than a directive - but that the regulation proposed is the minimum required to achieve the desired objectives and does not go beyond that .
I suppose in this context I do not really need to go beyond that except to say that I am particularly pleased to see that we are asking Member States to transmit information on personal care services , residential activities and social work activities without accommodation .
This information is hugely important because of the growing number of carers in the EU .
The ageing of our population is a major demographic challenge and caring is an essential element of dealing with that challenge .
Those of us who are lucky enough to live long enough will be more likely to need care of some sort and this is definitely a growing market for job opportunities within the EU .
While most caring work is unpaid and indeed much will remain so , the opportunities for employment in this area will increase .
Therefore we need reliable , good quality statistics in order to prepare ourselves to meet the caring aspect of the demographic challenge .
To conclude , as I said earlier , in the overall or global context : high quality , relevant , timely , comparable and coherent information is an extremely valuable tool in good policy formation , provided of course that we as politicians use the information that is provided to us .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , implementation of the Lisbon Agenda as regards the increase in the number of high-quality jobs requires certain tools .
One of these is provided by quarterly statistics on job vacancies in the Community .
Eurostat has to have a legal basis for collecting data on job vacancies .
An unwritten agreement is not enough and does not guarantee comparability and completeness of data .
Now for some specifics .
The first amendment means , in practice , an increase in the bureaucratic burden placed on small businesses , but there is an ever-increasing percentage of employees in just such businesses and therefore information about the situation in these businesses is increasingly useful .
I support the second amendment , which includes social partners in the implementation of the regulation .
Amendment 3 tidies up the method for submitting data even when they are provided voluntarily , which makes it vital .
I also support Amendment 17 , which guarantees publication of the data , thus creating the possibility of using them to come to practical conclusions .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , I , too , would like to add my voice to those who wish to congratulate the rapporteur and thank him for his report .
Like him , I also support the opinion that the compilation of good quality and comparable job vacancy statistics is a European priority .
I am equally certain that collecting this statistical data under the auspices of a gentlemen 's agreement alone is insufficient , and that it is necessary to adopt a legal act at European level to guarantee the production of harmonised and high-quality statistics across the Member States .
Only the Commission can coordinate the necessary harmonisation of statistical information at Community level .
I did advocate the same point of view recently , when expressing my opinion on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on Community statistics on public health and health and safety at work .
I was also very pleased by the results of the trialogue between the rapporteur , the Commission and the presidency .
The ensuing compromise proposals significantly enhanced the quality of the document .
Just like the shadow rapporteurs from the other political groups , I , too , was happy to add my signature on behalf of the GUE / NGL .
Among these compromise proposals I would like to highlight in particular the significant contribution of the proposal to include in the statistics data concerning units with fewer than 10 employees , the proposal to distinguish between vacancies for fixed-term and permanent posts , and the proposal to ensure that as many European citizens as possible have access to the data .
Finally , I would like to say that I welcome the definition of the quality assessment criteria because only relevant , exact , updated and comprehensible job vacancy data can help to fight unemployment in the Community .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , information on changes in job vacancies to identify labour shortages sounds fine .
But surely not just to compile statistics ?
It must be to enable employers to fill vacancies and for workers to find jobs , both as quickly as possible , hence quarterly .
Currently , national statistics are compiled by Member States themselves and the Commission seems to favour making use of that to set up a common framework under a single European Union regulation , option C. So the EC craze to harmonise converts a simple system into a bureaucratic and time-consuming one .
The real purpose is centralised control .
Will we soon see a requirement for employers and jobseekers to consult an EU bureau ?
Down the road , does it lead to job direction ?
It certainly leads to a planned European economy , spelling the end of the dream of an increasingly prosperous Europe of full employment and bustling innovation .
In a globalised marketplace , the only way to stay competitive is to stay loose , ready to fill the gap , ready to exploit an opening , ready for anything .
Columns of stats on reams of paper or locked on a hard drive do not do that - it is the man or women on the ground suddenly finding the chance and striking quick , before the other fellow .
If he wants second place , get employers to browse the stats .
While they are doing that , streetwise operators elsewhere are jumping in first thing and cornering the market .
Worse , Amendment No 8 - if adopted - allows the collating agency to reject as inappropriate national figures and substitute figures of their own .
Thus they can create a false image to suit the EC centralised controllers , misleading the people .
So much for informing the citizen !
Finally , Amendment No 3 encourages the exclusion of agriculture , fishing and forestry from these considerations .
Now , why should that be ?
I do not know much about forestry , but the UK figures for farming and fishing are horrendous .
Since 1973 , when we joined under the CAP , more British farmers have left the land and more have committed suicide than in any other comparable period in our history .
Our fishing fleets , down to about a quarter of 1973 size , are testimony to the devastation caused by the rotten CFP .
No wonder some people want to keep these figures out of pan-EU stats ; no need to alarm the citizens is there ?
( PL ) Mr President , every attempt to streamline the EU is worthy of respect , especially when it concerns the issue of employment .
Employment is , I believe , the most crucial link in the social and economic transformation of an integrated Europe .
The rapporteur has found a climate of anticipation accompanying this legislative initiative and has imbued his report with a highly accessible and truly interesting format .
The Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council replaces existing practices , based on a gentlemen 's agreement , for the collection of data on job vacancies with a decision to establish a legal framework for this activity .
This provides the opportunity to improve the next section of the process of information integration , which , by the way , forms part of the basic European economic indicators .
With this there arose the need for a legal basis that would help in the creation of the necessary methodological pillars for summarising the growing collections of data .
This regulation also promises to create another type of benefit .
It enables higher standards to be achieved in the quality and comparability of statistics .
It will also make it easier to develop effective employment policies based on reliable data , at both national and international level .
At the same time it will become possible to monitor the implementation of such policies in individual countries .
The governments of the so-called new EU countries have pointed out that , thanks to quarterly statistics , they will have at their disposal a common system of indicators which is essential for monitoring the employment market .
They have also noted , with some relief , that the introduction of this regulation will not mean that any additional finances are needed for quarterly data collection .
In the justification for its standpoint as regards this proposal , the Polish Government pointed out that the unification of data at European level , together with monitoring of its quality , should lead to increased knowledge concerning the changing levels of demand for specific qualifications and to more effective monitoring of the situation in the Polish labour market .
It will also make it easier for more accurate employment and pay forecasts to be made .
Comparability of data at European level will make it possible to evaluate the extent of mismatches in national labour markets against the background of the remaining EU countries .
It also has specific practical outcomes as regards the correlation of employment policy with supply and for planning the direction of vocational training for future employees .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to express my support for the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on quarterly statistics on Community job vacancies .
There can be no disagreement over how important it is for these data to be collected systematically and uniformly while fulfilling set standards in all Member States .
The value of information collected in this way is undeniable in terms of assessing the situation in the labour market in the European Union , as well as for the functioning of the European Central Bank .
The present situation , where these data are collected on the basis of an unwritten agreement , clearly shows that this method is ineffective and has to be changed .
Only with the approval of this regulation , which establishes the same rules for the preparation of high-quality statistics throughout the Community , will it be possible to have an accurate insight into , as well as an analysis of , the factors that combine to create the overall situation and conditions in the labour market .
This regulation does not just oblige Member States to create statistics in accordance with well-defined norms but also helps them in this task , by supplying ready-made tools for this purpose .
The unification of this research at European level will help to extend our knowledge of fluctuations in demand for specific jobs in national markets and will enable more accurate employment and pay forecasts to be made .
For these reasons it is vital for a legal document to come into force that , in a clear and transparent manner , will define all the rules regarding the collection of data about job vacancies across the entire Community .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon on Thursday .
Cross-border collective copyright management ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission on the follow-up of the EP resolution on cross-border collective copyright management ( Lévai report , by Giuseppe Gargani , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs - B6-0381 / 2007 ) .
author . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on 13 March 2007 , in plenary session , the European Parliament adopted a resolution on the Commission 's Recommendation of 18 October 2005 on collective cross-border management of copyright and related rights for legitimate online music services .
In that resolution , Parliament invited the Commission to make it clear that the 2005 Recommendation applied exclusively to online sales of music recordings , and to present as soon as possible - after consulting closely with interested parties - a proposal for a flexible framework directive to be adopted by Parliament and the Council in codecision , with a view to regulating the collective management of copyright and related rights as regards cross-border online music services , while taking account of the specificity of the digital era and safeguarding European cultural diversity .
Parliament also stressed that the proposed directive should not in any way undermine the competitiveness of creative businesses , the effectiveness of the services provided by collective rights managers ( CRMs ) or the competitiveness of user businesses - in particular small right-holders and users - and that it should , on the other hand , guarantee right-holders a high degree of protection and equal treatment ; ensure that the relevant legal provisions had a real , significant and adequate impact ; emphasise the use of alternative dispute resolution ; provide for democratic , transparent and accountable governance in CRMs ; promote creativity and cultural diversity ; allow only fair and controlled competition without territorial restrictions , but with the necessary and suitable qualitative criteria ; take into account the interests of users and of the market ; satisfy the future needs of an online market ; and foster the development of legitimate online music services .
Today the European Parliament is asking the Commission what steps it has taken towards meeting the expectations enshrined in that resolution .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank the European Parliament for the interest expressed in the cross-border management of music rights and the 2005 recommendation on online music .
The Commission 's 2005 online music recommendation aims to allow the music market in Europe to develop in the digital environment .
It aims to create a framework in which the best new online licensing model will emerge by agreement between the market players .
This should allow authors , composers and music publishers to get a fair share of the distribution of their online works .
The recommendation does not prescribe a particular EU licensing model , and leaves implementation of its principles to the market .
Exactly two years after adoption of the recommendation , the Commission is assessing the development of online licensing practices in the music sector in Europe .
Stakeholders were invited to comment on emerging online licensing trends by 1 July 2007 .
The Commission received 88 replies from interested parties , such as collecting societies , authors , creators and music users in Member States .
The process of reviewing the submissions is still ongoing .
Only after a thorough examination will the Commission assess further policy steps regarding the online operations of collecting societies .
The submissions analysed so far show that most stakeholders do not see the need for a framework directive , and prefer market-based solutions to regulatory intervention .
On the question of whether the 2005 recommendation is limited to online sales of some recordings , the Commission would like to point out that the principles on transparency and governance set out in the recommendation should not be limited to online music sales and should apply to all the activities of collecting societies .
To conclude , while the online market for music is still in flux , legislating in favour of a particular licensing model would appear premature .
The Commission will monitor developments and report back to Parliament and the Council as foreseen in the recommendation .
Any follow-up , if necessary , will be closely coordinated with the European Parliament and the Council .
Mr President , on 13 March 2007 the European Parliament passed a resolution on collective cross-border management of copyright .
In its resolution , Parliament called on the Commission to waste no time in presenting a proposal for a framework directive regulating collective cross-border management of copyright and related intellectual property rights for legitimate online music services .
It also called on the Commission to make it clear that the 2005 recommendation in this area applies exclusively to online sales of music recordings .
Can the Commission update Parliament on the measures it has taken to date , in response to Parliament 's requests ?
Can the Commission inform Parliament whether it is following the same guidelines and instructions issued by President Barroso on the unified , democratic , rapid development of a united Europe ?
When will the Commission respect Parliament 's procedural rules and the position adopted by the majority of its 785 Members ?
The 13 March resolution reflects the European Parliament 's clear position on cross-border collective management of copyright .
The Commission 's recommendation was the first step towards future convergence of the various practices in the 27 Member States .
On behalf of the Committee on Culture and Education , I myself argued , in my opinion for to the competent Committee , in favour of the importance of ensuring equal treatment for all right-holders , whether writers , composers , editors , record producers or performers .
In other words , this is an issue concerning millions of right-holders throughout Europe .
The situation today , as regards online services is not considered to be effective enough , either for rights users , or for right-holders .
We have thus all worked to present the Commission and the Council with the proposals that we believe would bring about a change for the better in the collective management of copyright .
The close cooperation between rights managers must be retained for the benefit of all parties .
Piracy remains the greatest problem facing the music industry today .
Three of the reasons for the spread of piracy internationally are the technological facilities for low-cost illegal copying , unfavourable economic conditions and the expansion of the Internet .
We shall all have to bear in mind that the spread of music piracy has the greatest impact on small countries where the music industry is mainly of a local and regional nature .
In specific terms , piracy entails a shrinkage of the legal music market and results in a decline in legal sales ; it therefore affects the viability of the national music recording industry .
Piracy certainly entails copyright losses for composers and songwriters , but it also deprives the state of income tax and VAT .
The fight against piracy must therefore be included among the Commission 's initial aims in the possible legislative proposal on collective management of copyright .
I would therefore like to call upon the Commission to take steps , as soon as possible , to fulfil Parliament 's requests and to present a proposal for a framework directive with a view to regulating the collective cross-border management of copyright .
Lastly , as I have always said , music is not a commodity , and it is the duty of us all to protect and strengthen creativity in Europe .
A directive that will in all likelihood not come into force until 2010 is a disaster for millions of artists in the EU .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( HU ) Thank you very much .
I would like to emphasise that this is about an extraordinarily important area , since income from goods and services protected by copyright and related rights accounts for 5-7 % of the European Union 's GDP .
This highlights the importance of such rights being managed appropriately .
As you know , in 2005 the European Commission adopted a Recommendation on the cross-border management of legitimate online music services .
At the time , Commissioner McCreevy described the Recommendation as ' a " soft-law instrument ” designed to give the market a chance to move in the right direction ' .
The Recommendation has far-reaching consequences for the copyrights market and major players in the market are already acting on the basis of it .
It clearly goes further than merely interpreting and supplementing existing rules and its impact has all the characteristics of a full regulatory initiative .
At the time , a lot of fear took hold in connection with this Recommendation , including the fact that it would result in uncontrollable competition and that market forces would be concentrated in the hands of a few big management societies , and monopolies would be created .
This is precisely why I thought that I should make a recommendation in an own-initiative report for the online music market to be regulated in a different way .
All the same , the Recommendation - which the Commission adopted - deprived the European Parliament and the Member States of the opportunity to have any significant influence on the changes affecting competition and cultural diversity in Europe .
It is precisely for this reason that I have been able to win the support of the whole Parliament and all the political parties for my report , in the interests of bringing to fruition a decision-making triangle , so that Parliament cannot be left out of the legislation of such an important area , and I have recommended that the Commission draw up a framework directive .
In my opinion , this recommended directive must meet the following requirements : it must guarantee right-holders a high degree of protection and equal treatment .
It must be based on solidarity between right-holders and on an appropriate , fair balance among management societies .
It must provide for democratic , transparent and accountable governance in management societies , including organisational structuring , transparency , representation , rules relating to copyright and production , and accounting , through minimum standards .
Comprehensive transparency must be ensured in collective management societies .
Creativity and cultural diversity must be promoted .
Fair and controlled competition can be allowed , without territorial restrictions , but with the necessary and suitable qualitative criteria for the collective management of copyright and the preservation of the value of the rights .
A high degree of legal certainty must be provided for users , and the availability of the global repertoire must be preserved .
We , or I , therefore ask you to think about whether a directive would be necessary for regulating this important area .

( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner Borg 's reply to the question put by Mr Dumitrescu fills me with concern : the Commissioner spoke of leaving the matter in the market 's hands .
But what is it we are talking about ?
We are talking about rights which have taken two centuries to evolve : rights of creators , authors , composers , artistes .
And now we are being told that those rights are to be regulated by the market : by what market ?
The market of thieves , the market of people who have divested producers and creators of their intellectual property by using new means of communication ?
What sort of rights are we talking about ?
Rights are regulated by public bodies ; specifically in the European arena we have institutions , namely the Commission , the Council and Parliament : the Commission with its power of initiative , the Council and Parliament through the codecision procedure .
It seems to me that now is not the time to follow a path which will lead to the disappearance of intellectual property .
And if intellectual property disappears , intellectual creation disappears as well .
Some of the wise men and women who talk to us today about the advantages of the information society say well , yes , composers and authors can wander the streets giving concerts like in the Middle Ages .
Are we going to reduce our authors to medieval minstrels who can play in the middle of the street , with a cap on the floor hoping someone will give them alms ?
I think now is the time for the institutions of the European Union to react vigorously to defend this European tradition ; its political essence is very important and it is vital for the maintenance of intellectual creativity .
Only through societies of authors , the collective management of those societies , can intellectual property rights and the creation of intellectual property be defended today , right now , against the real thieves in the form of broadcasting companies which use intellectual creativity for their own benefit .
( PL ) Mr President , the response to the Commission 's Recommendation on collective cross-border management of copyright for legitimate online music services was provided by Parliament 's Resolution that a framework directive be introduced to regulate this issue .
However , the Commission did not carry out the necessary and wide-ranging stakeholder consultation that was required , including with Parliament , which was a breach of democratic procedures .
It is completely unacceptable to ignore the institutional triangle and instead apply the so-called soft law approach without prior consultation and without the formal involvement of Parliament and the Council in the matter .
This recommendation , which aims in practice to create more freedom for copyright owners to select the institution that provides collective management , depending on requirements , would have far-reaching consequences for the copyright and related markets and would create a potential threat not just to competition rules , but also to cultural diversity .
As a result , market power would be concentrated in the hands of a few of the largest entities that will then be able to bypass the network of bilateral agreements and grant licences to the whole European market .
It is worth remembering that about 5-7 % of the EU 's GDP comes from the sale of goods or services that are protected by copyright and similar laws .
This fact illustrates even more how important is proper management of the relevant rights , as well as the need to strengthen their position in the current digital era .
While respecting the principles of competition , we should avoid reducing the income of composers , at the same time providing users of musical works with an EU-wide licence that corresponds to the business model of the future .
With this in mind the Commission should , as soon as possible , submit a proposal for an appropriate instrument that would be legally binding on entities working in this area .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all I would like to thank all the Members who spoke for their comments , which I will certainly convey to my colleague , Commissioner McCreevy .
If I can pick up on a number of points that have been raised : regarding the need for legislative intervention , let me say that the 2005 Commission recommendation on online music licensing has already brought about significant progress in the marketplace .
The recommendation has given collecting societies in Europe an incentive to set up EU-wide licensing platforms that make their repertoire available for online music shops across Europe .
Let me cite three relevant examples .
The UK and German societies have set up a platform for EU-wide licensing of the EMI repertoire , CELAS .
The UK and the Spanish societies are cooperating on a platform that will manage the Anglo-Hispanic repertoire at EU level , and the French and Spanish societies have announced a joint licensing platform that grants EU-wide access to the French-Hispanic repertoire .
In these circumstances , the Commission does not see the need for any premature legislative intervention .
I would also like to say that the 2005 Commission recommendation on online licensing has already brought about significant progress in the marketplace .
The recommendation has encouraged collecting societies in Europe to set up EU-wide licensing platforms that make their repertoire available for online music shops across Europe .
I refer to the three examples I have just mentioned .
The CELAS joint venture alone is in fact in a position to license approximately 25 % of all musical works to any European online music retailer , such as iTunes , Sony 's CONNECT or eMusic , in a single transaction .
On the question of cultural diversity , let me state that our recommendation is not detrimental to cultural diversity .
There are clear indications that the new platforms for Anglo-American , French or Spanish music are open platforms .
These platforms can include other music publishers ' repertoires or the entire repertoire of existing societies .
National collecting societies would not disappear ; authors would still be members of local collecting societies and revenues would still be distributed through collecting societies affiliated to the new licensing platforms .
Regarding the issue of rights , I would like to underline that there is no reason to think that this multiterritorial licensing model is bad either for cultural diversity or for the rights of artists , while it is good for the rightholders , who get more money than under the old territorial model .
Cultural diversity and the rights of artists are also about giving authors more money so that they can continue to create .
Let me make one last point .
The Commission actively encourages the development of an own online licensing market for music .
In this vein , the Commission will closely monitor developments in this emerging market and , in doing so , the Commission will carefully consider the issues raised in the Lévai report of 5 March 2007 .
If , between now and 2010 , we observe , for example , that monopolistic licensing structures are emerging on the Internet , that the repertoire available on the Internet does not adequately reflect Europe 's cultural diversity and that the marketplace alone is not delivering EU licensing structures that are adapted to the Internet era , then the Commission will consider adequate alternative means for reaching those objectives .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 29 November in Brussels .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( FR ) The purpose of Mr Dumitrescu 's question is to remind the Commission of its responsibilities .
Through its recommendation of September 2005 and its decision to call into question the territorial competence of CRMs , the Commission has upset the relationship between rights-holders and national collecting societies - and this has happened outside the context of any legislation or harmonisation measures .
Under the guise of adaptation to the digital environment , the Commission has introduced confusion into the European system of author 's rights and related rights .
That in turn has encouraged concentration and a format-based approach , to the detriment of artists and to the advantage of industrialists and other economic operators .


The Commission urgently needs to stop taking random initiatives without serious assessment of their impact ; it needs to examine the situation in all the arts and cultural sectors , in conjunction with all the stakeholders , and to adopt a comprehensive policy that will reflect the requirements of cultural diversity , as well as Europe 's values and the Lisbon Strategy objectives based on the knowledge and innovation economy ; and it needs to present Parliament and the Council with coherent draft directives respecting the principles that I have mentioned .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of sitting
( The sitting was closed at 11.30 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 10 a.m. )
Situations of fragility
The next item is the Commission statement on ' Towards an EU response to situations of fragility : engaging in difficult environments for sustainable development , stability and peace ' .
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , since July 2007 , the Commission and the Portuguese Presidency of the European Union have been working together closely to launch the process of preparing a more strategic and effective EU response to situations of fragility in partner countries .
This process should be pursued by future presidencies .
The objective is not to label or classify countries , but to tailor their instruments and responses to specific situations .
In these situations of fragility , there are major obstacles to poverty reduction .
Institutional capabilities in such situations are very limited , with states unable to assume the functions of governance , or with the consequences of natural disasters , violent conflict , or a lack of political will on the part of the government regarding development objectives .
In extreme cases , these situations can have an impact beyond the country 's borders , affecting regional stability or even global security .
The idea of fragility is not new , though the international debate is relatively recent .
Donors , partner countries and civil society have been aware for a long time of the need to be more effective in particularly unfavourable situations in order to meet the objectives of sustainable development .
Every situation is complex and different and requires a tailored response , in which diplomatic action , humanitarian aid , development cooperation , and security and crisis management intervention all play a part .
The effectiveness of the European Union 's response requires a long-term commitment , but also the definition of clear objectives when taking action in a fragile country .
The guiding principle should continue to be capability development and human security , within the perspective of sustainable development and poverty reduction .
Giving support to situations of fragility where this is to the detriment of successful countries should , however , be avoided .
Commitments to strengthen aid therefore take centre stage again .
The European Commission has presented a communication proposing a pragmatic approach for the European Union to engage more effectively in difficult environments for sustainable development , stability and peace .
This communication was sent to all the European Union institutions .
The General Affairs Council on 19 and 20 November will adopt conclusions on this subject .
It will invite the Commission to draw up a specific work plan for implementing the recommendations and the priority actions presented in the communication , the aim of which is to address situations of fragility more effectively by supporting the efforts made by the partner countries to create or restore the conditions necessary for their sustainable development .
2008 will be devoted to preparing the European Union 's strategic approach to situations of fragility .
This process requires the active participation of all the European Union institutions and all those working for development in the EU and the partner countries .
The European Parliament 's contribution to this exercise is of great interest to the Commission , which is inviting it to get actively involved in this debate , that should make it possible to support an overall response strategy to situations of fragility and to contribute in this way to creating suitable conditions for sustainable development , stability , peace and democratic governance .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , it is always very useful to be able to debate such an important issue in front of a heaving Chamber of colleagues who are agog to hear what Parliament has to say on this very important matter .
I am also very grateful to the Commissioner for having laid down the ground rules and his views on how we tackle this issue .
Fragility is a condition that has many , many parents .
The first of course is the process of decolonisation when the colonial powers drew arbitrary lines on maps , which cut across all sorts of internal stable civil society functions and split countries into two or three or four , irrespective of their tribes or religious factions and so on .
That induced a certain amount of instability .
Then there is a natural form of instability that fragile nations now experience : countries which are prone to floods ; small island states that are open to only a single economy product .
There are countries which are geographically unable to sustain themselves because of the way God has blessed them with very few attributes , countries which have desertification , starting to produce mass migrations of people .
There are 26 so-called fragile states in the world as we speak and the most vulnerable people in the world are facing catastrophic consequences , not through their own fault in some cases , but sometimes through bad governance , sometimes through internal conflict , sometimes through civil wars , sometimes through genocidal dictators as we found , not many years ago , in Sierra Leone and Liberia .
Now you can change a fragile state from being a fragile state to a post-fragile sustainable country , as we see happening in front of our eyes in Sierra Leone .
But this requires effort ; it requires commitment ; it requires a long-term commitment , as the Commissioner said , to that country 's economic growth .
It requires a commitment of nation-building , an expression which I use advisedly in this Chamber because the concept of nation-building is something that my country , the United Kingdom , has long experience of , as have France and Spain and some other European countries .
But it is wholly and utterly away from the knowledge of other emerging superpowers who have not , to put it bluntly , a clue how to punch their way out of a paper bag in terms of nation-building .
We need to be able to connect ourselves with the body of historic knowledge that is reposited in the consciousness of European nations , to help other nations who are taking a lead around the world in the process of nation-building .
Had we done that , and had Prime Minister Blair done that , I think the situation in Iraq , for example , would have been completely different .
Is Iraq a fragile state ?
Yes it is , because it is unstable ; the governance is not secure ; there are insecurity problems .
There are other countries in Africa which are very fragile - the Sudan , Somalia , small islands - as I said earlier all these require coming together with a body of knowledge that we already have and therefore I am very pleased indeed to be opening this debate this morning .
Thank you very much , Mr Deva .
I am afraid you forget one factor in instability .
When you arrive in those countries instability starts again .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to express my delight at this communication which - as you said , Commissioner - is indeed tinged with real pragmatism from the Commission , and which enables us today to debate a problem of concern not only to the citizens of the EU 's partner countries in the south of the world , but also our own fellow citizens who often , quite legitimately , ask how effective the European Union 's development aid is .
In this particular case , the essential message of our resolution can be summed up in one sentence and should attract support from everyone , beyond the political divisions .
It is to propose setting up a simplified cooperation system that allows the Commission and Member States to supply the aid they have promised to partner countries in the throes of particularly grave crises more rapidly than they can today - and I will not dwell on these crises because Mr Deva has just explained them at length .
Without this aid the populations of these countries see their chances of survival diminish each day .
Once this aid has been approved , which is in itself no mean feat , the complexity and length of current procedures for delivering European aid can cause situations that are even more dramatic and directly harmful to the beneficiary populations .
Take the example of Burundi , a small country in which I chaired the parliamentary observation mission for the last elections two years ago , and to which I will have the pleasure of returning in a few days .
The European Union has done a very important and remarkable job there , supporting the electoral and institutional democratisation process after more than ten years of bloody conflict .
Once established , the institutions and the new democratically elected power were very quickly faced with reality and the needs of the population , in terms of health , education and agriculture , which had to be met as a matter of priority .
There is no lack of projects in these sectors , but for them to see the light of day , European aid is utterly decisive .
It is not only decisive for meeting the urgent needs of the population , but also to enable the public authorities , which are still fragile , to begin a reconstruction process without which there is a major risk of seeing the country descend very quickly into chaos again .
Two years on , Commissioner , the budgetary aid announced by the EU has still not arrived .
What is true for the Great Lakes region is also true for other regions of the world .
That is the reason why , Madam President , subject to the clear definition of the conditions they have to meet to be able to receive it , all the countries in the world with which the European Union is cooperating and that are experiencing a serious situation of fragility should be able to rely on an exception system that guarantees rapid and effective intervention .
Madam President , I am pleased to be able to speak after hearing such remarkable experts and specialists , who have spent years grappling with this subject , and I include you among them , Madam President .
I would like to draw attention to the problem of the growing number of states recognised as unstable .
Over the course of six years this number has almost doubled , from 14 to 26 , so this is a very real problem , and one that is an increasing challenge for the European Union .
I would like to stress that over half of these unstable states are in sub-Saharan Africa , which highlights the need for us to give particular attention to that region of Africa , that region of the world .
I also think that strong words need to be said about the need to build the authority of governments in these countries .
The African Union is right to point out that the problem of reconstruction is also a political issue , perhaps more so than a technical one .
In view of this , the mechanisms of democracy and transparency are fundamental issues .
I fully agree with Mr Hutchinson , who spoke before me , about the need to simplify procedures so that our aid might be more rapid and more real .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( ES ) Madam President , I also truly welcome the fact that this subject is being dealt with in this Chamber , because although it is true that there is not an exhaustive legislative definition of what a fragility state is , we do have many cases which , empirically , fall into that category .
This afternoon we are , for example , discussing among other matters the case of Somalia .
This resolution therefore enables us to tackle some of the more serious problems that have to be faced in those contexts - for example , the fact that this fragility is frequently based on a situation of extreme poverty that tends to bring with it institutional collapse and insecurity at all levels .
In addition , it is also crucial to start from the principle that these states present a challenge in terms of development , and this means that we urgently need to define a coherent agenda based on the humanitarian principle of do no harm .
This is the first principle , and it is an important lesson to learn from recent events regarding the approach taken by Zoe 's Ark in Chad .
With regard to external action , in particular European action , in this type of context , this must be based on implementing programmes on the ground , which must be flexible and adaptable to changing needs and based on a strategy planned in the short , medium and long term .
All too often we stop at measures that may be necessary in the short term , but which fundamentally lose sight of the medium and long-term consequences .
Finally , I must mention the importance of establishing a dual mechanism of accountability , in particular including an obligation for the recipient countries to be accountable , naturally , to those who have provided resources , funds and donations , but also to their own populations , whom they should and must protect and ensure the survival of .
The donors should also guarantee that they are going to be accountable to these populations .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( PT ) Madam President , there is no doubt that it is urgent to provide more and better humanitarian aid in an ever more unequal and unfair world where concentration of wealth in the hands of a few at the expense of the exploitation and misery of millions .
There is no doubt that more and better cooperation for development is urgently needed in a world facing a new arms race and the increasing militarisation of international relations , led by the United States and its allies .
It is for that very reason that we are seriously concerned about the attempts to make development aid conditional on security strategies intended in practice to achieve more or less concealed objectives of interference , plundering of resources and neo-colonialism .
An analysis of the international situation must not leave out or underestimate the external causes fomenting and exacerbating the contradictions which are so often at the root of the problems .
We need only look at the very subjective list of what the World Bank considers to be fragile States .
How many instances of external interference and aggression does that reflect ?
We do indeed need an agenda for cooperation and development to respond to the most basic needs of millions of human beings , based on respect for national sovereignty and independence and peaceful solutions to international conflicts - an agenda which encourages the demilitarisation of international relations , which promotes equitable and fair economic relations and the cancellation of foreign debt paid for long ago , an agenda which overcomes the policies which are causing the profound injustices and inequalities , in order to build a fairer , more peaceful , more humane world of greater solidarity .
In fragile states the link between governance , development and security is paramount .
The EU must determine strategic priorities for relations with those states with human security as the overall goal .
It is not enough to support government institutions .
It is essential to promote the strengthening of parliamentary scrutiny , to support free and pluralist media , the independence of the judiciary and the empowerment of civil society , giving priority to women , vulnerable groups and minorities .
That requires commitment on the part of the EU .
Somalia today tragically illustrates the aloofness of Europe .
The causes of fragility that stir up violent conflict , exacerbating the incapacity of the state - bad governance , extreme poverty or violations of human rights , for example - must be broached in bilateral dialogue and often the Council , Commission and Member States fail to do that .
The causes of fragility must be taken into account in defining strategies and in the globalisation of the EU 's financial instruments .
Development aid must be focused on people and direct financial support for governments should be considered only when there is proof of commitment to resolving conflicts , to building the democratic rule of law and to improving governance and the human security of the peoples .
Finally , and unfortunately this aspect is omitted from the Commission 's Communication and the resolution we are to vote on , the EU must invest more , alongside DDR and SSR programmes , in controlling global transfers of light weapons , since they fuel armed conflicts which perpetuate the fragility of many states .
Member of the Commission . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , thank you for the short but very comprehensive debate .
Allow me to sum it up as follows : it basically reflected Parliament 's support for the general position , for the Commission 's general concept , for the general idea .
Of course some individual issues arose during the debate and these can be discussed in the course of future debates .
For example , there is the issue of light weapons transfers and many other ideas that , in my opinion , significantly enrich the general concept .
I have received a motion for a resolution submitted in accordance with Article 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon .
Social reality stocktaking ( debate )
The next item is the report by Elizabeth Lynne , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on social reality stocktaking .
rapporteur . - Madam President , I wish to begin by thanking the shadow rapporteurs .
That a report of this scale has received no plenary amendments shows this is truly a report from the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , and one we can all be proud of .
I would also like to thank the Commission for its close cooperation and the Portuguese Presidency for making social policy a priority for its Presidency .
We face a huge challenge in Europe .
That challenge is one of fairness . It is about lost potential , the inability to live a life free from the charity of others , and a life free from discrimination , poverty and social exclusion .
Our objective is clear : we want to expand opportunities so that nobody , whatever their background or circumstances , is left behind .
The vision of Europe must be freedom and opportunity for all , increasing opportunities and incentives to work , whilst strengthening the safety net for those who are unable to work .
In 2007 the facts are chilling : 72 million European citizens continue to live in poverty ; 8 % of all people in the European Union now suffer from in-work poverty .
Those are truly shocking statistics .
But what do they actually mean ?
They mean that one in six citizens is now living below the poverty line - one in six !
Many people would not believe that could be possible in 2007 .
Fifty years after the Treaty of Rome , after 50 years of economic growth , 10 % of people belong to households where nobody has a job !
By any measure , poverty remains one of the greatest social problems challenging Europe , and reducing social exclusion must be at the heart of our policies .
In some areas we are succeeding , but we must be frank : in the majority we are not . The gap between the rich and the poor in many EU Member States is increasing .
The elimination of income-related poverty must remain a priority for Member States but , for the one in six who live in financial poverty , there are many more who are excluded from society for other reasons .
We have to recognise that for many families - for many individuals even - there are problems more complicated than simply low income .
Barriers to opportunity are complex .
More than anything else , early intervention is crucial .
Prevention , of course , is better than cure .
In the UK , we know that the daughter of a teenage mother is three times as likely to become a teenage mother herself ; we know that sons with a convicted father are over four times more at risk of being convicted of a crime than those without a convicted father .
Yet , in many areas , there is no need to reinvent the wheel .
We must look at how other EU countries deal with these issues and learn from them .
We must share best practice more effectively .
Finland , for instance , has introduced a holistic sustainable approach that has been incredibly effective in reducing the number of people who are homeless .
Denmark , meanwhile , is implementing new policies that improve the quality of life of long-term rough-sleepers , rather than having the sole aim of integrating those individuals into mainstream society .
In Belgium , people who have experienced poverty are working with social workers to help them better understand the needs of poor people .
It is not always unemployment that causes poverty : in-work poverty is a problem as well .
That is why I have called for an exchange of best practice on the provision of a decent working minimum wage throughout the Member States .
At least five EU Member States do not even have one .
Equally , we must push all Member States to adopt a minimum living income for all .
Member States must do more to prevent exploitation of vulnerable workers as well ; to make sure that disabled and older people have a way into employment ; to prevent trafficking ; to safeguard the rights of asylum-seekers ; to ensure equal access to healthcare and community services for all ; to destigmatise people with mental health problems ; and to promote a more constructive approach to drugs and alcohol .
These are but a few of the issues this report has addressed .
Europe 's vision must be freedom and opportunity for all .
That is why it is so important to look at setting up mechanisms at a European level so that the exchange of best practice becomes a reality .
Member of the Commission . - ( CS ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , to start with I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Lynne , on her very interesting and comprehensive report .
I am pleased to see that the European Parliament has decided to address the fairly wide range of social issues covered by this report , issues that need to be solved urgently .
This report is a significant contribution towards social reality stocktaking on an ongoing basis .
This document comes at the time when the Commission and the Member States are examining the possibilities of strengthening the social dimension of the Lisbon Strategy .
We must respond to our citizens ' fears and we realise that social justice is one of the key problems for them .
Public opinion surveys show that the European Union should play a key role in supporting more integrated and cohesive societies .
As President Barroso said during a key debate on globalisation yesterday morning , the European Union has made significant progress in achieving the Lisbon goals .
New jobs are being created : 3.5 million new jobs were created last year alone .
The unemployment rate has fallen to approximately 7 % .
Although this rate is still too high , it is the lowest it has been in the last 10 years .
Economic growth has been satisfactory in spite of the recent financial instability .
However , there is no room for complacency .
Implementation of the Lisbon Strategy has been uneven and not all of its goals have been met .
Indeed , 12 million people are still unemployed , and these are often young people or long-term unemployed people with poor prospects for professional growth or social advancement ; 8 % of the European workforce suffers from in-work poverty ; 78 million European citizens suffer from poverty and one in five European Union citizens suffers from inferior living conditions .
In short , more has to be done in order to meet our common social goals .
Now , at a time when we are seeing the positive results of the European Union 's strategy in the area of growth and employment , it is the right time to begin to pursue social goals .
I welcome the reference in the report to the necessary political will and resolve to deal with issues of poverty and exclusion .
I , too , feel that it is urgent to tackle child poverty , combat discrimination and enhance diversity .
This of course means monitoring the transposition of the relevant legislation into national law and , if necessary , instituting proceedings against those Member States that have been found to infringe European Union legislation .
The report also looks at the barriers that prevent involvement in society and integration into the job market .
I agree that we have to combine supporting measures with suitable safety nets to ensure that no one is left out .
This attitude is reflected in the recent Commission communication on active inclusion .
This communication defines three key elements of a balanced and strategic approach to active inclusion :
Access to integrated job markets ;
Better access to services ;
Adequate income support .
This communication also launches the second phase of consultation with the social partners on these issues with a view to stepping up European Union cooperation in the area of active inclusion .
Following this consultation , the Commission intends to draw up a recommendation on the common principles of active inclusion , which is scheduled for the second half of 2008 .
In a further communication due to be adopted in the next few weeks the Commission will also present new measures to support the active inclusion of people with disabilities .
The Commission is grateful to the European Parliament for its persistent efforts to combat discrimination .
As stated in the Commission Legislative and Work Programme 2008 , the Commission will present proposals in 2008 for solving the problem of the existing protection loophole under Article 13 of the Treaty .
The proposals , which should be adopted by next summer , will be based on long-term dialogue with the European Parliament , on experience from the 2007 European Year of Equal Opportunities for All and on extensive public consultation .
The European Union has made significant progress in achieving gender equality , and the European Parliament has been an important partner in this process .
However , we have to continue to strengthen gender equality in the future .
This is a fundamental right , as well as a vital condition for achieving Europe 's goals in the areas of growth , employment and social cohesion .
I therefore welcome in particular the report 's reference to gender equality .
Since the Treaty of Amsterdam the Union has made progress in all areas of gender equality , and since 2003 in the area of equal opportunities for disabled people .
That said , there is still a lot of work to be done in both areas .
The fact that multiple discrimination still persists is a strong argument in favour of continuously emphasising equal opportunities in all areas .
This topic will be dealt with in the Commission communication due to be adopted in 2008 , which will be based on lessons taken from the 2007 European Year of Equal Opportunities for All .
Ladies and gentlemen , the changes in the EU 's social situation naturally follow the development of our society and the changes in the global concept as a whole .
In spite of that , I am convinced that the fundamental concept , i.e. finding a balance between the economic and the social and ecological aspects , is still entirely valid .
Therefore , the onus is on us to continue to look for new approaches that will help us to overcome problems that still exist .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Environment , Public Health and Food Safety . - ( SK ) Although it is necessary to monitor the social situation and social policies in the Member States in order to identify the problems and challenges facing the Union , the actions we take to deal with them are even more important .
As regards public health , we should focus on the problems facing EU citizens in the area of health care .
Taking into account the demographic trends and the rising average life expectancy , we have to develop public health strategies that will improve our quality of life , with a view in particular to preventing diseases and combating them effectively .
At the same time these strategies should take into account the need for high-quality , accessible and reliable health care for citizens from all sections of society , irrespective of their social status , age or country of residence .
We should pay particular attention to the most disadvantaged groups , such as physically or mentally disabled people , the elderly and children .
In view of the rising costs of health care , the Member States should adopt effective measures , such as targeted information campaigns , the use of generic medicines , the use of new technologies , mutual assistance measures at local level or greater solidarity between generations and in families .
In addition to that , and in cooperation with the Commission , the Member States should develop policies and support European initiatives to combat smoking , alcoholism and obesity , which will help to improve the quality of life of our fellow citizens .
Last but not least , we should focus on the effective implementation of the existing public health legislation .
The Member States and the Commission should ensure the application of the Community legislation on water , air and soil quality , and noise pollution , as well as the application of the regulations on chemical products , including those covered by REACH .
In this opinion the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality stresses that there are a number of dimensions to poverty and social exclusion but that the most important of these are the economic situation of families , housing conditions , and access to education , to health care and to long-term care .
The committee stresses that women and children are the main victims of poverty and social exclusion and points out that the risk is even greater in the case of immigrants , the elderly , the disabled and members of single-parent families .
It also notes that , on average , 15 % of pupils drop out of the education system but that , in some countries , such as Portugal , this rate is as high as around 40 % , which gives cause for concern as regards the education and training of young girls .
It stresses the importance of maintaining quality public services , a solid public and universal social security system and high levels of social protection and quality employment combined with rights and of ensuring effective gender mainstreaming in the formulation and implementation of such public policies ; finally , it urges the Commission and the Member States to give maximum priority to women 's social integration and women 's rights , by altering their respective policies accordingly , including income distribution policy .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( HU ) Thank you very much , Madam President . Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Lynne 's report , on which I heartily congratulate her , clearly does not and cannot have the last word on the issue of social inclusion and the transformation of social policy .
We are often prone to think that the European social model is timeless , but social policy must clearly also change , not only through globalisation , but also through the economy , social expectations , the demographic challenge and changing values , since we must find suitable responses to the challenges we face .
For this reason too the Commission 's initiative for preparing some sort of inventory of the social problems weighing on Europe 's population is to be welcomed .
It is obvious that nearly 500 million Union citizens are not one homogenous mass .
Despite the fact that the differences in income between the old Member States are falling , the differences between the rich and poor regions are still demonstrating a growth trend .
Two thirds of the population of the ten new Member States of the EU live in poor regions where the level of income is half , or less than half , the average income of the old Member States .
The situation is even worse in Bulgaria and Romania , where the average income does not even reach one third of the per capita income of the old Member States .
There is no question that in order to fight poverty we need to know more about the different forms in which poverty manifests itself .
However , to do this we need new poverty indicators , since up to now we have only had comprehensive data on the risk of relative poverty .
For this reason , we are eagerly awaiting the Commission 's communication in relation to this .
The report also draws attention to new risks of impoverishment .
For example , we know little about how dangerous are the proportions assumed by the population 's debt .
Of the 15 old Member States , the per capita debt of the population in 12 Member States exceeds EUR 16 000 , which accounts for 90 % of the average annual family income .
Please allow me to say one last sentence , Madam President .
The report again points out the importance of fighting child poverty , and we consider this to be extremely important .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( CS ) Madam President , Commissioner , first of all I would like to thank Mrs Elizabeth Lynne for the very good report and for her excellent cooperation .
Social exclusion is caused by a wide range of factors , and it would be a great pity not to use this report for follow-up work .
In my speech I would like to stress the importance of public services and their contribution to eliminating poverty and exclusion .
Once privatised , public services will become more expensive and less accessible .
I regret that we have not managed to adopt the position condemning those states that introduce a low basic tax , and so make it impossible to accumulate enough funds to carry out the State 's social tasks .
It would certainly be useful for the Member States to inform one another of their successes as part of the exchange of information on proven methods .
Of course I would also welcome the exchange of information on methods that did not pay off or even backfired .
I know that this is not being done but I am sure that it would be useful if the social partners and non-governmental organisations made it happen .
A fundamental precondition to ensuring that more and more citizens of the Member States do not find themselves dependent on often imperfect social welfare is the provision of an adequate number of reasonably well-paid jobs .
We cannot tolerate the fact that some people who work often depend on social welfare .
Consequently , we must seek to set up an adequate minimum wage in all Members States , either through legislation or through collective contracts , depending on the country 's traditional method .
Efforts to adapt old age pension schemes are being stepped up .
When taking steps to preserve the fundamental pillar - the State old-age pension scheme - all Members States should respect the relevant International Labour Organisation conventions that they have ratified .
Integrating disabled people into the job market is particularly important .
Therefore , we must look with a critical eye at the actions of those governments that have abolished various incentives for increasing the number of jobs for disabled people , and the Czech Republic is one of them .
Congratulations to my colleague Mrs Lynne on drawing up her report and on having achieved a political compromise that takes account of the opinions of the different political groups regarding the social realities within the Union .
It is true that the Member States ' governments are directly responsible for reducing poverty .
It is their duty to take measures to ensure that people have jobs , children attend schools and the poorest people are given social assistance .
However , the Union 's role in solving problems connected with poverty and inequality continues to be equally important .
The fact that 78 million European citizens live in poverty and the social divide between the poor and the rich is getting bigger and bigger is a most serious indication that action should be taken at both national and European level .
Most Member States have adequate minimum income rates .
However , there are still cases where the employers do not pay the established rates , thereby breaking the law .
As I have mentioned before on more than one occasion , Lithuanians working abroad happen to experience such unlawful treatment .
We should not tolerate employers carrying out such practices .
I welcome the Member States ' response to the Council 's call to reduce child poverty .
However , they have not yet drawn up their action plans for tackling the problem .
The disabled and elderly are particularly vulnerable .
We must make sure they have access to at least minimal long-term care at affordable prices .
The Social Fund has allocated resources for this .
It is a shame they remain unused in my country .
I do agree with the rapporteur 's position on the necessity of sharing experience and following the successful examples of achievements in Social security .
It is necessary to learn from those Member States that are making efficient use of resources allocated by the EU , to share their experience .
Ladies and gentlemen , in order to gain our citizens ' trust in the European Union , in its institutions , we must solve the most difficult problems they face .
In the speech he gave in this House , Nicolas Sarkozy , the President of France , said that the French feel that the EU does not care about them and does not provide social security .
French citizens have voted not against the Constitution , but against Europe , as they do not feel safe there .
The Commission has promised to prepare a report based on the social realities , with an analysis of social trends .
I do hope the main focus of this report will be the framework of actions , the framework that will define the methods of reducing or even abolishing poverty in Europe .
Then we will be able to win the support of our citizens and perhaps start to feel that we are working for them .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , we have here before us a great many ideas on social policy , for which I thank Mrs Lynne .
As social policy does not carry as much weight in the EU as economic policy , this report is not EU stocktaking - as the title says - so much as a list of demands for sociopolitical measures in the Member States .
I have two comments to make .
Sociopolitical matters are within the competence of the Member States .
We at European level may only make recommendations .
Europe is in a state of imbalance because there has been economic but not social harmonisation .
Europe has not become more just since Lisbon 2000 . On the contrary , poverty is increasing .
To truly combat poverty and make it possible for all EU citizens to live with dignity and justice , we need not only economic , market and competition aspects but also a social , just , ecological internal market for all people .
Secondly : often it is a case of ' all talk , no action ' .
We know what the problems are .
We do not really need studies and analyses .
It is time to take action at last .
It is not sufficient to declare 2010 the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion .
We need an effective anti-poverty agenda , we need data - so that all people , including those who are unemployed , have sufficient basic income and can live in dignity .
This is a matter of justice and is a human right for all .
Madam President , Mrs Lynne , this is a good stocktake of the lack of social security under which far too many of the citizens in the Member States are forced to live .
The stocktake also shows the connection between poverty , overcrowding , social exclusion and increased ill health and shorter life expectancy .
The stocktake looks at the importance of the right to housing , work , social security and the rights of women and persons with disabilities .
It also shows that problem gambling , alcohol consumption , drugs and smoking increase social exclusion .
The conclusion is therefore that Member States must tackle these problems .
So far so good , but the reality is often quite different .
Often these are just fine words because the EU , through various directives and regulations , with reference to the rules of the single market and competition rules , often prevents Member States from solving problems .
In addition , we subsidise wine producers and tobacco growing .
The free movement of goods , for example , prevents Sweden from maintaining a restrictive alcohol policy , which is very important .
Sweden has a gambling monopoly to limit gambling , but the EU is threatening court action .
There is the same double dealing when it comes to the text of legislation on misleading advertising and on advertisements aimed at children , because the EU 's other hand adopts TV directives with product placement and advertisements aimed at children .
It is possible to change the social reality but , in order to do so , public health concerns and environmental concerns must be given more importance than the competition rules of the single market , and social welfare and security must be given more importance than deregulation and privatisation .
The GUE / NGL Group is voting for the report and we will continue to do everything to improve social security for citizens .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Madam President , when I initially heard about the process of social reality stocktaking , I was delighted that someone wanted to hold a real discussion on the state of society .
Unfortunately , upon reading the documents from the Commission , I was disappointed to find that the stocktaking process was not looking at social reality but at economic indicators .
I am not convinced that economic indicators are a reliable measure of social reality .
If they were , the improved economic status of Ireland over the last decades should be matched by improvements in social cohesion , rather than the rise in serious crime , addiction , suicide , alienation , family dysfunction , exclusion and loneliness that we actually see .
We would not just ask if a person is employed ; we would ask if they are valued , connected and nourished physically , emotionally , intellectually and spiritually , and we would check whether the respect for this person extended to every person , regardless of age , size , ability , colour or any other characteristic .
To properly take stock of social reality , we would also look at the sustainability of the natural habitat of the human person : the family .
With this in mind , we would not just look at the gap between rich and poor , but the gap left by family breakdown and social isolation .
To understand social reality , we must start with the reality of the human person that makes up society .
I will give you just one example , and I hope it will illustrate the contradictory results we get if we look at the money and if we look at the man or woman .
We all agree that women should have the right to work and find equality when they do .
But when we exert economic pressure on women who would like to stay at home with a young baby to work rather than care for the child and push them into the workforce , we register a very high rate of employment and assume that this means a healthier social reality .
However , if we look at the baby , hardwired for immediate maternal input , and see the loss he or she suffers , which scientists tell us will be neurological and lifelong , then we have to question whether this high employment really translates as an indicator of a healthy social reality .
The irony of short-term thinking , of focusing exclusively on the economics of a society , is that it is the welfare of the people and the family at a human level that ultimately has the greatest impact on the economics .
Look at the cost of a troubled people to the exchequer .
Think of the cost of crime , drugs , dropping out , etc .
Economic growth can be gobbled up by the growth of social problems .
The word ' economics ' comes from the Greek for management of the home .
Economics should serve all people , helping them to be at home in their communities , at home in themselves .
If we get this right , we will have a very healthy social reality of which to take stock in the future .
( NL ) Madam President , the report somewhat cryptically entitled ' Social reality stocktaking ' was adopted almost unanimously in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs - there was only one vote against - and in fact this should come as no surprise .
After all , the report 's 97 recommendations amount to calls for assistance for everything and everyone : the poor , women , men , young people , the elderly , the unemployed , low-paid workers , the disabled , those who suffer discrimination , the sick , the healthy of today who may fall ill tomorrow , and so on and so forth .
I could say , with some irony , that the only group omitted from this report is those such as myself : heterosexual , middle-aged white men of right-wing political orientation .
Without irony , however , I would say that there is not a single person in this House who does not agree that the weaker members of our society are entitled to protection and that a civilised society can ultimately be judged on the degree of social protection it affords to people who , for objective reasons , find it difficult to play a normal part in society .
Therefore , you would have to be a bad person , as it were , not to support the catalogue of good intentions and social Santa Claus policy contained in this report .
Nevertheless , I shall not be endorsing this report .
The fact is that the list of recommendations contains a number of things I cannot support , particularly with regard to immigration policy , integration and diversity , and also the lack of essential protection of family policy .
The main reason I cannot endorse this report is much more fundamental , however .
Social policy and everything that can be subsumed under the heading ' social security ' is an outstanding example of a domain of the Member States , and sometimes of their federal states - not of the European Union .
Unless someone in this House has a machine for producing money and resources from thin air , unless such a machine exists , social protection measures still have to be funded from taxpayers ' money .
This means that choices have to be made and that , unfortunately , we cannot always play Santa Claus to everything and everyone .
There are essential decisions to be taken that are most fundamental to a whole society , and these decisions must be taken at the lowest possible level , as close as possible to citizens , and not in the ivory towers of Brussels , Luxembourg or Strasbourg .
The experience in my home country , for example , has been that Flemings and Walloons make fundamentally different choices on such matters as health care and their approach to unemployment .
The Flemish and Walloon societies are different , their political and economic worlds are different , and therefore they opt for different approaches and priorities .
If this is true of Belgium today , how much truer is it , mutatis mutandis , of the very different Member States of the European Union , for example the United Kingdom and Romania ?
It would be one thing if this report were only a catalogue of good intentions , but the European institutions have been intending to appropriate the field of social policy for years , and that is not a good thing .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in contrast to some of the speakers immediately before me , I believe the Commission is only to be congratulated on the communications on which this discussion is based .
They are not only a rich source for Member States seeking social facts and data but also , in my opinion , a sure sign that the EU and the Commission are serious about a stand-alone social policy .
If we declare our commitment to the European social model , in the sense of not only extolling it as a tradition and historical achievement , but also of making it into a trademark for a united Europe for the future , then a stocktake of our social reality is a basic prerequisite .
Particularly as a result of the enlargement rounds of 2004 and 2007 , we must finally distance ourselves from the view that European social policy is an adjunct to the internal market .
However , this is not entirely self-evident , for in many areas the dominance of economic policy in Commission proposals is , unfortunately , conspicuous .
In this connection , I would remind the House of the Green Paper on ' Modernising labour law to meet the challenges of the 21st century ' and the flexicurity debate .
The former was shelved by the Commission yesterday , news I can only welcome wholeheartedly while recommending the same course for the flexicurity proposals , which are directed at hard-won employees ' rights in the employment relationship .
All the points addressed in this report - many thanks to Mrs Lynne - are highly topical .
I am thinking of the minimum-wage debate in my country and the wage claims that are supported by the current strikes on the French and German railways .
When it comes to wages policy , we are right in saying that a full-time job must provide a living for the man or woman who does it .
Anything else falls short of the Christian responsibility of employers for their employees .
Work must be worthwhile - that must be the basic principle .
What always upsets me is child poverty , which I lament even in my own country .
I believe we must pay special attention to this . It should not exist .
Actually , I should like to see rapid efforts in the Member States making it redundant for us to declare 2010 the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion .
( SV ) Mr President , Commissioner , I would also like to begin by thanking Mrs Lynne for an excellent job and an excellent report .
I was myself invited to the conference in the Azores where we , the Commission and Parliament , together had a dialogue with civil society concerning these issues .
I would also like to commend the Commission for taking these issues seriously through its new communication on social exclusion and by presenting a recommendation next year which takes up these issues .
It is precisely as Mr Špidla says , the situation in Europe is generally very good with increased growth and more jobs , but at the same time the gulfs are increasing .
The gulfs are increasing and poverty is increasing .
There are big differences between Member States .
In a number of countries the differences are extremely large , and I am not just talking about new and old Member States - there are new Member States with small gulfs and old Member States with large gulfs .
We must deal with this .
I think the Commission 's strategy with three pillars is very good .
When it comes to work , jobs are not enough , because there are also bad jobs from which it is not possible to support oneself and which are not empowering .
We must have good jobs which pay decent wages .
We on the Committee looked at the situation regarding minimum incomes and saw big differences between Member States .
We need an exchange of experience here to find best practice .
Then there are the public services to which everyone must have access : social services , housing , health care and so on .
The methods are the open method of coordination which we shall strengthen .
I would also like to mention , before I finish my remarks , that today we are going to vote on Parliament 's position on , among other things , the forthcoming Integrated Guidelines .
We must also include the social dimension in the Integrated Guidelines in order to combine growth issues and employment issues with a social dimension so that we see these issues not in isolation from each other , but as a whole .
( ET ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I thank Mrs Lynne for raising a very important matter .
I welcome the report 's aim , namely to focus various stakeholders ' attention on discussing what constitutes Europe 's social reality .
This is a wide-ranging topic and for that reason I can dwell only on a couple of crucial points .
At the Nice Summit in 2000 , the Member States undertook to bring about a significant , measurable reduction in poverty and social exclusion by 2010 .
Regrettably , action on that objective has not been particularly successful .
An open Europe based on free movement and free trade has contributed to the economic progress on which people 's well-being and a better quality of life depend .
It has , however , become clear over the last few years that for many Europeans it is a matter for debate whether the net effect of globalisation , liberalisation and greater competition does anything to improve their well-being .
Today , in the 21st century , the level of poverty and social exclusion in Europe are worryingly high .
Mr Špidla recently said that about 20 % , in other words one in five of our citizens , is in danger of falling into poverty .
All the Member States have social services and social benefits , yet even after receiving them one sixth of people live in poverty .
Have we asked ourselves why this is the way things are in a Union which was not forcibly brought together ?
Why now , 62 years after the end of the war and 50 years since the Union came into being , have we been unable to guarantee people 's basic rights ?
My question is : is a successful economy an end in itself or should it be a means of improving people 's well-being ?
Furthermore , by providing social aid the Member States are committed to providing benefits equivalent to the minimum amount needed on which to live ; to providing aid sufficient to fulfil this objective .
We do not need to formally transpose reams of directives - there lies no more than self-delusion .
This raises the question as to whether timely implementation of adopted texts is guaranteed at the level of the European Union institutions , including in the ' soft policy areas ' .
In Europe we should not focus solely on economic results and competition ; we should also consider establishing greater social solidarity and sustainable social measures .
And where we have adopted a decision to that end , we must also see to it that it is implemented .
Our citizens expect that much of us .
- ( PL ) Mr President , unfortunately economic development , which we all crave so much , is accompanied by an increase in income stratification , which weakens social cohesion and creates serious problems where the weaker groups are concerned - those affected by unemployment , those receiving a low wage or those who have difficulty accessing education and health care .
The tasks adopted at the Nice European Council have been carried out inadequately .
There are still groups of people whose income is below the minimum needed to survive .
Lack of economic independence also interferes with people 's sense of dignity .
A general ban on discrimination , and a guarantee of equal opportunities , chiefly for disabled people , are obviously needed , but they do mean a rise in expenditure on social aims .
Our populations are ageing , which gives rise to fears about the financial capacity of pension insurance systems .
I congratulate Mrs Lynne on an excellent report , which draws attention to these and other important social problems in our countries and also to methods that could be used to deal with them .
I most definitely support this draft .
I would , however , like to draw attention to a contradiction in the European Union 's approach to social and economic problems .
The pressure to restrict expenditure on social aims prevents numerous social problems from being dealt with .
One example that could be quoted is the reform of the pensions system in Poland .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am not alone in congratulating Elizabeth Lynne on her report , partly because I know that in taking stock of everything that is socially flawed in Europe , she found so many things that were wrong that parliamentary officials were forced to drag her away from her desk so that she could be here with us this morning , and she still had not finished .
It is true that there is much poverty in Europe .
When I came in and saw my colleague Fernando Fernández , I remembered what he said in Puebla , Mexico , a few years ago , when we were both attending a conference on world poverty .
He said then that poverty can be predominantly blamed on bad government , which exists all over the world .
Therefore , those responsible for poverty are first and foremost national governments , and not the European Union .
This is a call for national governments , who expect and demand so much from Europe but do so little themselves , especially where it is most needed , to accept responsibility .
I also met a friend of mine , Mr von Wogau , as I came into Parliament , and he asked me whether it was true that in Italy , the state pension for a widow or for someone is completely incapacitated is EUR 50 a month for life .
Mr President , I had to tell him that unfortunately this is true .
For this reason , as the only elected representative of pensioners in this Parliament , I say yes to a minimum wage for anyone lucky enough to work , I say yes to a minimum pension in Europe for all old-age pensioners and I say yes to anyone who is unemployed , out of work or without a pension , that they too should also be entitled to receive a minimum income .
( DE ) Commissioner , Mrs Lynne , I am much obliged to the Commission for the initiatives and to Mrs Lynne for her most excellent report .
Anyone who wants to combat poverty - as Mr Fatuzzo has already said - must really focus more intensely on the older generation .
We must stay abreast of demographic changes and also ensure , despite steadily rising costs in the health system , that it will be just as possible to age with dignity in the future .
Older people have just as much right to comprehensive , quality-assured health care and long-term care regardless of their income or where they live .
We urgently need a targeted exchange of experience amongst Member States as to how best to organise and secure high-quality , affordable care .
In particular , we must take into account the problem of increasing numbers of people suffering from dementia .
However , to do this , we need sound data ; that is also why we are asking the Commission to provide us with these data as quickly as possible .
In a social Europe , all patients must have equal access to evidence-based medicines and medical products .
It is simply unacceptable that the very same antibiotic costs EUR 3 in Belgium and EUR 34 in Germany , for example .
Therefore I am glad that , with this report , we are calling for the Commission and the Member States to enter into intensive dialogue with us , and with the pharmaceutical industry and patient groups , in order to develop balanced guidelines for greater transparency as far as the effectiveness and price of medicines are concerned .
This is another contribution to reducing the costs of health care for us all .
- ( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I , too congratulate you on your two communications and I hope that you will continue with your constructive proposals .
My colleague , Mrs Lynne , with her sensitive approach to social issues , and all of us with our amendments , have been involved in all the OMC actions included in the national action plans .
The report on social reality stocktaking will give direction to the social policy of the Member States .
It should take account of the fact that in Europe today there are serious demographic problems directly affecting social cohesion and solidarity between the generations .
The family is still not taken into account by Member States in terms of the support it should be given , although it forms the basis of society .
Poverty is increasing , in single-parent families as well as in large families , not only because of lack of income , but also because of a lack of social support and equal treatment , especially in taxation .
Families ' living conditions directly affect children , especially in the more vulnerable categories .
Inequality of access to resources and opportunities is growing , limiting both personal development and the future economic development and cohesion of Europe .
Would the EU , for each child born there , not be able to guarantee an income to cover those children 's living expenses and upbringing , equivalent to the per-capita income of each Member State ?
Policy on the promotion of social cohesion must be based on participation in the employment market .
It must also contribute to the social integration of individuals not in employment and those offering informal services within the family .
For this reason , the Member States are called up on primarily to investigate ways of recognising the unofficial skills acquired when caring for children and dependent persons , such as preliminary training and work experience .
This will facilitate their integration into the employment market and provide pension and insurance rights .
Solidarity between the generations must be maintained by making use of the knowledge and experience of older people and through its dissemination and use by younger generations .
The Member States are called upon to promote systems for the exchange of services between the generations and to invest in voluntary schemes , whether of an educational , cultural or business nature .
This will be achieved by creating suitable infrastructures and providing information on increased opportunities for older people to participate in such activities , so that they do not become marginalised or fall victim to social exclusion .
( ES ) Mr President , Mrs Lynne , Commissioner , thank you very much for offering us this communication and this document , which are undoubtedly going to enable us to improve our knowledge of changes and trends , and the agenda that we need to have for the future .
We should not , however , make a mistake .
We have many documents , we have many analyses , we have many debates and we have many words , but here , as for diseases , we need not only a diagnosis but also treatment .
It is true , as you said , Commissioner , that we need European treatment , through the Union , its institutions and its mechanisms , in order to respond to the problems of today and tomorrow , taking into account that if we do not do it at Union level it will be impossible to do it solely at the level of the Member States .
Some Member States that are making fast progress , such as mine , are beginning to be threatened by policies that are seeking to slow down , or , in other Member States , to establish unfair competition with the supply and social change that is taking place in our countries .
Commissioner , please take account of the fact that the feeling is beginning to spread that European social policy , which in the 1960s and 1970s , as a Spanish trade unionist said to me in a letter today , was aimed at harmonising progress , and in the 1980s and 1990s limited itself to ensuring minimum requirements , is now beginning to slide towards a social policy in which there is competition between the Member States to achieve the lowest common denominator .
Commissioner , the risks that we face for the future include not only ageing and globalisation , but also the contagious lack of solidarity and aggressive , xenophobic and anti-European nationalism that is threatening both Europe 's current social victories and its future ones .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to add my voice sincerely to the thanks to our rapporteur , Mrs Lynne .
Social protection and social inclusion help to combat poverty and exclusion in preventive health care and many other areas , and are among the most important challenges for the future .
The term ' minimum income ' is often discussed in different ways in the Member State that I come from .
However , I fully support Mrs Stauner 's approach with regard to jobs , full-time working and income .
The social partnership is strongly established in Austria , which gives us a great opportunity , indeed one that is used in attempts to find a solution with the agreement of all those involved .
This means we do not have as many strikes as in other EU states , where these are frequently the order of the day .
This is precisely why a regulation at EU level must be approached very carefully .
The different national social welfare systems mean that we must proceed very judiciously with any harmonisation .
Our concern must be to offer social protection to all employees and to enable their social inclusion .
Naturally , it must also be possible , within the framework of subsidiarity , that Member States should , must and can have higher standards .
Mr President , the social reality of Europe is that poverty is rife .
Seventy-two million men , women and children are below the poverty line , many are homeless and many disabled or confined to their homes because of lack of services .
Many people are trapped in poverty by inflexible welfare rules .
I am afraid that communications and guidelines will not solve these issues .
While I do not underestimate the difficulties faced by Commissioner Špidla , we need to establish legal obligations on Member States to achieve the necessary changes .
Working people are seeing their pensions devalued and their job security undermined , and many fear the race to the bottom .
The problem is that inequality is built into many Member States ' economic models .
For many of them , including Ireland , the attitude is ' Let us create the wealth . Then we will sort out the social problems ' .
This is to ignore the reality that social inequalities are a brake on economic progress and that we cannot have long-term sustainable prosperity for everyone if we treat social policy as an afterthought and fail to avail of the wasted talent of 72 million people , not to mention the human misery that hides behind that statistic .
( CS ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , European societies are undergoing dramatic changes in relation to the nature of work and family life , the social status of women and social mobility .
Social values are changing and societies are becoming more and more multicultural .
The current developments have expanded people 's horizons and given them more options when making decisions about their lives .
Although the Member States of the European Union are among the richest countries in the world , new types of poverty and inequality are still emerging .
Tens of millions of European citizens continue to live in poverty .
Social inclusion and social protection are basic values of the European Union and fundamental rights for all individuals .
However , the Member States must step up their efforts to combat child poverty .
Unless there are significant improvements in the inclusion of children from disadvantaged social groups even at pre-primary level , the number of pupils who drop out of school early will not decrease ; nor will we be able to increase the number of people completing secondary school and thus gaining key skills .
An increasing number of citizens will have to cope with social exclusion , unemployment and other socially undesirable phenomena that are harmful to themselves as well as to the economy and society .
From this point of view , it is also crucial to combat youth unemployment .
It is important to remove the obstacles in some professional training programmes so that they are more flexible and effective and reflect the needs of the labour market .
This will significantly improve the opportunities for disadvantaged people to assert themselves .
Strengthening social cohesion and eradicating poverty and social exclusion must be political priorities for the European Union and its Member States .

Mr President , I welcome this debate and report on social reality and , though we must of course welcome stocktaking and exchanges of best practice and the open method of coordination , the reality that we have to understand is that these devices have not yet stopped : women having 24 % less pay compared to men in Germany ; nearly one in three children living in poverty in Poland ; and wealth inequality in my own country , the United Kingdom , at a 40-year high .
I do think that European social funding and national programmes like the New Deal in the UK are essential active labour market measures to tackle the real barriers which prevent groups in our society from progressing from worklessness to work and that work is still one of the best devices for us to combat poverty .
I do thank Commissioner Špidla for putting a firm commitment in the Commission 's work programme for new legislation on Article 13 discrimination , which I have long discussed with him .
I and this Parliament look forward to working with him on the detail , not least in the Presidency conference next week .
But all of us - he and us together - must guard against this talk on stocktaking delaying the new social agenda in Europe , or deregulation in one area actually leading to increases in inequality and injustice , not combating these evils .
Trade unionists , social NGOs and of course disabled people , with whom I have worked for more than 20 years , are sceptical about what we are doing for social Europe .
We have to listen to their concerns and we have to respond to them .
Member of the Commission . - ( CS ) Mr President , this debate has been extremely comprehensive and detailed .
It would be very difficult to give a detailed answer to the individual comments , so allow me to provide a brief summary in response .
First of all , it seems to me that the debate has clearly shown that Parliament 's welcomes the idea of social reality stocktaking , and though I agree with Mr Cercas that diagnosis is not the same as therapy , I am also of the opinion that no therapy is possible without diagnosis .
Our society is constantly changing and we have to find new methods to adapt to it or reform the old methods .
For this to be effective , we need to understand the global picture .
I think that the debate has another common denominator , and that is that although the social reality has its own dynamism to some extent , we also have our own values : a general European concept of a European social model that encompasses social inclusion and social protection and activity in general .
It is therefore not acceptable in our model of thinking and acting to adopt a passive view .
There is always the possibility of trying out active politics and active intervention .
There is also a third idea that I would like to stress .
There is no doubt that , like most policies , the majority of European decisions also comply with the principle of subsidiarity , according to which the policies to solve a given problem are dealt with in the best and most effective manner .
This means that there is no doubt in relation to the position of the Member States on social policy .
On the other hand , the debate also clearly shows that the goal cannot be reached at Member State level alone , without efforts at European level .
It is therefore our duty to find the most advantageous and effective synergy in this area .
The debate brought to light a concern that I also share to some extent : a concern that there is a risk that inequality and the incompatibility of the social policies in individual Member States may lead to competition that possibly lowers social standards .
The European Commission does not want to open this door .
Our fundamental concept is to make individual European social policies compatible in such a way that will ensure competition and development from the bottom up , with a view to progress that always includes a social dimension .
Ladies and gentlemen , the debate also clearly shows that social and economic policies cannot be designed on an ' either / or ' basis .
The only possibility is ' not only / but also ' , which means the balanced development of both policies together , without making giving preference to one over the other .
The usual trend is to give priority to the economic policy .
However , I could see clearly from the debate that this approach is not favoured by the European Parliament .
Ladies and gentlemen , you mentioned a wide range of individual problems , notably the issue of the health service , including access to medicines and its overall organisation .
You discussed the effects of demographic ageing and the importance of services of general interest .
I am glad that all these views are represented in the European Commission 's strategic documents .
We aim to integrate them into a general global strategy .
Ladies and gentlemen , allow me in conclusion to express my thanks to Mrs Lynne , whose report , which is currently being discussed here , is without doubt an important element of the global effort to ensure progress across the European Union .
Thank you , Commissioner .
As President I would also like to congratulate Mrs Lynne on a report that has had a huge impact among civil society .
I have been a privileged witness to how the convoys of young people standing against poverty and for inclusion , who travelled across Europe , took Mrs Lynne 's document and went from city to city , from European capital to European capital , honouring the European Parliament , thanks to the work of our colleague .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.35 and resumed at 12 noon )

( ES ) Mr President , I would like to ask you , along with Mrs Mann , who cannot be here today with us in Parliament , and other colleagues , to pass on the solidarity of the citizens of the European Union that our Parliament represents with the victims of the tropical storm , which then turned into a Christmas hurricane , which has devastated Haiti , the Dominican Republic , Jamaica , Cuba , Barbados and other areas of the Caribbean , leaving a trail of destruction , disease and death .
Also , Mr President , please express our solidarity with the victims of the floods in the Mexican states of Oaxaca , Chiapas , and also , above all , Tabasco .
I would like to ask you , Mr President , not only to pass on our solidarity but also to urge the European Commission to mobilise the tools at its disposal to alleviate this situation and remedy the damage , which always affects the most disadvantaged areas .
Thank you very much , Mr Salafranca .
As far as this relates to Parliament , we shall proceed in this manner , and we shall also pass your thoughts on to the Commission .
Communication of Council common positions : see Minutes
1 .
Regulations governing political parties at European level and the rules regarding their funding ( vote )
- Leinen report
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , last Friday , the Council accepted the essential content of this Regulation on the funding of parties and foundations at European level .
In addition , this morning , a trialogue took place with the Commission and the Council , and we reached agreement on the questions that remained to be settled .
Therefore , there is a realistic chance of adopting this project at first reading and creating the prerequisites for better financing even for 2008 .
I therefore suggest that we postpone the vote until 29 November , at the next plenary , in Brussels .
( Parliament approved the proposal )
2 .
Quarterly statistics on Community job vacancies ( vote )
- Athanasiu report
3 .
Full application of the Schengen acquis ( vote )
- Coelho report
4 .
Recovery plan for bluefin tuna in the Eastern Atlantic and the Mediterranean ( vote )
Braghetto report
5 .
The European Interest : succeeding in the age of globalisation ( vote )
- Joint motion for a resolution :
- Before the vote on the heading above paragraph 1 :
on behalf of the ALDE group . - I would like to suggest changing the heading of the first part to read : ' External Lisbon dimension ' . That is to say , to change ' External policies ' to ' External Lisbon dimension ' .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
- Before the vote on paragraph 5 :

( DE ) Mr President , due to the withdrawal of an oral amendment to paragraph 5 , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats wishes to vote ' no ' , contrary to what is stated in its lists .
- Before the vote on paragraph 14 :
( DE ) Mr President , there are Members who have a problem with the central section , the part from ' points out that one ' to ' domestic demand ' .
In agreement with Mr Caspary from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , I therefore suggest adding the words ' in some Member States ' after ' European economy ' , and I hope that this will deal with the problems with the central section .
I believe this could also be of assistance to the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
- Before the vote on paragraph 30 :
( DE ) Mr President , there is no objection to postponing the text , but I would still ask that we hold a vote on it .
If Parliament votes in favour of the text , the text belongs elsewhere , but it could be that it is not endorsed , which is why I am asking for a vote on the original text .
There has been no request for a split vote .
- After the final vote :
( SV ) Mr President , Parliament has now voted in favour of updating and amending the Integrated Guidelines .
This concerns , for example , the social dimension .
So far the Commission has chosen not to pay attention to this .
I would like to hear Mr Špidla 's comments on the decision which Parliament has now taken and whether he is going to push the issue of updated and amended Integrated Guidelines within the Commission .
Member of the Commission . - ( CS ) The decision taken by Parliament has a certain weight and the Commission must take it into account when preparing further documentation .
Therefore , Parliament 's vote naturally carries the appropriate weight and the issue of the Integrated Guidelines was fundamental in the debate we held with Parliament .
We interpret ' certain weight ' to mean ' great weight ' and recommend that the Commission adopt our assessment .
6 .
Application of Directive 2004 / 38 / EC on the right of citizens of the Union and their families to move and reside freely within the territory of the Member States ( vote )
Joint motion for a resolution :
- Before the vote :
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I refer to Rules 19 and 166 of the Rules of Procedure .
Before Parliament votes on the joint motion for a resolution by certain groups on freedom of movement , I would like to condemn most firmly on behalf of my group the personal attack in paragraph 13 thereof on the Vice-President of the Commission , Franco Frattini .
I wish to denounce a politically undignified manoeuvre by the Italian Socialists , taken up by certain of my fellow Members , which is unworthy of the challenges we face .
More serious still , this untruthful distortion of Mr Frattini 's comments , which our institution must reject , will mean we cannot make a composed decision .
If our group were to vote against this resolution because of this manoeuvre , this would not in any way diminish our support for all the Romanian and other EU nationals who obey the law and respect their host country .
Europe is founded on the rule of law , something we reaffirm in the resolution my group has signed on the joint initiative of our Italian and Romanian colleagues .
The question of freedom of movement is not just a national matter , but a European one .
It is not a case of settling political scores , but a question of values , ladies and gentlemen .
( Applause )
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , we held an extensive debate in this Chamber in which Commissioner Frattini took part .
The Commissioner responded very moderately in his own comments and in his answers to speeches from various Members .
The resolution criticises only one point ; that is , that it can be proved that Commissioner Frattini gave the public incorrect information on a specific point of European law .
The fact that our resolution corrects this and also clarifies that the Commissioner responsible for the legal protection of the citizens of Europe made an incorrect statement in public on an essential question of citizens ' rights is the duty of this Parliament and has nothing to do with any conspiracy theories .
However , we know very well , Mr Daul , that you are a pitiful Member , because you were pressured by Forza Italia to make that statement . That is all there is to be said on the matter .
( Applause from the left )
We do not want to conduct a debate here now .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think that we should comment on the statement by the chairman , Mr Daul , separately .
This Parliament will express itself with a majority and has every right to criticise or censure the Commissioners .
It is the sovereign right of this Parliament .
If we did what we did , it was because Mr Frattini misinterpreted Community law , and although it is difficult to make myself heard above all this shouting , I would like to repeat that we are acting here as MEPs towards a European Commissioner and we will continue to do so !
( Applause from the left )
Please could we be a little less emotional in dealing with this matter .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I wish to speak briefly on a point of order .
Independently of any party political debate , it is highly unwise of Commissioners to get involved in party political matters in their own countries or in anybody else 's country .
I think it is not unreasonable that this House should remind the Commission of its duties in this regard .
( Applause from the left )
I now have three more speeches and then we shall close this short debate .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , I think I do not need to add much to what Monica Frassoni , Graham Watson and Martin Schulz have said .
I would simply like to say this : it would be sensible , when any Commissioner has his words challenged by four groups who are not all from the same half of the Chamber , for him to reflect on what he should avoid doing again if he wants to have Parliament 's trust .
( Applause )
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in accordance with Rules 151 and 19 of the Rules of Procedure , I ask you to assess the admissibility of paragraph 13 , which contains an unmotivated and unfounded personal attack on the Vice-President of the Commission .
This is a text which , if approved , after the statements by the spokesperson of the Commission President defending Mr Frattini , would cause an unseemly conflict between Parliament and the Commission for internal political reasons .
Therefore , I ask you to put the text of the motion to the vote without paragraph 13 and at the same time I ask the authors to retract the text via an oral amendment .
- Before the vote on paragraph 1 :
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to add the following oral amendment : ' Expresses its deep regret at the murder of Ms. Giovanna Reggiani in Rome on 31 October 2007 , and sends its sincere condolences to her family ' .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
- Before the vote on paragraph 13 :
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to add the following amendment : ' Considers education and the fight against school drop-out within Roma communities to be one of the fundamental tools for combating social exclusion , exploitation and crime ' .
( The oral amendment was not accepted )
- Before the vote on Recital F :
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , considering the importance of the conditions set forth in Articles 5 , 6 , 7 and 8 of Directive 2004 / 38 / EC on the right of entry and residence .
( The oral amendment was not accepted )
7 .
Application of the Schengen acquis ( vote )
Motion for a resolution :
8 .
Pakistan ( vote )
Joint motion for a resolution :
- Before the vote on paragraph 1 :
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , as Chairman of the Delegation for relations with the countries of South Asia , I led negotiations on this compromise text .
I recognise that it is a sensitive issue and it is important that we all recognise the situation in Pakistan .
I think the whole House will want to send a strong , unified message to General Musharraf .
In the spirit of compromise and , I hope , to win the support of the whole House , I would like to propose the following oral amendment .
In recital A , we refer to President Musharraf ' suspending the Constitution and the rule of law and replacing them with martial law ' .
I would like to propose that we say that he has replaced them ' by the state of emergency , de facto martial law ' .
Then , in line with the suggestions made by other colleagues , in three other places , paragraphs 1 , 10 and 11 , we should replace ' martial law ' with ' the state of emergency ' .
I hope that will command the full support of the House .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
9 .
Bali Conference on Climate Change ( vote )
Motion for a resolution :
- Before the vote :
( FI ) Mr President , I would just like to say that one important point in the Finnish version of this resolution has been translated wrongly .
In section 1 , which concerns the Bali negotiating mandate , there is a misunderstanding in the Finnish , which suggests that this resolution would be dealing with the EU 's internal negotiating mandate before the Bali Conference .
In fact , the Bali mandate means that at the Bali Conference the countries which have ratified the climate treaty will try to obtain a negotiating mandate to make it possible to establish the next climate treaty .
In other words , the Finnish text in section 1 which says ' to agree on a negotiating mandate for the conference ' should say ' on a negotiating mandate for a treaty at this conference ' .
- After the vote :
Mr President , I should be recorded as voting against Amendment 7 .
I am afraid the wrong light came on when I pressed the button . It should have been a vote against .
This does not change the result of the vote , but it is a sensitive issue for me .
I would therefore ask that my vote be recorded as a vote against .
It will be noted as you have said .
10 .
Strengthening the European Neighbourhood Policy ( vote )
Obiols i Germà and Tannock report
- Before the vote on paragraph 14 / 2 :
( FR ) Mr President , excuse me , I would just like to make it clear that the deletion of the term ' readmission agreements ' only concerns the first section of paragraph 14 , to remove any ambiguity over the interpretation of the vote .
- Before the vote on Amendment 3 :
rapporteur . - Mr President , I would like to add for paragraph 19a the following wording : ' underlines the need to involve and work together with the EEA countries ( Iceland , Norway , Liechtenstein ) and Switzerland and to make full use of their experience of working with the European Union ' .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
- Before the vote on paragraph 42 :

rapporteur . - Mr President , this is just to confirm that the oral amendment is to delete the paragraph , so that should be taken first , before Amendment 13 , which means that the order of voting in the list needs to be changed .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
11 .
Trade and economic relations with Ukraine ( vote )
Zaleski report
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , before the vote I , together with my colleagues from the Committee on International Trade , should like to say thank you for the successful work that has been done , which allows us to save time due to the absence of amendments .
This report should send a clear signal to the new government and the parliament in Ukraine that , for our part , we have done everything necessary to ensure that the negotiations for the free-trade area can take place .
We are trusting partners in this dialogue .
If there is a representative from Ukraine here today , please would he or she tell the national parliament that the European Parliament recommends voting without delay on the application by Ukraine for accession to the WTO , and ratifying this accession as soon as a decision has been made in Geneva .
For the mutual benefit of both the EU and Ukraine , I would ask you all now please to support this report .
Thank you very much .
( Applause )
Mr Zaleski , if I were allowed to congratulate you on how well you express yourself in my own language , I would do so .
12 .
Situations of fragility ( vote )
- Motion for a resolution :
13 .
Social reality stocktaking ( vote )
- Lynne report
- Before the vote on paragraph 9 :
rapporteur . - I propose that the word ' women ' be changed to ' individuals ' in paragraph 9 .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
Voting time
The next item is voting time .
( For results and other details of the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
The next item is the explanations of vote .
in writing . - ( PL ) Mr Leinen 's report specifically states that the most significant innovation in the Commission proposal is to make it possible to fund not only European political parties , but also affiliated political foundations at European level from the Union budget .
I agree that the proposed regulation will improve the financial stability of European political parties and the funding of their election campaigns in the European Parliament elections in 2009 .
( SK ) A year ago it still looked like the date for the enlargement of the Schengen area would be postponed until 2009 .
I am glad that we have all stepped up our efforts and found a constructive solution to make the free movement of people without passport controls a reality .

I thus welcome the report by Mr Carlos Coelho confirming the accession of nine new Member States to the Schengen area .
I believe that the free movement of people without passport controls is a real success story of European integration , which is why I was happy to vote for this report .
The accession of the new Member States , including Slovakia , to the Schengen area , says clearly to the people of Europe that the Iron Curtain , built by the totalitarian Communist regimes between Western and Eastern Europe , will be consigned to the history books after 21 December 2007 .
For me , the vote on this report is a historic event since it is taking place in the same week as the Slovak and Czech Republics will commemorate - on 17 November - the 18th anniversary of the fall of the totalitarian regime that used to prevent citizens from travelling around Europe .
I believe that all European citizens will welcome this Christmas present .
( NL ) Mr President , I voted against the Coelho report primarily to draw attention to the numerous problems with the open-border policy of the Schengen Agreement .
After all , the Schengen system stands or falls by a strict , watertight control of its external borders on the one hand - which , to be perfectly clear , is not taking place - and by a rigorous approach to crime in all Member States , coordinated in all Member States , on the other - which is found far too rarely .
Finally , all Schengen countries must also conduct a strict immigration policy , something that is completely at variance with , for example , the waves of mass legalisation seen in quite a few Member States in recent years .
In these circumstances , as an individual and as a politician , I cannot rejoice at no longer having to pass through border controls at internal borders , since criminals and illegal immigrants do not have to do so either , and that is pernicious to our society .

( CS ) Mr President , allow me to speak about the report by my colleague Mr Carlos Coelho on the draft Council decision on the full application of the provisions of the Schengen acquis in the nine Member States that joined the EU in 2004 .
I personally believe that this decision is absolutely vital .
The accession of our countries , including my home country , the Czech Republic , should not be postponed under any circumstances .
All the analyses to date objectively state that all these countries are adequately prepared for the enlargement of the Schengen area .
Thanks to an incredible effort by the relevant Members States , the many experts involved in the inspections , the police , judicial authorities , officials and others , today these Member States are sufficiently prepared to apply all the provisions of the Schengen acquis in a satisfactory manner .
I therefore assume that the Justice and Home Affairs Council will also express its support for this decision on 6-7 December this year .
The symbolic importance of the elimination of the internal borders that our citizens associate with joining the Schengen area will go down in history and can only be compared with the fall of the Iron Curtain almost 20 years ago .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , I am delighted that - in spite of the technical problem - we all joined together to vote on the report confirming that the new Member States , including the Czech Republic , will be ready to join the Schengen area as early as 2008 .
I appreciate the effort and openness of the Member States and the Commission during the intense technical consultations required prior to the enlargement .
The enlarged Schengen area will no doubt present greater challenges for Europe 's internal security , but on the other hand , and I would like to emphasise this , it is the culmination of the efforts to achieve free movement in a truly integrated area .
Next year Europe will be united as it has never been before .
The Iron Curtain is definitely gone and I thank you for that .

- ( PL ) Mr President , Poland 's accession to the Schengen area brings with it not only potential benefits linked to convenience in crossing borders , but also threats .
One negative phenomenon that Poland has already been experiencing for a number of years is the difficulties encountered by citizens of our eastern neighbours in entering our country , including Poles living in Belarus and Ukraine .
A lack of border controls may lead to many negative phenomena associated with criminality and illegal immigration .
We are also concerned about action taken to remove national border controls in Member States in favour of pan-European EU border services .
That is why I abstained from voting on this matter .
in writing . - ( PT ) As we have long argued , we consider that the areas of Justice and Home Affairs are central competences of States , particularly of the Portuguese State .
We therefore oppose their progressive transfer to the supranational institutions of the EU in a process that justifies every new ' advance ' on the basis of the previous ' advance ' .
Such is the case with the creation of the ' Schengen area ' with its Schengen acquis , which serves as a catalyst for the communitarisation of policies or measures linked to border control - visas , asylum or immigration - or police and judicial mechanisms .
All the more so when such ' communitarisation ' happens in a framework in which the major EU powers , in concert , make sure that the decision-making process gives them the possibility of defending and safeguarding their interests , which is not the case for Portugal .
As we have stated , essential international and European cooperation between sovereign States with equal rights concerning these matters is one thing , but the unacceptable handing over of fundamental elements for the safeguarding of national sovereignty and democracy to supranational institutions dominated by the major EU powers to create ' Fortress Europe ' is quite another .
Hence our vote .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am voting against this report since , as I have already explained at length on several occasions , including recently , during my speeches in Parliament , I am firmly opposed to the Schengen Agreement .
I am particularly opposed to it when this Agreement becomes the vehicle for illegal immigrants and dangerous movements within the EU .
The borders of these countries that want to become part of the Schengen acquis are an easy target for criminals .
They would provide another means of entry for uncontrolled immigration from former Soviet bloc countries and from the Middle East , . not to mention the social disorder that the free movement of citizens within the EU undeniably causes Italy and other countries .
The Schengen cooperation must remain open to all Member States who wish to join and participate in the cooperation .
On the other hand , it is extremely important that all the countries participating in the cooperation already satisfy the requirements at the time of joining , because the cooperation entails a common external border .
If there are deficiencies in one country , Sweden has no way of checking the border protection .
The investigations made show that there are problems which need to be tackled , and the reasonable thing would be to delay joining until all the requirements have been satisfied .
With this explanation of vote , we the undersigned Swedish Social Democrat Members of the European Parliament would like to clarify how we voted on the Braghetto report .
We think it is very important to set up a recovery plan for bluefin tuna .
Bluefin tuna has been an endangered species for a long time following massive overfishing .
In time this risks damaging the whole ecosystem in the fishing waters concerned .
However , we think that the Commission 's resolution is not entirely adequate and therefore voted against it .
We voted for the Committee 's Amendments 4 and 6 - two amendments which entail the removal of two , in our opinion questionable , exemptions for bluefin tuna fishing .
We also supported Amendment 13 which would have meant that we should adopt a recovery plan worthy of the name .
The proposal went considerably further than the original proposal , which is something we fully support .
The level of bluefin tuna stocks is still dangerously low and the European Union must take greater responsibility for the recovery of bluefin tuna stocks .
in writing . - ( FR ) I would like to explain my vote on the report on the recovery plan for bluefin tuna in the Eastern Atlantic and the Mediterranean .
In view of the truly critical state of bluefin tuna stocks , the European Union is reacting as follows through this regulation : a steady reduction of catch quotas , a restriction on fishing periods , and a stepping up of control measures to combat illegal fishing .
I support these proposals .
I am , however plagued by a certain pessimism .
Firstly this is because scientists are already saying that the provisions in this regulation are not enough to guarantee the recovery of stocks .
They believe there would be good reason to set quotas going well beyond the annual catch rates set by ICCAT ( the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas ) .
I am inclined to believe them , so I have lent my support to Amendment 13 tabled by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance .
In view of the presence in the Mediterranean of fleets from non-EU countries such as Libya , Turkey , Tunisia , Japan and China , which are not members of ICCAT , it is clear that the regulation we are looking at will only have an effect if these countries sign up to the provisions it lays down , and there is no certainty they will .
in writing . - ( PT ) The establishing of an EU multi-annual recovery plan for bluefin tuna is the practical implementation of one of the measures adopted by the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas .
The plan provides , amongst other things , for a steady reduction in the catch quota , closed seasons , an increase in minimum size and an observer scheme on board fishing vessels and on fish farms .
The recommendation adopted also provides for financial compensation to be paid to fishermen during the closed season with a view to safeguarding the fleet and employment in the sector .
We also think it is important to improve control , periodically updating the volume of catches by the various vessels to prevent some countries from exceeding allocated quotas to the detriment of others , as happens at present .
You will recall that the bluefin tuna fishing season was closed from September to December because it was suspected that some countries had already exceeded the quotas , as turned out to be the case .
Finally , we regret the rejection of our proposal underlining the fact that small-scale coastal and traditional fisheries , in addition to providing thousands of jobs , enable the sustainable exploitation of fisheries resources .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this proposal for a Council regulation , which sets out a plan for the recovery of bluefin tuna stocks in the Eastern Atlantic and the Mediterranean .
Under the proposal , fishers will be compensated for losses caused by closed seasons and quota reductions designed to allow the stock to recover .
It recommends no derogations on seasons or minimum sizes .
Firm action is needed to make sure this fish stock is not depleted beyond repair .
in writing . - ( PT ) We voted against this resolution that picks up the main aspects of neoliberal policies at Community level and tries to encourage their implementation at world level .
It is a resolution that accepts flexicurity as a concept to be developed and integrated into the National Reform Programmes of each Member State , that attempts to hide the real implications and objectives inherent in the Lisbon Strategy and in its guidelines for economic and employment policies , in particular the associated liberalisations and privatisations .
We cannot accept a resolution that welcomes the intention to develop an external dimension to the Lisbon Strategy , specifically the promotion of market liberalisation on a worldwide scale , accentuating its neoliberal nature and interference in the economic guidelines of third countries .
The Commission communication on its contribution to the October meeting of Heads of State or Government states that the re-launch of the Lisbon Strategy for growth and jobs has been a success , but it should have added the words ' for the large national and international economic and financial groups ' who have seen their profits grow exponentially , whereas workers have had to face an erosion of their rights .
in writing . - I and my British Conservative colleagues believe firmly in the Member States of the European Union pursuing policies that will enhance Europe 's competitive position in the globalised economy .
We believe that Europe should pursue the Lisbon Agenda vigorously by securing a deal in the world trade talks , pushing for further deregulation to free industry and business to compete in world markets , driving forward liberalisation in the internal market , implementing effectively the Services Directive and adhering to a sound competition policy .
All of this must be underpinned by an unshakeable commitment to free trade and open markets .
Some of these elements are present in this motion and we welcome that .
Sadly , however , we believe that overall this joint motion is a huge missed opportunity .
It should have set down the basic principles of an EU approach to globalisation as outlined above , but does not do so .
There are elements in this motion which would take Europe in a direction which would undermine the ability of the EU to compete successfully in the globalised economy .
in writing . - ( FR ) This resolution should have provided a chance to affirm a few urgent matters and to state what the European Parliament is actually expecting of the European Union institutions to ensure a revival of growth , shared social progress in our 27 Member States and development for the developing countries .
There is none of this , but just the same old story of what a good thing globalisation is .
There is nothing about a democratic counterweight to the ECB imposing a monetary policy that favours industry and jobs .
There is nothing about a strategy to counteract the EU 's permeability to hedge funds and sovereign wealth funds .
There is nothing about Community preference and the strict imposition of social ( ILO ) or environmental standards .
There is nothing about development aid , which is essential for co-development .
Why are we surprised about the low growth in Europe , social problems and the people 's mistrust ?
in writing . - I voted for this composite resolution which responded to the Commission paper ' The European interest : succeeding in the age of globalisation ' .
The resolution highlights a number of ways the Union can take advantage of the opportunities globalisation allows : promoting a level playing field in competition and trade issues ; improving EU policymaking so it is more joined up ; and emphasising the need for the social dimension of the EU to be reinforced .
in writing . - I welcome this resolution which draws attention to a series of interrelated issues - social rights through to financial regulations and the impact of how , as a result of expanding markets , the citizen can make sense of them .
There is a balance to be had between liberal market conditions and issues of the needs of developing countries and it is absolutely necessary that we continue to debate this issue time and time again .
Europe will not succeed in combating the increasing poverty and global warming - the major challenges of globalisation - if it constantly puts the emphasis on liberalisation .
Indeed , it is free trade that causes these problems .
Globalisation creates the illusion that the general level of prosperity in the world is gradually increasing , but at the same time I note a steady increase in the gap between rich and poor in the Member States .
Liberalisation is also the cause of the great environmental disaster that lies ahead unless we hasten to take decisive , enforceable measures to combat global warming .
Lacking a vigorous policy in this field is criminally irresponsible .
Investing in an energy-efficient economy and creating jobs in that area is nevertheless a promising course of action .
The ' polluter pays ' principle is disregarded all too frequently .
As a Member of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance I regret the absence of this input .
If Europe wants a single market with free movement of people , goods , services and capital , it should also lay down high social and environmental standards that offer protection and set an example to the rest of the world .
The proposed text remains vague and superficial and once again typifies the Commission 's policy .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it would be truly hypocritical if Parliament , after voting by a very large majority for Mrs Angelilli 's oral amendment , which sends the condolences and support of the European Parliament to the family of a victim of such an unmotivated and serious crime in our country , then fails to adopt a clear position to prevent these acts , this massacre of honest citizens , which is happening due to the lack of controls .
No one wants there to be xenophobia in Italy , especially towards members of a people such as the Romanians , who , as an editorial in the newspaper L 'Avvenire reminded us , have given us such artists as Mircea Eliade , Ionesco and Cioran .
This is a great civilisation and one that is closely related to our own .
The influx of criminals , and specifically the emergence of Roma groups , is another matter entirely .
For these , border controls and deterrents are needed , with the introduction of a fingerprint recognition system so that we know who is coming into our country and what their intentions are , if possible , and more importantly so that we can pinpoint the exact date of entry .
Although we do not want to introduce draconian measures in Europe , if we are saying that checks must be carried out after three months , then we need to know the exact date of entry and this , as Mr Amato admitted in the Italian Chamber of Deputies , is not the case at present .
Mr President , I voted in favour of this resolution because I recognise that the free movement of persons is a fundamental principle of the European Union and one which must be respected and defended by all Member States .
Furthermore , I think we are right to emphasise yet again that the EU was actually founded on measures to combat all forms of racism and xenophobia and indeed all forms of discrimination .
Equally , we should all in this House recognise that the Roma people of Europe are perhaps the most discriminated against , in some countries to totally unacceptable levels .
We should understand that the assimilation , social integration and protection of the Roma minority are objectives that this European Union has yet to achieve .
I think that this is an aim that we should all work for , along with the spirit of free movement .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted against the resolution on freedom of movement in the European Union tabled by centre-left groups - I will explain why in a minute - after declaring that I am absolutely and totally in favour of Mario Mantovani 's proposal to block entry into the EU and therefore Italy for non-EU nationals for three years .
For EU nationals , I am very much in favour of the right to freedom of movement of workers , citizens and tourists , provided that this is not a licence to kill .
It is inconceivable that a 45-year-old woman should die on her way home from work and a doctor a few days away from retirement should be killed during an attempted burglary at his home in Milan .
Both of these events have occurred in the past few days in Italy .
This is not freedom of movement !
( RO ) I voted in favour of the resolution regarding freedom of movement submitted by the PSE , ALDE , Verts and GUE / NGL Groups , although it only partially fulfils the purpose for which I believe this resolution should be drafted .
I believe the text of the resolution should have constituted an even clearer support for the European citizens residing in countries other than their country of origin , implicitly for the Romanian citizens residing in Italy who obey the Italian laws .
The voted text does not condemn the xenophobic attitudes toward Romanian citizens and does not refer to the amplification of the tension between the Romanian community in Italy and the Italian people , which is also generated by the inadequate enforcement of the decree issued by the Italian Committee of Ministries and statements of certain Italian politicians .
I also believe that , as mentioned in the common PPE-DE and UEN resolution , the efficient enforcement of the legal provisions by the Italian authorities would have prevented this situation .
I ask both the European Commission and the Italian authorities to take into consideration the provisions of the common resolution of the PPE-DE and UEN Groups as well , which are not included in the text adopted today .
( NL ) Mr President , things are actually becoming more and more ridiculous .
Now a majority in this House even deems it necessary to level an accusation of xenophobia at the people and government of Italy .
In addition , the motion for a resolution states that the Italian Government 's approach to the problem of crime among the Romanian Roma present there in massive numbers has contributed to rising tensions .
Italy therefore has only itself to blame for all this and should have participated in the European Social Fund programmes for the integration of the Roma .
I should like to make it clear at this juncture that the people and government of Italy have a right to defend themselves , and that what has happened mainly goes to show that the Directive is unsuitable and that it must be made easier , not more difficult , to deport criminals - criminals , mark you , not decent people working to make ends meet .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this joint resolution , which notes that the right of free movement is a fundamental one accorded to all EU citizens .
Member States have an obligation to look after the citizens of other Member States living in their territories , and to ensure dignity and respect for the rights of all citizens of the Union , no matter where they are living .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am strongly opposed to these motions for resolutions and want to express my firm opposition .
This has all stemmed from belated and inconclusive action taken by the Italian government , which has realised that Italy is facing a crisis , unfortunately only following terrible incidents perpetrated by EU nationals .
Directive 2004 / 38 / EC is clear when it says that ' All Union citizens shall have the right of residence on the territory of another Member State [ ... ] if they [ ... ] have sufficient resources for themselves and their family members not to become a burden on the social assistance system of the host Member State ' .
Therefore , these motions for resolution seem pointless and pretextual .
The treaties impose freedom of movement of citizens within the EU and no one wants to engage in discrimination based on the country of origin .
However , once EU citizens commit serious and execrable violent crimes in another Member State or if they are unable to give a reason for their visit , as the Directive requires , it is in the interests of the entire Union that they should be sent back to their own country .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted in favour of the resolution regarding free movement , initiated by PSE together with other political groups , because I consider it to be extremely important for the situation created in Italy not to create a dangerous precedent questioning the very respect of European Union fundamental principles .
I believe this situation should be solved immediately in order not to allow the European Union citizens to be discriminated against , irrespective of their nationality .
The measures proposed by the resolution will protect all European citizens from abuse .
The EU needs all its citizens and Romanians should feel the solidarity of European people because there are thousands of Romanians working abroad who are appreciated for their hard work , honesty and correctness .
The Union 's Charter to be annexed to the Reform Treaty lists the fundamental rights of European citizens : dignity , freedom , equality , solidarity , citizenship , justice .
The EU guarantees democracy , rule of law , human rights , as well as the protection of minorities .
In this context , the measures proposed by the resolution will contribute to the better integration of the Roma community .
( SK ) To reiterate what is said in the motion for a resolution , I , too , would like to congratulate the Portuguese Government for putting forward a proposal providing a technical transitional solution - SISone4all - which will allow the new Member States to be connected to the Schengen Information System in 2007 , before the Commission introduces the new Schengen Information System II .
Congratulations are also due to the new Member States entering the Schengen area on the tremendous efforts they made to meet all the Schengen requirements in such a short period of time .
Enlargement of the Schengen area to include nine new states from 21 December 2007 is also the richly deserved outcome of the European Parliament 's actions to stick to the original date .
This is why I voted for this motion for a resolution .
in writing . - ( PT ) We voted against this resolution because we are opposed in principle to the communitarisation of Justice and Home Affairs , an area at the heart of state sovereignty .
The ' Reform ' Treaty is an attempt to turn the communitarisation of Justice and Home Affairs into a common policy .
Communitarisation - that is , the loss of national sovereignty - is all the more serious when it is promoted in a context characterised by Community policies and measures which dangerously compromise citizens ' rights , freedoms and guarantees that represent the progress of civilisation and fundamental democratic achievements .
Consider the restrictive asylum policy and the increasing difficulties faced by asylum seekers in securing their rights and guarantees .
Look at immigration policy with its security-orientated approach , its criminalisation of irregular immigrants , its inhuman ' detention centres ' and repatriation measures , its discriminatory , exploitative and predatory treatment of human resources from third countries .
Note the growing use of information and the ever-increasing storage of data - including biometric data - available to a wider set of bodies , including third countries , for example the access of US bodies to air passenger data .
The current political climate in Pakistan is certainly critical , since the President has declared a state of emergency and clear violations of human rights have been committed through deprivation of liberty , violence against peaceful demonstrators , and silenced media .
We are firmly opposed to this but we are also opposed to the European Parliament , through this resolution , making yet another attempt to have the EU take over the independent foreign policies of the Member States .
The UN is the only body which , on behalf of its members , has the competence and authority to apply pressure in the global community .
It is very important to restore stability and peace and to restore respect for human rights in Pakistan , but that is not a task which the EU should take away from the Member States .
in writing . - I agree the state of emergency declared ( de facto martial law ) should be ended and the state of civil law reimplemented with immediate effect and voted for this .
For many of us who are observers of Pakistani politics , it is depressing to see how badly affected the Pakistani communities without our constituencies feel .
A return to a democratic procedure is essential for credibility and the due process of Pakistani politics .
( FI ) Mr President , our Group considered the amendment regarding the recognition of the role of nuclear power in our declaration on the climate conference to be an essential part of this resolution .
That is why we want to express our satisfaction that Parliament confirmed this by adopting Amendment 7 .
We are not alone in our view .
The UN 's climate panel , the IPCC , also confirmed the role of nuclear power as a low-emission form of energy .
Perhaps , too , we should remind ourselves that this House took an historic decision in connection with Mr Reul 's report , with 509 votes in favour .
The European Parliament recognised that nuclear power was , at the present , the EU 's most important energy source with low carbon dioxide emissions , and at the same time highlighted its role in the fight against climate change .
On the other hand , our Group did not support section 25 in the resolution because in our opinion it needlessly linked or compared the peaceful use of nuclear power with the spread of nuclear weapons and the threat of terrorism .
We should remember that there are no moral censors in the atmosphere .
It does not shun one form of energy or sympathise with another for ideological reasons .
Only freedom from emissions has any importance , and now the emissions are not welcome .
In any case , I wish to say we are pleased that this House sent out a clear message for the Climate Conference and recognised the seriousness of the threat of climate change .
( DE ) Mr President , my delegation , the Austrian Social Democrats , abstained from voting on the report on the Bali conference for precisely the reasons that Mrs Korhola has also raised .
We support the other political messages of this report .
The report is very good .
My delegation cannot support the sending of a signal that nuclear power is an essential element in combating climate change .
I also think that it should be up to the countries and continents themselves which strategy they follow .
I should like to reemphasise my delegation 's support for all elements of this report , including the exclusion of nuclear power projects from the Clean Development Mechanism .
However , we did not want to back this political signal in favour of nuclear power , so we abstained .
In order to show our agreement with the rest of the report , which is good overall , we did not vote against it .
in writing . - We support the resolution dealing with the upcoming Bali conference .
The resolution expresses several important points .
Among other things it clarifies the significant amount of emissions which are emitted from the livestock sector .
It also emphasises the importance of relevant support to developing countries in their prevention and mitigation work to limit the negative effects of climate change .
However , we do not support the proposal that nuclear energy should be seen as a tool which is necessary to prevent climate change .
I voted in favour of the motion for a European Parliament resolution on limiting global climate change to 2 degrees Celsius - the way ahead for the Bali Conference on Climate Change and beyond ( COP 13 and COP / MOP 3 ) .
Having regard to the fact that climate change is a major challenge facing societies today , I think it is fundamental for the European Union to renew its leading role in the Bali Conference and for a global post-2012 climate agreement to be reached .
in writing . - ( PT ) Amendment 7 destroys all the spirit of compromise which prevailed during the negotiations over the final text .
The fact that it was adopted introduces a fundamental change in a text that should have retained a broad parliamentary consensus on the Bali challenges .
Thus , in the spirit of that overall objective and , although as shadow rapporteur I indicated to the Socialist Party that I would be voting in favour , I personally found myself forced to abstain in the final vote in protest against two aspects : the introduction into the text of the abovementioned Amendment 7 which supports nuclear energy , and the method employed by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats in the light of the spirit of compromise which prevailed during the negotiations over the text .
in writing . - ( PT ) It is true that we are noticing very marked , rapid , and unnatural climate changes that result from many factors , but particularly from the predatory nature of neoliberal policies .
We need effective measures to adapt human society to new living conditions .
The climate changes anticipated in various scientifically credible and reasoned scenarios might not be slow and gradual , depending on the measures taken in the meantime .
There is an urgent need to take deeper , cross-cutting measures to avoid more serious problems in the future , even the proliferation of human and environmental tragedies .
However , we also stress the need to break with neoliberal policies at European and global level , otherwise the major powers and the multinationals will continue to impose their own interests in terms of profits , both the exploitation of natural resources and in international trade , including trading in greenhouse gas emissions , which will have an extremely adverse impact on balanced human development .
Environmental problems are transboundary and therefore the UN Climate Conference is an important diplomatic arena for change at the global level .
In the resolution in question , the EU aims to gather the Member States under a common flag in order to steer the conference negotiations in what the EU considers to be the right direction .
Limiting climate change is a good objective , but it is regrettable that in the EU 's hands global environmental policy is overstepping the boundary into foreign policy at the same time as we dictate to third countries and Member States how their national climate policies should look .
The June List considers that every country should have its own vote at the Climate Conference and we have therefore chosen to vote against this resolution .
in writing . - I voted for this resolution from the Climate Change Committee setting out the EU 's proposed negotiating position for the start of talks on the future of global climate change cooperation post-2012 .
It sets out a sound and progressive EU position to drive reductions in global greenhouse gas emissions , taking note of the social impact of climate change , the EU 's desired intention to restrict global warming to 2 ° C or less , and the vital need for global buy-in to the system .
in writing . - On behalf of the Fine Gael Delegation ( EPP-ED ) :
Fine Gael Members voted in favour of this motion for a resolution , as we believe it is important to have the European Parliament 's view on climate change stated in advance of the Bali Conference .
However , we voted against Amendment 7 , as we are traditionally opposed to nuclear power .
in writing . - I would like to thank the rapporteurs on this issue which brings into focus the issues surrounding one of the most important problems of our time .
Caps on emissions with targets to reductions alongside alternative non-carbon based energy production are not accepted by some jurisdictions in the way the EU has agreed .
But this Conference can go a long way to unite and coordinate international action .
in writing . - ( RO ) The resolution on limiting climate changes to 2 degrees Celsius is an extremely important document for our future and , for this reason , I voted in favour of its adoption .
Climate changes represent a major challenge with catastrophic consequences on the environment and human communities .
We are dealing with a problem we should address with short , medium and long-term measures .
Climate changes already have disastrous effects on agriculture , hydrologic systems , forests , fauna and flora .
Countries such as Greece , Romania , Bulgaria , Spain and Portugal have dealt with periods of drought , as well as with floods .
The EU should reaffirm its role as the leader in reducing climate changes .
The financial mechanisms available for protecting water resources , avoiding deforestation and promoting non-polluting technologies should be increased and accessed by the Member States .
We have to allow each Member State to define its own energy mix in order to provide its energy resources .
At the same time , Member States that generate nuclear energy should ensure the security of such installations and , especially , adequate waste management .
Research funds for decreasing the quantity of waste and increasing the security of installations are required .
( NL ) Mr President , by no means do I want to detract from the sterling work done by the two rapporteurs on this report on the European Neighbourhood Policy , but I wish to point out that the report contains a gap .
It fails to draw attention to the immense challenge presented by immigration from the south , in which regard I take the view that the North African countries themselves also bear tremendous responsibility .
I should have liked this report to include a plea for a joint policy between EU Member States and North African countries to combat illegal immigration , one that called the North African countries themselves to task and made good neighbourly relations and financial and material support from Member States dependent on goodwill , on a joint approach to this enormous challenge .
This - as I see it - fundamental aspect is lacking in the report , and I have therefore abstained from voting .
in writing . - ( PT ) Following the decision to take new and significant steps in European capitalist integration , specifically at the level of what is known as ' role of the EU in the world ' that is reflected in the ongoing ' constitutional ' project - now revived in the ' Reform ' Treaty - and in the current EU policies , the majority of the EP is approving a report , which is compulsory reading ... , on strengthening the European Neighbourhood Policy ( ENP ) .
Any doubts concerning the EU 's real purposes and ambitions in relation to the ENP would soon be cleared up on reading this report .
It amounts to a programme for actually interfering in and controlling the whole area of the Mediterranean , the Middle East , Central Asia and Eastern Europe .
It is a programme which aims to achieve such objectives as : ' triggering and strengthening the commitment of the governments of the ENP countries to political and economic reforms ' ; their assimilation of EU ' common policies ' ; their ' alignment with EU foreign policy ' ; and the creation of a free trade area ' .
The report also advocates ' more joint actions between the EU and the USA ' for ' the promotion of democracy , the enhancement of energy security and the strengthening of regional security in the EU 's neighbourhood ' , a point so transparent that it was toned down in the vote in plenary .
It would be best to read the report ...
in writing . - ( PL ) The Neighbourhood Policy is taking on new significance at a time when further expansion of the European Union is going out of fashion .
It is different in nature in the Mediterranean Neighbourhood compared with the Eastern European Neighbourhood , where many countries released from the Soviet area of influence are openly declaring a desire to accede to the European Community .
In this event , as Poles , Hungarians and Lithuanians well understand , any substitute forms of involvement will not satisfy national ambitions .
They have less influence on the required direction in political and economic evolution in these countries .
They provide less of an incentive to reinforce the procedures of a state based on democracy and the rule of law and economic market principles and a genuine respect for citizens ' rights .
Looking at this from the perspective of a European Union border country like Poland , it would appear that the best policy is maximum openness to the aspirations of countries located beyond our eastern border .
This is clearly linked to creating an area of stability around the European Union and limiting the field of action of demagogy , of which there is plenty in young democracies .
There is also justification for a budgetary effort based on ENPI , the new instrument to replace the TACIS and MEDA programmes , which supports the desired processes in our part of the world .
So far , the Eastern European Neighbourhood has been less well funded than the Mediterranean Neighbourhood .
The larger the European Union becomes , the greater our responsibility for the Old Continent will be .
The report on the European Neighbourhood Policy summarises the ways and means of imperialistic intervention in neighbouring countries .
It falls within the EU 's overall imperialist strategy worldwide .
As usual , the report uses ' democratic reforms ' and ' democratisation ' in the neighbouring countries as the most suitable pretext for exerting coercion and pressure on governments that do not align themselves with its policies .
This is to support and fund the action of the numerous civil society organisations , so that they can further their undermining role within these countries and promote the interventionist plans of the EU .
The European Parliament calls upon the neighbouring countries to participate in the EU 's anti-migration policy by intensifying repressive measures against migrants .
It calls upon them to cooperate closely with all its repressive mechanisms , such as Europol and the border protection agency Frontex ; it incorporates them into the EU 's plans to restrict democratic freedom and strike at popular movements , on the pretext of combating terrorism .
It openly calls for ' joint actions between the EU and the USA in advancing goals ' , such as joint imperialist interventions and the sharing of the spoils .
It is in the interests of the people to resist and overturn the imperialist plans of the EU and USA in this area and to intensify their struggle for national independence and popular sovereignty .
in writing . - ( FR ) Strengthening the European Neighbourhood Policy ( ENP ) , as detailed in this report , requires a deepening of cooperation between the two shores of the Mediterranean via a heightened dialogue between governments , local authorities and representatives of civil society .
It is also essential to remember that the ENP must follow the line set by the European Union 's development policy .
Almost all the countries to the south and east of the Mediterranean are developing countries , according to the official list drawn up by the OECD 's Development Assistance Committee .
Achieving the millennium development goals should therefore be a priority of EU action in the region .
( SK ) I am in favour of strengthening the relationship with Ukraine and I support further structured dialogue with this country , which is our neighbour directly to the east .
During the last elections Ukraine showed great determination to make democratic changes .
It decided to continue with a coalition that is clearly pro-European , modern and progressive .
We must also remember that Ukraine is a vast country with attractive economic potential and a serious partner in economic relations .
It is high time we signed an agreement with Ukraine on economic cooperation , on a free trade area .
We must respond to the fact that Ukraine is going to join the World Trade Organisation .
I fully support the creation of a reliable energy transit system between Ukraine and the EU .
I am very much in favour of cooperation in agriculture and environmental matters , but I would put most emphasis on scientific and educational cooperation , and on strengthening the dimension of the knowledge-based economy .
( SK ) Ukraine is a neighbour of strategic importance to the EU and a natural ' bridge ' connecting the EU with Russia and Central Asia .
It is a large country whose Orange Revolution has put it on the road to democracy .
Ukraine has become a key partner of the European Union 's neighbourhood policy .
Our cooperation with Ukraine must improve and we must give all possible diplomatic and political support to Ukraine 's accession to the WTO .
Negotiations on the free trade area should start as soon as possible so that an ambitious agreement can be signed as soon as possible .
We all understand how complicated the situation is in Ukraine : it is a very young and fragile democracy .
Today this country finds itself facing a strategic decision : to move towards Russia or to move towards the European Union ?
That is why the excellent balanced report by the rapporteur , Mr Zbigniew Zaleski , comes at the time when Ukraine needs a clear European perspective .
I welcome this report and I gave it my unequivocal support during the vote .
I believe that following the early parliamentary elections the country will be able to form a government that will bring Ukraine even closer to our common European house .
- ( PL ) Mr President , the European Union 's intention should be to build stronger and increasingly close relations with Ukraine .
Mr Zaleski 's report , which we have accepted , contains many suggestions on how this might be done .
Ukraine should be our strategic partner , not just because of its specific geographical situation and size , but particularly because of the role it plays in the region in relations with Russia and the Central Asian states .
It is therefore in the EU 's interests to strengthen and develop economic and political ties with this country .
We are all aware of how much more work lies ahead for the Ukrainian people on the road to achieving Western standards in their economy , in their standard of living and social matters and in strengthening the democratic system in the state .
The EU should provide aid for achieving these goals , and one way of doing this would be to conclude a free-trade agreement with Ukraine , as well as to support its accession to the WTO .
This would help to reinforce the market economy , democracy and the civil state , which will bring Ukraine closer to EU membership .
Bringing the EU and Ukraine together is a long and difficult process .
It is one that is proceeding on a number of levels , but it is necessary nonetheless .
For the two sides to come together , Ukraine must continue with the economic and social reforms it has begun , maintain its pro-European policy slant and strengthen its democracy .
For its part , the EU must send out a clear signal to show that there are prospects for Ukrainian membership of the EU .
The June List welcomes increased trade and deeper economic relations with Ukraine .
Such a development would benefit both parties in the short and long term alike .
However , it can be seen that the underlying purpose of this report is not only to develop economic relations but to conduct foreign policy on the part of the EU .
The tone of the report is manifestly dictatorial and the proposals for cooperation given are presented almost exclusively on the EU 's terms and with the EU 's own interests in the foreground .
Therefore the June List has chosen to vote against this report .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report , for which I was the Socialist Group shadow .
It notes the areas where the EU and Ukraine should strengthen their relationship , discusses a free trade area with the Ukraine , energy supplies , and relations with Russia .
I would like to see a stronger and deeper relationship between the EU and the Ukraine , and trade and economic relations are a vital part of that .

in writing . - ( PT ) EU relations with the Ukraine fall under European Neighbourhood Policy which , as the report stresses , aims at supporting the development of the market economy in the EU 's neighbouring countries , in other words , capitalism .
The report aims at the signature of a free trade agreement ( FTA ) , i.e. Ukraine 's integration ' into the EU single market ' by the ' gradual adoption by Ukraine of the Community 's acquis ' .
Thus the report :
' Calls on Ukraine ... to pay more attention to market liberalisation by guaranteeing the successful achievement of the privatisation process , the dismantling of monopolies ' ( read : public undertakings ) ' and the independence of Ukraine 's national bank ' ;
encourages ' the approximation and convergence of standards in the agricultural , industry and services sector ' through ' conformity to Community standards ' , and , in the light of Ukraine 's conditional adhesion to the Single Economic Space ( SES ) with Russia and other former Soviet Union Republics , ' recalls that certain provisions included in the SES agreement , if fully implemented , might be in conflict with the establishment of a functioning FTA with the EU ' .
Believe it or not , as the rapporteur states , ' the agreement with Russia would in fact prevent Ukraine from any real form of economic sovereignty and stake a heavy claim on the country 's independence ' .
Enough said ...

We find some of the trends that ' will to some extent form the EU 's humanitarian approach in the future ' very worrying and extremely negative , taking the form of initiatives such as the ' EU response to situations of fragility in developing countries ' or the ' European Consensus on Development ' , aimed basically at African countries but also at Caribbean and Pacific countries .
An analysis of those initiatives reveals that the central issue of including ' development ' as one of the external dimensions for achieving the strategic objectives of the EU 's major powers ( CFSP / ESDP ) , which is tantamount to saying the promotion of ' development ' as an instrument for interference and control in a strategy which , significantly , does not rule out ' coercive military intervention ' .
Hence a whole programme and panoply of instruments which , in our opinion , amalgamate and confuse the ' borders ' between ' aid ' and interference , for example in such fundamental issues as ' state-building ' .
There is certainly an urgent need to show solidarity with many countries that have inherited disastrous situations from colonialism and that are the victims of decades of interference , but such solidarity , in order to be effective , must be based on respect for the principles of national sovereignty and independence and on an effective and genuine development aid and cooperation policy .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is with great pleasure that I say I voted in favour of Elizabeth Lynne 's proposal to tackle the poverty that exists in Europe .
However , before this packed Parliament here in Strasbourg , I must criticise the fact that in Italy there is discrimination against elderly pensioners , who are made to live in poverty if they become incapacitated after the age of 65 , but are given a significant allowance if they become incapacitated before the age of 65 .
Mr President , since on 12 December 2007 the new Treaty will be signed in Brussels , giving binding legal force to the Charter of Fundamental Rights , I ask that infringement proceedings be brought against Italy on 12 December because it is violating the right of the elderly to receive the same treatment as all other citizens .
We Swedish Social Democrats voted in favour of the report .
It is important that the fight against poverty and social exclusion is intensified in Europe .
However , we would like to clarify our position .
Paragraph 32 speaks of the setting up of a decent minimum wage at Member State level .
The report states clearly that this should be done together with the social partners where applicable .
We therefore consider that the collective agreement model we have in the Nordic countries is covered by the formulation .
The Swedish Conservatives are positively inclined towards large parts of the report on social reality stocktaking .
In the case of many of the proposals , such as those concerning economic migration and increased opportunities to combine gainful employment and family , we have been a driving force in national policy .
However , the Swedish Conservatives have chosen to vote against the report because several of the proposals cross the boundaries of the principle of subsidiarity .
We do not , for example , consider that the European Parliament should concern itself with treatment programmes at correctional institutions or the treatment of gambling addiction .
Nor should the European Parliament have opinions on the regime under which Member States choose to operate their health care , and we do not accept the assertion that deregulation would damage the quality of care .
Labour market policy measures , such as the introduction of minimum wages , should also be left to be decided at the national level .
in writing . - ( PT ) We voted in favour of the report because it records important data on the social situation : 78 million European citizens continue to live in poverty , 8 % of the European Union suffers from in-work poverty and the gap between rich and poor in many Member States is increasing .
It also includes some positive recommendations , such as the need to fix a decent minimum wage , protect unemployment benefit and support people with disabilities , although it does not tackle the root causes of the social situation and does not call for an end to neoliberal policies , which we are proposing .
Consequently , few demands are made as regards the policy changes required .
Unfortunately , it only partly includes the proposals in my opinion adopted in the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , among which I would highlight the appeal to the Community institutions and the Member States to give maximum priority to women 's social integration and women 's rights , by altering their respective policies accordingly , including that on income distribution policy .
in writing . - I and my British Conservative colleagues believe that social policy should be for Member States to decide .
We are anxious that European competences should not be extended in this sphere and that countries should not be pressured to adopt policies that could be unhelpful to their well-being in economic and social terms .
We also believe that the ' European social model ' is a barrier to economic and social development .
There are issues in this report which we support , such as helping people out of poverty , assisting people back into work , support for disabled people and care for the elderly .
Policies in these and other social matters are best delivered by Member States , taking account of national circumstances .
We believe fundamentally that strong economies are the best route to obtaining social progress in societies .
in writing . - ( FR ) This report on social reality stocktaking in Europe sets out its true economic and social condition from the start .
It is an admission of powerlessness within an ocean of Europeanist absurdities churned out by the ultraliberal , globalist thought police .
Since 2000 , none of the measures to combat unemployment , poverty and exclusion have achieved anything .
Worse still , while the European Union calls for greater economic immigration and the protection of its so-called social model , the report reminds us that 78 million Europeans are living in poverty .
It forgets to mention what accompanies the hell of poverty , which is not just economic .
It is psychological for millions of Europeans who feel culturally and socially adrift on their own soil as they watch their work disappearing abroad in relocations .
It is also physical , when violence and insecurity largely generated by immigrant populations frustrated by the difficulties they have in integrating aggravate the whole situation .
The solution is therefore not to recognise the hybrid ultraliberal schizophrenic European system , but to challenge it in order to put forward a Europe of recovered identities , which applies protection and Community preference to Europeans first of all !
I agree that social integration and social security are among the European Union 's fundamental values and are a fundamental right of all citizens .
The report correctly stresses the need to take ethnic and faith-based heterogeneity into account in EU legislation in order to protect all people from violence and discrimination .
I also agree with the formula that access to goods and services should be the right of every EU citizen .
Social policy falls to a large extent under the competence of the Member States which is why I am in favour of promoting the open method of coordination as well as the exchange of best practices aimed at combating social exclusion .
Social security systems must be based on principles which motivate the recipients to seek employment opportunities and not act as a perverse incentive for inactivity .
The low level of education of the population and the high school dropout rate should make us stop and think , since it is the least qualified individuals who are the most vulnerable to social exclusion .
This situation is particularly worrying in my country , Portugal , where in 2005 more than 39 % of young people ( aged between 18 and 24 ) had completed only lower secondary school education .
That trend must be reversed and citizens must be given the necessary skills for a successful entry into the labour market .
Since this proposal goes along those lines , I voted in favour of it .
in writing . - ( PL ) I am voting in favour of Mrs Lynne 's report on social reality stocktaking .
She has quite rightly commented that the revived Lisbon Strategy focuses not only on economic results and competitiveness , but also on a drive for greater social cohesion and the social dimension of sustainable growth .
Social integration and social security are fundamental EU values .
They are the fundamental right of everyone , regardless of their ethnic origin , age , gender , level of disability , sexual orientation or faith .
Unfortunately , part of EU society continues to live in poverty .
Member States are proposing various forms of protection from poverty and social exclusion .
I therefore believe that there should be a deepening of cooperation and an exchange of best practice models between Member States in this area .
Attention should also be given to the problem of youth unemployment and to the fight against child poverty , as children from poor families have less opportunity to access future employment .
There are many praiseworthy statements about anti-discrimination and the importance of equal treatment in this report which deserve attention .
Unfortunately , it also contains extremely far-reaching statements concerning , among other things , the introduction of minimum wages .
Sweden is opposed to politically determined minimum wages .
Quite regardless of what people think is reasonable social policy , the EU must accept that Member States choose different solutions .
This must not become yet another example of where the EU goes in and regulates in detail in an area which must lie entirely and completely at the Member State level .
The EU countries are also at very different levels of development .
Introducing minimum wages will prevent the poorest countries from competing .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 1.20 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
1 .
Christian communities in the Middle East ( debate )
The next item is the debate on seven motions for resolutions on Christian communities in the Middle East .
author . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , religious freedom is an objective factor in recognising respect for human rights .
The violence suffered by Christians around the world is both an affront and a challenge to human dignity .
I intended to table this draft resolution at the last plenary in October , but the coordinator of the political groups asked me to postpone the resolution until the November plenary , to give us time to prepare a more detailed text backed by a broader consensus .
In the text that we will be voting on this afternoon , which is the result of a compromise between socialists , liberals , the Union for Europe of the Nations Group and the Independence and Democracy Group , the salient features of the initial draft resolution have remained .
We have also been able to insert concrete references to acts of violence and abuses committed this year not only in the Middle East , but in other parts of the world against Christian communities .
These events mainly concern Iraq , Egypt , Pakistan , Turkey , China and Vietnam , and in fact the intense coordination carried out in the last few days and the consequent unearthing of numerous episodes that have occurred outside the Middle East has led us to find a new , more fitting title , which is ' serious events which compromise Christian communities ' existence and those of other religious communities ' .
Obviously the text does not include all violence perpetrated against Christians , such as in Eritrea and North Korea .
However , ladies and gentlemen , I would ask you to recognise the political message of this text , which is also aimed at those countries and incidents that have not been mentioned .
From the outset , having to liaise with other groups has allowed me to clarify that this resolution in no way intends to rekindle conflict between civilisations .
Europe has always been first in line when it comes to protecting minority rights and cannot continue to ignore the increasing harm being inflicted on so many Christians .
Today , ladies and gentlemen , our Parliament can express itself on an urgent and important subject , for the protection of life and religious freedom , not only of Christians , but of millions of people of all faiths .
I would therefore ask ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
author . - Madam President , I speak on behalf of the Socialist Group to give our total support to this joint motion for a resolution on religious persecution .
In one minute I can only touch on some elements of that resolution , and want to focus on the plight of the indigenous Christian community in Iraq , which at one time represented almost 10 % of the population .
As someone who supports and is supported by the Save the Assyrians campaign , I have to say that this Parliament is wont to rest on compromising consensus , which sometimes results in a levelling and a loss of meaning .
That is true of this resolution .
Recital K deplores the situation of Assyrian villages in Turkish border areas .
Why ?
Because the Turkish Government is actually shelling Assyrian villages , claiming that they contain PKK militants , which seems to be an unlikely situation .
In recital S it also refers to the situation in Syria , to where tens of thousands , if not hundreds of thousands , of refugees have fled from Jordan and Iraq , but the border is now being closed .
What is needed is help and assistance .
Madam President , may I begin by expressing my satisfaction and by thanking the other co-authors of the resolution dealing with such an important problem as the events surrounding Christian communities in certain Middle Eastern states , as well as on a world scale .
At the same time , as one of the signatories to this resolution , I would like to emphasise that a guarantee of religious freedom is the first step towards assuring fundamental human rights , and the instances of persecution of Christians that occur around the world are a basic example of violation of these rights .
Furthermore , while mindful of the fact that we are seeing a lack of any reaction on this matter from authorities , institutions and political movements around the world , I would like once again to stress the significance of the resolution under discussion for defence of the rights of Christians and to emphasise that the Union for Europe of the Nations Group fully supports it .
author . - ( FR ) Madam President , I dare not think what the expressions on the faces of my PPE fellow Members would be if they found out that a resolution on Muslim communities in Europe had been adopted by the Gulf States or by ASEAN .
It would be felt as a nasty shock , a sign of aggression , an unacceptable intrusion by a religious authority in a non-EU country into relations between our Member States and religious minorities .
Do not do unto others what you would not have them do unto you is also a Christian precept .
Seriously , would such a resolution be perceived as a call for tolerance and intercultural and religious dialogue ?
Certainly not !
The European Union , so proud of its values , would be well advised to demonstrate on these ultra-sensitive issues a modicum of discernment and respect for international conventions .
To tackle violations of the rights of people from religious minorities , to condemn the murder of Christians or restrictions on freedom to worship , we have a choice between two equally well-founded approaches .
The first is to talk to a country , on the basis of its international commitments and the agreements between us , and ask it to investigate , try those responsible , and ensure the rights of religious minorities are respected , and that is what we do here regularly .
The second approach is that taken by the United Nations , through a resolution tabled by 12 countries and by all the EU states , concerning the elimination of all forms of intolerance and discrimination based on religion , beliefs , and freedom of thought and conscience because , in international law - and this is very valuable - they are linked .
An individual 's rights to belief , to religion , to thought and to conscience are interdependent .
What will we be doing today if we adopt this unacceptable text you are proposing ?
We will be ignoring the work being done by our Member States at the United Nations and taking a different approach which is likely to encourage certain countries to exploit religious issues in their international relations .
We will be going against the balanced approach recommended , for example , by Mrs Jahangir , United Nations Special Rapporteur , currently under house arrest in Pakistan , and at the end of the day we will also be making the situation of religious minorities throughout the world , including Christians , more fragile .
Once again , together with experts working on religious freedom , such as Christian Solidarity Worldwide , I say that this resolution simply increases the danger for those we want to protect .
author . - ( NL ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , if we really have fundamental rights at heart , we cannot fail to be concerned by the precarious position of Christian communities in the Middle East .
The present motion for a resolution spurs all the European institutions on in this regard .
A recent delegation visit by our Parliament gave us more insight into the daily life of Lebanese Christians .
They fear ending up in a kind of second-class position like their co-religionists in almost all the countries of the region .
They are faced with a direct choice between personal safety and personal dignity , their religious convictions .
Today 's Lebanese Christians want to retain both .
The actual political violence of recent years is now directly affecting Christians in the land of the cedar .
An informant in Lebanon said just this week that , even though Christians are not the primary targets , the majority of politicians assassinated are from Christian backgrounds , as are the journalists who have become the target of attacks , and this intimidates the Christian population in Lebanon .

author . - Madam President , for thousands of years man 's presence on earth has been subjected to the perils of lethal forces outwith his powers of defence or understanding .
Such forces range from disastrous natural phenomena to incomprehensible somatic and mental illnesses .
Man 's powerless status has been made easier to cope with through his belief in a superpower entity he called ' God ' .
Different human groups developed a different understanding and a different approach to God .
The result has been the creation of a large number of religions .
Such religions are , of course , man-made and not God-made and therefore suffer from several weaknesses .
Such weaknesses include fanaticism , dogmatism and failure to accept other people 's right to believe differently .
These weaknesses differ in number and in intensity amongst different religions and unfortunately they have often been exploited by extremist religious leaders and unscrupulous politicians .
This has led to religious wars and to the committing of despicable crimes against human beings in the name of religion .
Both Christianity and Islam , two of mankind 's main religions , have not been exempt from these sad inflictions and history is full of shameful examples to illustrate the point .
Of course , with the passage of time , most religions became more mature and more humanistic and this is certainly true with Christianity .
But this change has not happened with some other religions , unfortunately .
This is why in some countries , mainly Islamic countries , Christians are being persecuted , sometimes with extreme criminal vigour and sometimes with the consent of political groups and even governments .
This is indeed a very sad state of affairs , which involves a range of countries or regions worldwide - some of them have already been mentioned in this Chamber today - but it is more specific in the Middle East .
With this resolution we hope to bring attention to the persecution of Christians in these countries and hopefully to help in making sure that the authorities , both political and religious , in such countries fully understand that such aggressive behaviour is neither compatible with the principles of respect for human rights nor with the true teachings of a caring religion .
Thank you Madam President , as you can see I still have 20 seconds to spare !
author . - ( NL ) Madam President , the Christian communities in the Middle East date back to the early years of Christianity .
They predate both Christianity in Europe and Islam in the Middle East .
Yet these days they are often seen as an alien element in what is now a predominantly Islamic area .
This is not merely the result of religious intolerance from certain quarters within Islam ; the blame also lies with Europe .
Three times in history , Europe and Christianity have aroused aversion and hatred in that region .
The first time was the crusades in the late Middle Ages , when occupying European armies took control of sites holy not only to Christians but also to Jews and Muslims .
The second time followed the collapse of the Ottoman Empire at the beginning of last century , when Egypt , Sudan , Jordan and Iraq came under British colonial control and Syria and Lebanon under French colonial control .
We are currently in the third phase .
Europe 's positions on Israel , Palestine and Iraq arouse great opposition in the Middle East , where Europe is suspected of focusing primarily on its own energy supplies , on safeguarding its own transport routes and on giving preferential treatment to those ethnic or religious minorities best disposed towards it .
One possible consequence is that Christian minorities may be unable to hold their own in the Middle East in the long term and be doomed to flee to Europe .
Giving Christians and Jews in the Middle East leeway is a better solution , as indeed Europe must do to its Islamic minority .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , if you will pardon my saying so , Mrs Flautre is talking nonsense .
Muslims do a huge amount for Muslim minorities .
We support Muslim and other religious minorities .
However , it is unfortunately true that if we do not do anything for Christians , nobody will .
The Islamic or Arab League has never championed the rights of Christians as we have the rights of Muslims .
It is therefore high time that we put this matter on the agenda .
It is an act of justice , whereby I must say emphatically that the problem is not Islam .
Christians in the Middle East have survived 1 200 years under Islamic rule .
It is in our supposedly so advanced age that they are seriously endangered , especially in Iraq , which is occupied by the West .
We must acknowledge our own responsibility to make it possible for them to survive and live in freedom and dignity .
Most religious persecution takes place in communist China , in pseudo-Christian nationalist Russia , in communist dictatorships - and also under Islamic regimes . For me , Islamism is simply a perverse dictatorship and ideology of the twentieth century .
We Europeans have a duty in this regard , and we shall perform it .
( Applause )
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PT ) Madam President , congratulations to the authors of this joint motion .
I should like to mention that it is appropriate to remember that before the persecution of Christians we had the persecution , for example , of the Jews , and we had and still have persecution of the Yazidis , the Mandians and the Muslims themselves , whether Shiite or Sunni , in Iraq .
It would not be fair or proportionate to compare what is happening in Iraq to what is happening in Europe .
In fact it must be remembered that those who are persecuted in Iraq unfortunately do not have , in Europe , the protection to which they are entitled , whether Christian or non-Christian .
There are absolutely incredible cases of a total lack of sensitivity on the part of our European Union as regards persecuted Iraqis .
May I end by reminding you , not to detract from all others , of Father Ragheed Ganni and the entire congregation of the Church of the Holy Spirit in Mosul , perhaps the most monstrous crime committed this year .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , we are talking here today about the brutal persecution of Christians , particularly in the Middle East .
We should not lose sight of the fact that Christians are persecuted throughout the world , however , and I do not agree with what Mr Casaca said about there being very many religious minorities who are persecuted .
Please could he provide examples of where these minorities are being persecuted on any major scale ; I am not talking about the chance killing , however reprehensible , of an infidel , but of cases where another religion is persecuted in the way that Christians are persecuted .
I fully agree with Mr Posselt , and I agree with much else that has been said , where dozens of examples of persecution of Christians have been mentioned , but not , as Mr Casaca claims , of many other religions .
It is not true .
Christians are the main objects of persecution , and it is mainly Christians who are persecuted .
Yesterday in Parliament we heard a speech from President Sarkozy , who spoke of the need to defend Europe 's identity .
What is this identity ?
Who will defend us if we do not defend ourselves and the roots of our identity ?
Christians in the Middle East bear witness to our European identity .
They have been there for 2 000 years and we must defend them if they are to remain there .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that today , with this motion for a resolution , we are taking an important step , because this Parliament must always condemn acts and events that endanger the lives of men and women on the grounds of their faith , religious beliefs or political opinion .
Religious freedom is a value that we must bring to the fore .
Although it is true that in some cases Christians risk persecution and criminalisation , it is for this reason that Parliament must protect and defend them , just as this Parliament has always protected and defended Muslim citizens who have been the victims of discrimination in the West .
We believe that all religions can play a positive role , a peacekeeping role , to encourage respect for diversity .
For this reason we must strongly condemn any form of religious fundamentalism , which is so often a factor in conflict .
I believe that this Parliament must always endeavour to listen and promote interreligious dialogue .
There are some notable examples that show how it is possible to construct a solution in which religions can listen to each other and build on common ground .
I am also anxious to recall the sacrifice of some Catholics , some Christians , who have fought to free the poor , for peoples and for social liberation .
This is why our group is voting in favour of this resolution , in memory of priests such as Peppino Diana and Pino Puglisi , who died because of their stance against the mafia and organised crime in general .

on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Madam President , I welcome this joint motion for a resolution , since I regard it as vital that we protect Christian minorities in Africa , Asia and the Middle East .
It is important that we protect all religious communities from persecution .
I regard it as appalling that people have to face constraints in their daily routine , in what they can do and where they can go , in their ability to own property and to get an education or a job , as well as threats on their life , because of their Christian affiliation .
The freedom of religious observance is a fundamental human right and thus it is essential that governments ensure that even the religious minorities in their countries can practise their beliefs free from any restraint , that is to say without there being a threat to their life or anything else .
Muslims must realise that they must promote the principle of religious freedom and tolerance , the same freedom and tolerance for their adherence that they enjoy and expect to enjoy in our countries , many of which have large Christian populations .
( FI ) Madam President , I set great store by Mr Mauro 's initiative .
Every day peace-loving Christians are under threat of systematic oppression and are used as scapegoats in crises they are not involved in .
This is totally reprehensible and an issue it is necessary to highlight .
Actually to improve the position of Christians , however , it is important to understand the problem as part of a wider whole .
It is not only Christians who are having difficulties , but in many countries Muslims , Buddhists , Hindus , Jews , Sikhs and Ahmadis also have problems .
The list is long .
Freedom of religion is essential for a society which respects human rights and civil liberties .
It is , as it were , a meta-right , in practice a prerequisite for the existence of other human rights , which reflects the condition of society as a whole .
If a society starts to get ill , it is visible first in the shape of restrictions on freedom of religion and in the status of religious minorities .
For this reason we have to show our firm support for the United Nations General Assembly Resolution on freedom of religion .
It is worth noting that in many countries , like Pakistan and Indonesia , religious communities are striving jointly to establish freedom of religion and the protection of minorities .
Religion itself might therefore also be a solution .
A pluralist dialogue always leads to less tension and benefits freedom of religion and society as a whole .
( PT ) The persecution of religious minorities in many countries should make us reflect upon the fragility of the aspects of civilisation which we think we have achieved .
Religious freedom is an essential and inalienable pillar of universal human rights .
Despite the laudable intentions , this resolution is incomplete .
The EP must speak up about the persecution of Christian minorities in particular , but first on all forms of intolerance and discrimination based on faith or religion which , in fact , affect all religious communities .
We should also be worried about Islamophobia and anti-Semitism which are on the increase in Europe and elsewhere .
If we focus almost exclusively on discrimination against Christians , we might give the wrong impression .
It therefore needs to be stressed that the EP fully supports the resolution on the eradication of all forms of intolerance and discrimination based on religion or belief presented by the EU Member States to the UN General Assembly .
- ( PL ) Madam President , the Middle East also has its Christian roots .
Regardless of the differences between them , the Christians there have managed on many occasions to demonstrate that they are able to live alongside Muslims , Jews or followers of other religions in peace and mutual respect .
Lately , however , we have seen actions by adherents of the Islamic faith that have come down to a practical implementation of the false notion that being anti-Christian shows what a good Muslim you are .
The Lebanese journalist Hazem Saghieh made this point recently .
Numerous and often drastic instances of violations of the rights of people who , solely because of their Christian faith , are treated as second-class citizens are evidence of the violation of the fundamental principle of human freedom : the freedom to practise a faith .
The question needs to be asked : What can we in the European Union , which is open to and respects the rights of Muslim co-citizens , do for Christians who do not even have a modest fraction of such rights in those countries ?
Where is there the slightest reciprocity ?
There is none to be found in religiously motivated murders , nor in widespread discrimination , nor in the failure to give consent to the building of Christian churches , nor in the ruination of memorials to Christian culture .
The whole world wants peace , and people want freedom , including religious freedom .
- ( PL ) Madam President , the current political situation in the Middle East means that Christians who live in that region are feeling increasingly threatened .
One reason for this is the rise in the influence of Islamic fundamentalists , who heap blame on them for every failure suffered by the people of the region .
Because of their religious ties with people in the West , they are also accused of westernising the traditional social structures , about which people in the Middle East are very unwilling to speak .
One way in which the fundamentalists express their dissatisfaction is by organising anti-Western demonstrations , during which they destroy symbols associated with Christianity and shops run by Christians .
In extreme cases even murders are committed .
The passiveness of governments means that increasing numbers of Christian families are deciding to emigrate .
The resolution outlines a number of problems encountered by Christians in the Middle East .
These are not all the examples , however , so in my view the European Parliament should prepare a full-scale report on the situation of Christians in the Middle East , or the situation of religious faiths generally .
We should also give some thought to how to conduct a dialogue between civilisations that enables Christian society and Muslim regions to be involved effectively .
- ( PL ) Madam President , I congratulate Mr Mauro .
I have no doubts whatsoever about this resolution .
I support it wholeheartedly .
The only problem is whether we are effective , whether we will be effective and whether we will change anything .
There are three ways in which we can act .
The first way is through diplomatic pressure .
That is what we are currently doing .
European governments need to be mobilised too , however .
Every diplomat should bear this in mind .
We must push for such actions in bilateral and multilateral talks .
The only way to get a good result here is through large-scale diplomatic pressure .
The second way is through economic sanctions .
I know from my own country 's experience 20 or 30 years ago what economic sanctions meant for the Communist government in Warsaw - well selected sanctions , so as not to cause harm to citizens .
We must use this method too .
The final way is through thorough analysis of our actions , because countries in the Middle East and other parts of the world have their ups and downs .
This also depends on our actions , which are not always very coherent or prudent .
This means intervention , cultural events , and also speeches from diplomats .
We do not want to hide our convictions .
Quite the contrary - we want to show them clearly .
However , we must act not only firmly but also judiciously .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , the Commission is aware of and strongly condemns discrimination on the grounds of religion and belief .
Our policy is to fight all types of discrimination , and we do it in bilateral relations and multilateral forums such as the UN .
At the UN General Assembly , the EU has taken the approach of tabling its customary resolution on the elimination of all forms of intolerance and discrimination based on religion or belief .
Last year , the consensus on the text of the resolution gathered a record 99 co-sponsors .
Together with the Member States , we are paying very close attention to the human rights and democracy situation in partner countries .
We raise those issues in political dialogue meetings via demarches and public statements , reminding partners of their commitments under international law prohibiting discrimination on any grounds .
The EU is actively seeking to advance the cause of human rights protection under the Neighbourhood Policy .
The European Neighbourhood Policy action plans cover a wide range of issues in this regard .
The individual meetings of the Subcommittee on Human Rights with Jordan , Israel , Morocco , Lebanon and Tunisia have already reviewed the progress made in the implementation of the ENP action plans ' commitments on human rights and fundamental freedoms .
The first meeting of the Human Rights Subcommittee with Egypt is scheduled for later this month .
In parallel with bilateral contacts with governments and support for political reforms , we are supporting non-governmental organisations worldwide that are active in protecting and promoting human rights .
We believe that human rights defenders play an indispensable role in society .
We find it equally important to maintain and further increase freedom of religion in Europe .
The EU can show and share good practices .
Mr Casaca has asked to make a personal statement , in accordance with Rule 145 of the Rules of Procedure .
( PT ) Madam President , I am sorry if I did not make myself sufficiently clear .
I stand in total and unreserved solidarity with the Christian communities persecuted throughout the Middle East , especially in Iraq .
I merely pointed out , and I intend to provide my fellow member with everything he regards as necessary , that such persecution was unfortunately not confined to the Christian community and that the Yazidi community , the Mandian community , the Shiites and Sunnis themselves , who are outside the majority communities , have also been subject to terrible persecution in that country ; that is a fact that no one can ignore .
I just wanted to stress that and say that I am willing to provide all the documentation required .
Mr Casaca , you have exceeded the time limit for making a personal statement .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debate .
2 .
Uzbekistan ( debate )
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions on Uzbekistan .
( ET ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to recall what the French President , Nicolas Sarkozy , said in this very Chamber a couple of days ago : all those who have failed to respect our values , preferring instead to win contracts , have lost out on all fronts as a result .
Where Uzbekistan and more broadly the whole of Central Asia are concerned , there is a danger that in assessing the region 's energy resources the interests of individual countries will begin to prevail over our common values .
Unfortunately , this is also apparent in the inability to agree on a motion for a resolution in support of the EPP and the UEN on the Council Decision suspending the visa ban on Uzbek officials for six months without a genuine change in the human rights situation .
The motion for a resolution also refers to the very critical human rights situation in Uzbekistan .
To date , however , there has been an understanding in Uzbekistan , and I heard this with my own ears , that human rights are an internal matter for that country .
We cannot agree to this approach and I urge you to support the first , more critical version of the motion for a resolution .
author . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as a democratic institution , we cannot allow human rights to be trampled on anywhere in the world .
However , we find it equally unacceptable if , within this very House , diplomatic relationships and interparliamentary cooperation between the EU and Uzbekistan are risked without giving it a thought .
When I look at the motions for resolutions presented by the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe and the left-wing groups , it is tantamount to a diplomatic demolition derby .
In Parliament 's last resolution , dated October 2006 , we committed ourselves to a constructive , dialogue-oriented solution .
Today , however , we are not seeking dialogue but slamming a door shut .
My group cannot answer for this , so I ask you to reject the motions for resolutions by the PSE Group , the ALDE Group and the left .
The motion for a resolution presented by our group together with the Union for Europe of the Nations Group has the following in its favour . The political situation in Uzbekistan is by no means satisfactory .
The human rights situation continues to be alarming in many respects .
Yet some progress is being made in spite of everything .
For example , the first round of the human rights dialogue between the European Union and Uzbekistan took place in Tashkent on 8 and 9 May of this year .
Any resolution by the European Parliament must illuminate the current situation , and the present resolution can only be based on this .
author . - ( PL ) Madam President , I would like to begin by thanking the co-authors of the resolution .
At the same time , bearing in mind the Community guidelines on the protection of human rights adopted in 2004 , I would like to emphasise the need to improve relations between the European Union and Uzbekistan .
I would like to stress , however , that these relations should be based on the principles of democracy , the rule of law and respect for human rights , with particular emphasis on the latter .
Furthermore , with regard to the decision to suspend for a six-month period certain sanctions imposed on Uzbekistan , I support the initiative to monitor progress in respect for human rights in that country .
The negative decision of the Uzbek Ministry of Justice regarding recognition of the office monitoring these rights is evidence that we should bring further efforts to bear in this area .
As Vice-Chairman of this Parliament with responsibility for the Neighbourhood Policy inter alia in Uzbekistan , I appeal to international institutions , and particularly to the Uzbek authorities , to take supporting action that leads to the development of a civil society .
author . - ( FR ) Madam President , the aim of this resolution is simple : it is to tell the truth .
That is what the Uzbek people and human rights activists are asking us to do .
The urgency derives from the assassinations of journalists and dissidents that have occurred over the last few months , and from the conclusions of the Council on 15 October , which were wrongly presented as a diplomatic victory by President Karimov .
The important fact is that the sanctions have been extended for 12 months because no investigation has been carried out into the Andijan massacre and the meetings of experts on the matter have not produced any result .
As regards the lifting of visa bans for six months , we agree that the visa bans should automatically be renewed if the excellent criteria introduced - the visits by United Nations special rapporteurs , for example - are not met within six months .
On the other hand , we are not happy with the conclusions on the alleged progress made on human rights .
For example , the abolition of the death penalty has still not actually come about , and the EU-Uzbekistan dialogue on human rights is suspended .
Finally , in this resolution , we condemn the assassination of several independent journalists and dissidents , and demand that serious and impartial investigations are conducted .
I am concerned about the intentions of the PPE and the UEN .
They are proposing to go further than all the Member States by interpreting the Council 's conclusions not only as a suspension of the visa bans but actually as removal of the visas altogether .
Their paragraph 3 states that the ineffectiveness of the sanctions is an encouragement to the Uzbek regime , which makes no sense either intellectually or politically .
The text does not even mention the 13 human rights activists whose immediate release President Pöttering demanded by letter .
Finally , my last point is that paragraph 9 mentions the difficult situation of Human Rights Watch .
That is fine , but the organisation made it known clearly that it did not want to be mentioned in a resolution that was technically incorrect and as harmful for human rights activists as for the Uzbek people and that in the end , as everyone realises , would be used as a propaganda tool by the dictator , President Karimov .
Consequently , I am asking the MEPs from the PPE and UEN to subscribe to the serious attitude we need to adopt on this matter and with regard to the Uzbek people , and support our motion for a resolution , which says nothing more than the truth about the human rights situation in Uzbekistan .
author . - Madam President , the persistence since 1989 of the tyrannical governing regime of Uzbekistan under Mr Karimov is a cancerous infliction on democracy .
Mr Karimov 's regime is responsible for the implementation of a policy of terror and corruption in his country , with the victims being , of course , mainly the people of Uzbekistan .
These people are subjected to arbitrary arrest and detention , to torture and ill-treatment and , while there have been numerous demands for democratic reform , both by the international community and the EU , Mr Karimov carries on taking no notice whatsoever .
This reminds me of another individual who is governing his country in a similarly totalitarian manner and takes no notice of those who call for democratic reforms to be implemented .
I am talking about King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia , a country where women have no right to vote , and even no right to drive a car , and where serious human rights abuses are part of everyday life .
In this respect , sadly , some EU governments are guilty of double standards : they attack Mr Karimov ferociously - and quite rightly so - but are very gentle indeed with King Abdullah .
In fact , recently King Abdullah was given an extravagant welcome on state visits to Britain and Italy .
The main difference between Uzbekistan and Saudi Arabia is money - lots of it - and as long as King Abdullah spends his billions in Britain and Italy , his involvement in gross violations of human rights and democratic institutions in his country can be conveniently overlooked .
That , I suppose , is why , when I suggested that the situation in Saudi Arabia be discussed here today , it was turned down ceremoniously by almost all the groups .
Perhaps more sensitivity might be shown next time , I hope .
author . - ( NL ) Madam President , Uzbekistan is in need of radical change .
The initial impetus in this direction was nipped in the bud on 13 May 2005 , with brute force that claimed the lives of hundreds of demonstrators .
Since then , the outside world has remained silent for a conspicuously long time .
Little happened initially following our earlier topical and urgent debate on 27 October 2005 .
Yet it was not only in better-known states such as Ukraine , Georgia and Belarus that authoritarian regimes took power following the collapse of the Soviet Union ; this was particularly also the case in Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan .
There , it was not democracy that had triumphed , but a small group of people who had gained experience in the old state apparatus and the security forces .
Having no objective other than to stay in power , these people turned state enterprises into their own private property , manipulated electoral results , gave the opposition as little leeway as possible , hampered free organisations , restricted the press and , if need be , used violence against their own people .
Sadly , this state of affairs persists in Uzbekistan .
To date , Europe 's attitude towards Uzbekistan is influenced far too much by economic and military interests .
It appears that the dictatorship in Uzbekistan has been allowed to stay on because it proved itself useful in the military intervention in Afghanistan .
Such an attitude would completely destroy the credibility of Europe 's pretensions with regard to human rights and democracy .
Europe must not make the rights and freedoms of the Uzbeks secondary to other considerations .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , under the German Council Presidency , after explicit influence from the German Federal Government , the sanctions against Uzbekistan were relaxed under the condition that Karimov 's government would improve the human rights situation in the country .
However , torture is still used in Uzbek prisons ; the human rights situation in Uzbekistan has not improved at all .
We hear this from international organisations , which are observing serious attacks on civil society .
Not only human rights organisations , but also women 's organisations , information centres and many other organisations are being affected .
Human rights activists are being condemned to long-term sentences and numerous activists , including journalists , have had to flee .
We must not soften the sanctions ; we must not lift them .
We are seeing once again that , even in this Parliament , there are different discourses on human rights when it comes to access to raw materials compared to when raw materials are not at stake .
We must send a clear signal that we do not accept this .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( ES ) Madam President , I would also like to use the opportunity of this debate to alert the House and draw its attention to a group of people that is particularly persecuted in Uzbekistan , and not only in Uzbekistan , but also in Turkmenistan .
This is , basically , the LGBT population .
Gays and lesbians are usually doubly persecuted , because they are activists , in many cases , but also because they are gays and lesbians .
Between two and five years in prison await many of those who publicly acknowledge that they are part of this group , or are denounced as members of it .
I think that within this context perhaps , when we are talking about human rights in general , we normally take into account all human rights , but often we forget about this particular group , which has specific needs and which also tried at the last meeting of the OSCE , held in Madrid , to present these claims in the face of incomprehensible opposition from many governments .
I think that this is something that we should remember , and which , in any case. we should go return to in the debate on relations between the European Union and Central Asia .
Madam President , first of all , I am really worried about the PPE-DE Group 's attitude concerning the human rights situation in Uzbekistan .
We should not be taken in by the hypocritical efforts to achieve respectability undertaken by the Uzbek Government with the aim of giving the impression of democratic progress and improving relations with the European Union .
No , Uzbekistan has not progressed in the last two years .
The government has still not authorised an independent investigation into the killings in Andijan .
Human rights are still mocked and torture is still used , according to the UN report .
Political opponents still do not have the right to express themselves freely .
The press is still at the command of the government .
We denounce that , and we also question the government on two murders , those of a theatre director and a journalist , both known to have criticised the Uzbek Government .
We must not support the subterfuge of the self-re-election of President Karimov on 23 December and we must remain very cautious and attentive regarding the Uzbek political situation , even if some national interests within the European Union suffer because of it .
Human rights must never give way to economic relations in the European Union .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , the recently adopted new strategy for Central Asia reflects the commitment of the European Union to enhanced long-term engagement and cooperation with the region .
The EU and Central Asian countries , including Uzbekistan , have agreed to make human rights , the rule of law , good governance and democratisation key elements of the strategy .
We intend to step up support for the protection of human rights and the creation and development of an independent judiciary , thus making a sustainable contribution to the consolidation of the rule of law and respect for international human rights standards in Central Asia .
EU-Uzbekistan relations have to be put in this context , where encouragement to take positive steps to improve human rights and democratisation are the basis of dialogue and cooperation .
Our relations with Uzbekistan have gone through a difficult phase over the last few years , notably since the events in Andijan in May 2005 , and we remain seriously concerned about the human rights situation .
It is our firm belief that we stand a better chance of encouraging progress in the human rights situation in Uzbekistan by engagement rather than isolation .
Isolation has not worked .
We welcome the gradual re-engagement that has taken place over the past year , since the EU-Uzbekistan Cooperation Council agreed to establish a regular human rights dialogue , the first round of which was in May this year .
Two rounds of expert-level talks have also taken place on the Andijan events .
We are also planning a dialogue with Uzbek civil society on freedom of the media , which should take place in Tashkent early next year .
We also welcome Uzbekistan 's introduction of habeas corpus and the abolition of the death penalty , which should come into effect in January 2008 .
At the last meeting of the General Affairs Council , the EU Member States agreed on the renewal of restrictive measures but , at the same time , agreed on the conditional suspension of the visa ban .
The Council urged Uzbekistan to fully implement its international obligations relating to human rights and , in particular , to allow unimpeded access by relevant international bodies to prisoners , to engage effectively with UN special rapporteurs , to let all NGOs operate without constraint in Uzbekistan and to release human rights defenders from detention and cease harassing them .
The Council stated that the lifting of the visa restrictions would be reviewed after six months , to assess whether Uzbekistan had made progress in meeting these conditions .
The Uzbek authorities agreed to continue the discussion on human rights issues in the context of the EU-Uzbekistan Cooperation Committee early next year .
Uzbekistan has also shown itself open to discussing with the Commission ways to further enhance Community assistance in supporting the reform of its political institutions , such as the parliament , and the reform of the judiciary , all of which we will discuss further in the Cooperation Committee .
The fact that the EU 's restrictive measures remain in place clearly signals both to the Uzbeks and the broader public our concerns about the situation in Uzbekistan .
Uzbekistan has a long way to go in the area of human rights and we will continue to stress to the Uzbek side , in line with the Council conclusions , that we expect to see concrete progress in the human rights situation on the ground .
Human rights will continue to be an important and difficult issue in our relations with Uzbekistan , but the Commission believes that engagement is the best way to promote positive developments .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debates .
( Abbreviated in accordance with Rule 142 of the Rules of Procedure )
in writing . - ( FR ) When Europe speaks , freedoms improve .
The European Union absolutely must pursue the policy begun in 2005 after the blind and totally unpunished repression at Andijan , which according to the OSCE and Human Rights Watch left between 500 and 1000 people dead .
The many challenges ahead ( energy , terrorism , freedoms ) mean that Europe must mobilise more than ever on its periphery .
Its most pressing mission is to act to promote human rights and to make calm relations with Uzbekistan dependent on progress with fundamental freedoms .
The EU cannot ignore the reality of a chimerical rule of law and the hateful assassination last September of the director Mark Weil , known for his opposition to the regime in Tashkent .
The Uzbek parliament has recently made several steps towards the abolition of the death penalty and civil justice .
Although these decisions are still very inadequate , the European Union 's firmness has not been in vain and runs counter to the principles of an unacceptable and dangerous realpolitik .
We need to go even further to achieve democracy and political stability , but we have finally begun to hope .
It is up to the vast country of Uzbekistan not to ruin this hope , by building a genuine partnership with Europe .
3 .
Somalia ( debate )
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions on Somalia .
author . - Madam President , for many generations people from Somaliland and Somalia have been coming to my constituency of London .
They have a long tradition of working in the British Merchant Navy and sending monies back home .
During my time in the British Parliament , I was Co-Chairman of the British-Somali All-Party Group .
Sometimes we took up problems and sometimes we took up personal issues and so forth .
There were many of these .
The Somalis were wonderful people but were not served by particularly wonderful leaders .
Now things have gone from bad to worse .
We now have a failed state .
We have a situation where the country has some of the worst health statistics in the world .
Its people face violence every day and continually rising child and maternal mortality rates .
They are being caught in the crossfire between Ethiopian and government troops and the court militias .
That is why this issue is on the agenda today .
We can see how awful it is to live in Somalia today .
We can see the glaring necessity to get humanitarian aid there , and yet we cannot get it there .
We can see the need for peacekeeping forces , and we welcome what the African Union has promised , but we do not welcome what it is actually providing . It is nothing like what has been promised .
At the moment all we have there is Ugandan troops .
Until the promised figure of 8 000 troops is reached , the Ethiopians will not leave .
We have to see how we can get people talking - talking across borders , talking across some of our traditional prejudices - because , if people do not talk , there will be no stability , and if there is no stability then there is no future for that country .
If there is no future , then more people will die .
We will not be responsible , but we will have played no part in preventing that happening .
author . - ( ES ) Madam President , I also obviously want to stress the importance of this resolution , especially in the context of the debate that we had this morning .
We are talking precisely about how to deal with the situation of fragile states .
Somalia is not only a fragile state , it is actually a failed state .
However , on this point we must not forget , as Mr Bowis was saying , that the enormous level of violence that exists in the country at the moment is primarily fuelled by the continuous entry of arms , mainly light weapons and ammunition , which come from other countries in the region , and in many cases directly from Western countries , which include the European Union .
We therefore must not forget that , as well as reacting to the current immediate consequences of what is happening in Somalia , we also have a responsibility for this situation , and when we talk about the obligation and responsibility to protect , which is what we are used to doing in this type of debate , we also need to take our own responsibility for prevention , for example by controlling arms exports .
author . - ( PT ) Yesterday in Mogadishu there were incitements to attack African Union forces - such is the scale of the tragedy and loss of control that are destroying Somalia and inflaming the entire Horn of Africa .
The EU must , as a matter of urgency , bring pressure to bear on all parties to the conflict to commit themselves to an inclusive process of national reconciliation , capable of tackling the political issues at the root of the crisis .
The ' transitional government ' will remain a fiction if it continues to take no action to protect the civilian population and facilitate humanitarian aid .
Somalia is more awash with arms than ever , according to a recent UN report .
It is essential for countries and dealers who breach the arms embargo imposed in 1992 to be stopped and held accountable .
Finally the African Union peacekeeping force urgently needs to be strengthened and the occupying Ethiopian troops need to leave .
It should be acknowledged that the Ethiopian intervention , instigated by the Bush administration with the passive complicity of the European Union , did not bring peace or government or even help to combat terrorism in Somalia .
It only brought more suffering , poverty and death to the people of the whole region .
author . - ( PL ) Madam President , we are talking here today about the tragedy that has taken place in Somalia .
It is generally said that there are three intervention measures that can be taken in such a case : diplomatic pressure , an economic embargo and , if necessary , armed intervention .
There is , however , a fourth possibility that we do not mention , and that is that EU countries should start by removing the potential for their own pseudo-business to corrupt bureaucrats in various post-colonial countries , who then set about starting civil wars , often in the basic interests that the pseudo-business is pursuing .
Let me say something else on the same subject that Mr Romeva i Rueda and Mrs Gomes : surely the weapons used in these countries , including Somalia , are produced in and exported from so-called democratic countries , countries that are economically developed .
States in this part of the world should specifically put pressure on their own arms producers and pseudo-businessmen to ensure that they do not provoke or play a role in the worst disasters unfolding on the planet today .
author . - Madam President , Somalia has been the subject of European Parliament and UN resolutions in the past .
Unfortunately , the situation there has not improved and the prolonged destructive civil war has carried on unabated .
The resulting tragic human suffering continues , with hundreds of thousands of poverty-stricken refugees , thousands of malnourished and dying children , and the reported emergence in the region of contagious diseases like cholera and hepatitis .
That country is in a desperate situation , where anarchy and the law of the jungle prevail .
In this joint motion for a resolution , as in previous ones , we make a series of useful suggestions , such as the cessation of all foreign military intervention in Somalia - mainly from Ethiopia and Eritrea - and full implementation of the arms embargo against Somalia , which , although imposed 15 years ago , is sadly still to become truly effective .
We also make a call for protection of freedom of the press by strongly condemning the Somali Government 's systematic harassment of the media and its shameful failure to investigate the killing of journalists whose reporting was deemed to be critical of the government .
We make these calls conscious of the fact that the chances of them being listened to are very slim indeed .
Still , we must persevere in the hope that perhaps common sense and a humanistic attitude will at last prevail and that the Somali people eventually will see more peaceful and prosperous days .
author . - ( NL ) Madam President , since 1991 , Somalia has no longer existed in practice as a country , at least in the sense of the territory of the former Italian colony .
Only in the north , in the former British colony of Somaliland , does a kind of state exist , but this state is not recognised internationally .
The place of the state has been taken by a number of warlords , who alternate between fighting and cooperating with each other .
The army of neighbouring Ethiopia has appointed itself their joint protector .
The Union of Islamic Courts , on the other hand , is their joint adversary and wants to reunite Somalia on the basis of traditional Islamic rules , without the warlords .
All attempts so far to establish a generally accepted unity government and to help Somalia function again as a state have failed .
The Commission 's financial support for the Transitional Federal Institutions that were created in 2004 appeared justified at the time but led to the accusation that the European Union was taking sides in an armed conflict and thus cooperating with Ethiopia against the forces that would prefer to see a strict Islamic regime in power .
Such a European policy , however well meaning , cannot succeed without the support of the inhabitants of Somalia .
For this reason , it is good that the motion for a resolution on which we are soon to vote calls for the cessation of foreign military intervention and for dialogue and reconciliation at domestic level .
Madam President , since the fall of the Siad Barre regime in 1991 , Somalia has not had a properly functioning government .
The internal situation is one of chaos and anarchy .
As a result of the conflict between the rebels of the Islamic Courts Union and provisional government troops , 850 000 people were made homeless and there were many deaths .
The situation in Somalia is dramatic .
Cholera is spreading throughout the region , more than 1.5 million people require urgent medical aid and tens of thousands of children are suffering from malnutrition .
There is a real risk that this conflict could lead to destabilisation throughout the region .
Of even more concern is the fact that of the promised 8 000 African Union soldiers , only 1 600 have so far been deployed in mediatory action .
Because of this , the African Union , the United States , the European Union and the UN should increase humanitarian and logistical aid for the Somalians as well as step up diplomatic efforts aimed at accelerating the peace process and establishing a stable government through free elections in 2009 .
Madam President , Somalia lies on the Somalian Peninsula , known as the Horn of Africa , and is an ethnically and religiously homogeneous state .
Somalians constitute 97 % of the population , with almost 100 % professing Islam .
With its natural resources it had the conditions necessary to achieve economic development and a decent life for citizens in the Republic of Somalia , which came into being in 1960 .
Sadly , a coup d 'état , a civil war , changes in political orientation , tribal divisions and the involvement of the Islamic Courts Union with its links to the Taleban in the struggle for power have combined to create hell on earth for the people of Somalia .
How can we help these people ?
The solution to the Somalia issue lies with the UN and the African Union .
In the interests of Africa , the African Union should step up its political and military activities to protect people and create the conditions necessary for the absolutely essential humanitarian aid to be provided by the UN and the European Union .
In Somalia 's situation a debate on human rights violations , which are occurring on a massive scale in that country , will not change anything .
What are needed is action that would be supported by the European Union .

Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I fully agree with Mr Bowis that , as long as people talk , there is always hope .
We consider it very timely to have this wake-up call on Somalia today , since the situation currently poses a significant threat to peace and security , not only in the region but also beyond .
It also causes immense suffering for the people of Somalia .
As you know , the Union has taken a lead role in the Somali peace process and the establishment of the transitional federal institutions .
We have always strived for a political solution involving all Somali parties , and Commissioner Louis Michel carried out a last-ditch peace mission to rescue the peace process prior to the Ethiopian intervention in December 2006 and has been instrumental in linking EU support to the African Union peace mission to Somalia and to the launch of a genuine National Reconciliation Congress .
We have an unfolding humanitarian disaster and a diminishing humanitarian space in Somalia , including a crackdown on the independent media and journalists , who are dying in targeted killings .
The current levels of humanitarian distress in south and central Somalia have reached alarming proportions .
An estimated 1.5 million people are in need of humanitarian assistance , including more than 730 000 internally displaced persons , of whom one-third are estimated to be at extreme risk .
An estimated 173 000 Mogadishu residents fled the violence in the past two weeks alone .
I also wish to inform you that , in response to the current humanitarian crisis , the Commission 's Humanitarian Aid Office , ECHO , is working with implementing partners to support 1.5 million people , providing the local population , internally displaced people and host communities with access to water , sanitation , nutrition , drugs and support for livestock and livelihoods .
This year , it has allocated the highest ever budget for assistance to Somalia , amounting to EUR 20 million .
We are also very concerned about the evolving security situation in Mogadishu and other regions in south-central Somalia .
Insurgency operations appear to be expanding and all parties have significantly increased their military capabilities in the past weeks .
The EU is committed to following a multi-pronged approach that entails supporting a comprehensive security strategy , including a ceasefire process and a full deployment of the African Union Mission in Somalia that would facilitate Ethiopian withdrawal , and encouraging the nomination of a representative and effective Prime Minister and government while engaging and providing reassurances to the opposition , to facilitate their involvement during the remainder of the transitional period leading up to elections in 2009