Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 1 March 2001 .
Tribute
Ladies and gentlemen , last week I learnt , to my great sadness , of the death of two former Members , Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz and Mr Lambrias .
They both passed away on 3 March 2001 .
Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz was one of the great characters of the German Green Party and a fervent supporter of the anti-nuclear campaign .
She was Member of this House from 1989 to 1999 , and , in particular , she was Vice-Chairman of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance of the European Parliament .
She was an honest political fighter and even those who did not share her beliefs always respected her for her unwavering commitment .
Mr Lambrias was a Member of this House for 15 years , between 1984 and 1999 .
He was Vice-Chairman of the Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats .
All Members who knew him appreciated his human qualities and his strong commitment to European integration .
I would like to express my condolences to both families , to the Group of the Greens and to the PPE-DE Group and I would ask you to observe a minute ' s silence in memory of our two colleagues who have passed away .
( The House rose and observed a minute ' s silence )
Statement by the President
Ladies and gentlemen , as you are aware , there has been another terrorist attack in Spain since our last part-session .
During the night of 8 March , Iñaki Totorika Vega , a member of the Ertzaintza , the Basque regional police force , was killed in a car bomb explosion in Hernani .
On my own behalf and on behalf of the European Parliament , I have expressed our deepest sympathy and sincere condolences to the victim ' s family .
I have also sent a message to the Spanish Government stating our unconditional support in its fight against terrorism and I would ask you to rise and observe a minute ' s silence to pay tribute to Iñaki Totorika , and to all the members of the security forces who work so courageously , often putting their lives at risk , for peace in the Basque region .
( The House rose and observed a minute ' s silence )
You will also be aware of the terrible accident that took place in northern Portugal when the bridge at Entre-os-Rios collapsed , claiming the lives of more than 70 people .
On behalf of the European Parliament , I immediately sent our condolences to the Portuguese Prime Minister , Mr Guterres , to assure him that our thoughts are with the Portuguese people at a time of such suffering .
I again ask you to observe a minute ' s silence to show our respect for the memory of the victims .
( The House rose and observed a minute ' s silence )
Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting
The Minutes of the sitting of 1 March have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?

Madam President , I refer to the speech by Mr Manuel Medina Ortega during the last part-session , and would ask you to consider the following request .
Since Mr Medina Ortega 's speech concerning the application for the removal of the immunity of Mr Berlusconi and Mr Dell 'Utri , a number of reports have appeared in the press , and rumours are rife in this House .
As the Group of the Party of European Socialists , we believe that it would be helpful if you , Madam President , put an end to these rumours by granting the request which I wish to put to you - although I realise that you are under no obligation to do so - namely to permit me to address three brief and very precise questions on this issue to you . The Members of this House trust that your answers will clarify the matter .
Madam President , I believe that this would serve the interests of the House itself and also the performance of your office .
I would therefore be most grateful if you would perhaps grant my request - and , I repeat , you are not obliged to do so - in view of the political sensitivity of this matter .
Mr Schulz , I do apologise but I do not fully understand which part of the Minutes you are referring to .
We are currently discussing the approval of the Minutes .
Is there something that you would like to be corrected ?

Madam President , it concerns the speech by Mr Medina Ortega , referring to Rule 6 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure in connection with the Spanish Supreme Court 's application for the removal of the immunity of Mr Berlusconi and Mr Dell 'Utri .


Your point does not refer to the Minutes of 1 March .
I shall gladly reply to any questions that you wish to ask when we deal with points of order .
I think that it would be unwise to surreptitiously start to deal with points of order before the agenda has been approved , as this was something that we changed , to the overall satisfaction of , I think , nearly all Members .
Madam President , may I understand you to mean that you will call me again at the start of the discussion of the agenda ?
No , this can be done once the order of business has been established .
That is now the time when we deal with points of order .
Madam President , with regard to the Minutes , my name is not on the attendance register of 1 March 2001 .
I probably forgot to sign the register , but I did attend and I took part in all the votes .
This will be corrected .
( The Minutes were approved )
Agenda
Madam President , I wish to raise a matter which is not , but should be , on this week 's agenda - the foot-and-mouth disease crisis in Europe .
It seems extraordinary that this Parliament , which represents the people of Europe , is not addressing this question this week , given the deepening of the crisis since the Commission last spoke .
I obviously have a particular concern in that this crisis is threatening a EUR 15bn food industry in the Republic of Ireland because of the steps we have had to take to ensure that foot-and-mouth disease does not get a hold there .
It seems to me that this is a matter of concern not just to people in Ireland but to people everywhere in Europe .
I would ask you , Madam President , to take the initiative and request the Commissioner to come to Parliament this week to make an up-to-date statement on this crisis .
I am quite sure that we can find at least 30 minutes to enable the Commissioner to do that , and to demonstrate that this is a credible political forum for the people of Europe .
Thank you , Mr De Rossa .
The Rules of Procedure do not give me the authority to take this step .
A debate was held at the Conference of Presidents to determine whether this question should be included in the agenda for this part-session .
I would reiterate that this was already discussed , at the previous part-session of 28 February . In the end , the Conference of Presidents decided to let the Commission keep a very close eye on this situation and to hold a debate at an appropriate time .
This question was , therefore , very central to the concerns of the Conference of Presidents .
There has , however , been no request for an amendment .
Madam President , I would urge you to consider the position that now exists in relation to the foot-and-mouth crisis in the United Kingdom .
I respect the point you make , that this was discussed by the Conference of Presidents last week and given the situation at that time it was decided not to place it on the agenda this week .
Could I just point out the number of outbreaks in the UK yesterday was higher than at any time in the three weeks since the crisis started .
The situation is now out of control and even though the British Agriculture Minister is insisting there is no crisis , the whole of the EU views with alarm what is happening in the UK .
Ireland has a particular interest , but so do the French , as do all of us in the 15 Member States and beyond .
The situation has changed so much since the matter was discussed by the Council of Presidents that I would urge you to find time , perhaps during the discussion of the regulation you have just referred to , for us to have a Commission update this week here in Parliament .
Madam President , I would like to add my voice to those who are calling for an emergency debate on the escalating crisis with regard to foot-and-mouth disease in Great Britain .
I am not raising this subject with the intention of embarrassing the British Government in any way , but I am extremely concerned for European farmers , for the British farmers who are bearing the brunt of the crisis at the present time , and , in particular , I am concerned for farmers in Ireland .
You will be aware that Ireland depends more than any other Member State of the European Community on the beef industry .
We export 90 % of our entire production .
For that reason it is extremely important that the most severe restrictions are put into place in Great Britain .
I believe you should invite the Commissioner to come and give his views on the overwhelming crisis that we are going through at the present time .
I would ask you , as you have always done in the past , to find the time for an emergency debate on this matter .
Thank you , Mr Hyland .
From what you have said and in the light of recent developments that have caused the situation to escalate seriously over the last few hours , I am tempted to suggest that this request for inclusion be put to the vote .
I cannot take this step , however .
The House will judge whether this request is admissible .
This would , of course , be an exceptional occurrence , as it has never been done before .
The Rules of Procedure do not stipulate what to do in these circumstances .
In any event , however , the House must decide .
Madam President , with all due respect to the Conference of Presidents - which I also attend on occasion , as you have quite rightly pointed out - there should be an opportunity for emergency statements by Members of this House , especially when new developments have occurred .
So I think that - as you , yourself , have implied - we should be able to decide in a free vote today whether we wish to include an update on this issue on the agenda , contrary to the Conference 's original decision .
There is one problem , however .
In essence , of course , the Council is also called upon to make a statement on this issue , so I would ask that , if possible , it should also be discussed when a representative of the Council is present , as this will hopefully give us the information we need for our decision making .
In this sense , I should like to express support for my fellow MEP .
I entirely agree with Mr Swoboda .
I think it is very important that we have some mechanism in the House to adjust the agenda when an urgent situation such as this arises .
The sad fact is that , although this particular disease affects only animals , it can be transmitted by air over a distance of some 200 kilometres and therefore any Member State within the European Union and beyond is vulnerable .
It is therefore a matter of urgency .
The Commission should make a statement , whether in the presence of the Council or not , and I urge you to put it to the House .
Madam President , naturally , what I have to say is in line with the comments made by the previous speakers .
The Commission has already given a statement at a point when the matter did not appear to be so serious .
There was no vote for a resolution .
In this instance , are we going to have both a statement as well as a resolution ?
Personally speaking , I would be in favour of this .
Madam President , clearly the House will want to make its own decision on this very important issue but I should like to stress that at no point has the British Government not accepted that this is a crisis facing not just British farming and rural communities but potentially the whole of the farming industry in the European Union .
However , the outbreak is not out of control , as the remarks by some people here might give the impression .
Indeed , when Commissioner Byrne spoke in front of the House , he congratulated the UK Government on its swift , direct handling of this issue .
Cooperation is continuing to take place between the British Government and the relevant authorities in the Commission and throughout the Union , to ensure that the outbreak is controlled , contained and eradicated as soon as possible .
Madam President , according to the Rules of Procedure , which we must respect , you need not consult the House .
Rule 37 makes it quite clear that the Commission may , at any time , ask for permission to make a statement .
If the Commission is willing to make such a statement you do not need to put it to the House .
You can so decide under your authority as President .
The Commission has not asked to do this as yet , but I am sure that it will agree to do so .
Madam President , I did not really intend to speak .
I was there when , at the Conference of Presidents , we said that there was no need for us to hold a debate at this time , as we had already discussed foot-and-mouth disease last time .
Now that Mr Corbett has , however , albeit not denied Parliament the right to decide , he implied instead , as it were , that it would be inappropriate to take such a decision here , I would just like to say , on behalf of my group that in the light of recent developments , we all agree unanimously that we should have this debate .
We do not want to wait until the Commission kindly grants us a debate ; we call upon the Commission to come here to Parliament and discuss the issue with us .
We send out the same appeal to the Council as well , and in this regard I am rather more forceful than Mr Swoboda .
We should not kindly request the Council ; we expect the Council to make a statement as well , so that together , in the plenary sitting of the European Parliament , we can represent the interests of our citizens and our consumers !
Who is in favour , in principle , of holding this debate ?
( The House gave its assent )
We agree in principle , therefore , to hold this debate and we shall arrange a time with the Council and the Commission for them to attend .
Madam President , I have been indicating for a long time that I wished to speak .
It is rather unfair that if you are at the back of the Chamber or if you are not at least six foot tall , you cannot gain attention .
I just want to make one point in relation to this whole issue of foot-and-mouth .
As one of my colleagues from Ireland mentioned , it cannot be taken in isolation because of the amount that Ireland exports .
European tax-payers are funding the live export of animals , which is just exacerbating the situation .
We have to stop live exports .
In fact , that is what is responsible for bringing it into Northern Ireland .
Luckily , the Irish Government has been able to contain it ; the same goes for Britain .
So really we have to bring an end to European tax-payers ' money being used for the cruel and inhumane policy of live exports .
Madam President , I have been asking to speak for 15 minutes .
You did not see me - you do not look in this direction very often .
I have nothing to say with regard to the content .
I think that there are many good reasons to hold a debate .
As regards the form , I do not agree with Mr Poettering - our vote would not contravene the Rules of Procedure .
We do not take a decision by majority that goes against our own Rules of Procedure .
There was , however , a perfectly acceptable solution based on consensus , without the need for a vote .
If everyone had been in favour , this item could possibly have been included in the agenda .
Having said that , we are definitely not voting in contravention of the Rules of Procedure and I hope that everyone is clear on this .
Madam President , for some months now , European citizens have had reason to wonder whether their telephone , fax and e-mail messages are being treated as confidential .
We now know that the Echelon system does exist and that the US National Security Agency is , in all likelihood , the main user of the system .
For some days now , Members of the European Parliament have had reason to wonder whether the Commission ' s internal communications are being treated as confidential .
At a meeting of the Temporary Committee investigating the Echelon affair , a senior official responsible for the encryption of confidential information said that he had always been on very good terms with the NSA in Washington and that they check our systems on a regular basis to ensure that they really are secure and are being used correctly .
He said that he was extremely pleased to see that the American secret service had tried for two weeks but had not been able to break the encryption .
If we take a lighter view of this , it is almost like a bank manager asking some safe-breakers to check that the bank ' s safes were secure and , if they said that they were indeed secure , he would take their word for it .
I think that we can draw an analogy between this situation and our own .
The clarifications and denials made by this official ' s superiors were hardly convincing .
I do not think that any Member here was swayed by them .
I think that this is , therefore , a political problem , not just an implausible affair and it should be cleared up in Parliament .
That is why we are calling for Mr Patten , the Commissioner responsible , to explain the current situation to us and we shall then decide how to follow this up .
Madam President , if I speak now , I will not speak again on behalf of my group , so I shall kill two birds with one stone .
I will not repeat what my fellow Member , Mr Lannoye quite rightly said - I wholeheartedly agree with him .
I spoke to you , Madam President , on this very same subject at the beginning of the month .
I think that we should respond to three requirements which advocate including this issue on the agenda for this part-session .
First of all , there is a requirement for timely action .
This is actually an issue that directly relates to Community life and which was raised last month , most fortunately , by the Temporary Committee and its rapporteur , Mr Gerhard Schmid .
We cannot , therefore , wait until September and for the Temporary Committee ' s report to discuss this , as some Members are proposing .
The next requirement is for the truth .
In the answers provided by Commissioner Patten and the Temporary Committee ' s rapporteur , Mr Schmid , the explanations contradict the statements made by the official involved .
We therefore need an explanation and we need it now , not in September .
Lastly , I shall mention the requirement for Parliament to maintain its credibility .
Mr Lannoye reiterated the point that the media has already latched onto this affair and if we decided not to discuss it when questions are raised and not to give the facts in response , we would , more or less , be seen to be on the defensive and suspected either of wanting to cover something up or of being inconsistent .
In order to avoid running this risk , I think that the best thing to do is to include this item on the agenda .
Madam President , I have a great deal of sympathy with the substance of the arguments put forward by the two previous speakers .
It was really quite alarming to have to hear what a member of the Commission ' s staff said to the Echelon Committee .
Even if only a quarter of what he said is true , the situation is extremely problematical .
I believe , however - and this is my group 's view - that the Echelon Committee is there to examine these issues in detail and get to the heart of the matter .
So I would also support the expansion of the Echelon Committee 's competencies , if necessary , so that it is able to undertake a detailed examination of these issues , which have , after all , been referred to it - even if some have been withdrawn again - and then present its findings to Parliament .
As a group , we feel that this would be a better way forward .
The issues are serious , we take them very seriously , but after detailed examination by the Committee they should be presented here and dealt with by us .
I do not think that we can open a debate on this issue .
I have received a request from the representatives of the two groups concerned .
Mr Lannoye , did you have a point of order ?
Madam President , I shall not try to deceive you - this is not a point of order .
I just wanted to speak briefly .
Mr Swoboda quite rightly said that we must carry out an enquiry .
I would like to say , however , that the Echelon affair is being investigated by a temporary committee and not a committee of enquiry .
Mr Lannoye has just clarified this point for us , so that we can all make an objective decision .
( The House rejected the request )
Madam President , I have a point of order relating to the Nassauer report .
Normally this Parliament is consulted on a Commission proposal .
By derogation from that , under Rule 61 , we can deal with a proposal from a Member State government as well .
In this particular case , though , Parliament is to deliver an opinion on a position that has been adopted within the Council .
It originated with a Member State but we are not giving an opinion on the actual proposal which was put to the Council .
I am not seeking to hold up the Nassauer report but I would ask for the matter to be referred , in future cases , to the Committee on Constitutional Affairs because this is a very important precedent .
If , in future , we are going to deal with the changing target of the latest document within the Council instead of the proposal that initiates the legislative procedure , which we then normally seek to amend and where the author can take account of our amendments , we may be going down a slippery slope .
This could be unfortunate for the future and I would ask you to invite the Constitutional Affairs Committee to look at that .
I would hope that , unlike five minutes ago , this genuine point of order to make sure our Rules are properly applied will not be misinterpreted as a political manoeuvre to keep something on or off the agenda .
I am not seeking to remove the Nassauer report from the agenda .
Nor was I , just now , seeking to prevent us discussing foot-and-mouth .
My concern was to make sure that we respect our Rules of Procedure because they are the foundation of the powers and privileges of this House .
Thank you , Mr Corbett .
You have , in fact , made a general comment about an item on the agenda and we shall take note of this .
It was a request for you to refer this to the Constitutional Affairs Committee .
Madam President , I would like to go back to the issue of the Temporary Committee on the ECHELON interception system .
Mr Swoboda ' s wise words were music to my ears .
I glean from those that he is in favour of extending the mandate of the present Echelon committee .
Can the Group of the Greens count on his support if we submit a proposal to that effect ?
Relating to Thursday : President .
With regard to Thursday and the debate on oral questions to the Commission on water management in Europe , the Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats has requested that this debate not be followed by a resolution .
Is there a speaker to move this request on behalf of the Group of the European People ' s Party ?
Madam President , it was my group that took the step to make a request about the Commission ' s statement .
I should like to draw the attention of my fellow Members to the fact that this problem does not only concern water management in a Member State , in this case Spain , insofar as everyone knows that a very ambitious hydrological plan is obviously included in the period up to 2008 which clearly contravenes a number of European directives , one of which is the framework directive that we adopted quite recently .
Yet , Spain is not the only country concerned .
Similar projects exist in Italy , France and Portugal .
We believe , therefore , that it would be a shame if the European Parliament did not make a clear statement , especially when the European directives , for which we voted , are under threat and are also clearly at risk of being violated .
Madam President , I did not request the floor earlier because I did not think that I needed to explain the reasons why our group considers it unnecessary , at the moment , to propose a resolution on an issue which , as has been pointed out , falls within the competence of the Member States , in other words , the regulation of water resources .
Furthermore , I have just heard a completely uncalled-for comment which assumes that a Member State ' s hydrological plan - which has not yet been implemented , which is at a stage of open planning , and which is still subject to new suggestions and development - violates a framework directive .
I am absolutely convinced - and this is also expressed in Commissioner Wallström ' s reply to an oral question on this issue - that the Spanish Government ' s hydrological plan does not only comply with all aspects of the framework directive , but that it respects it absolutely , and the framework directive will be an essential complement to the successful implementation of our plan .
Therefore , because this is entirely an issue involving the management of resources by a Member State , I consider a resolution to be completely unnecessary .
We shall , therefore , take a vote on the request for the debate not to be followed by a resolution .
( Parliament gave its assent )
The order of business is thus agreed .
Speeches relating to points of order
Madam President , I come back to my question to you , which I quite obviously raised at entirely the wrong moment . I asked you earlier , and I should like to repeat this now , whether you are prepared , in view of the burgeoning debate about the process regarding the application for the removal of the immunity of Mr Berlusconi and Mr Dell 'Utri , to answer three brief questions which I would like to put to you .

Madam President , I repeat , you are , of course , under no obligation to answer these questions , but I believe - as you will see from the questions themselves - that , together with your possible answers , they may well dismantle the obvious lack of clarity surrounding this matter .
So my request , as I said , is this : may I put these questions to you , and will you answer them ?
Please go ahead , Mr Schulz .
I would be delighted to give you as much information as I can about this issue .
Madam President , judging from the correspondence which I have seen so far , and according to the letters which you had delivered to Members ' post boxes today , it is quite apparent that you , or the head of your private office , I am not yet entirely sure which - had doubts as to whether the application for the removal of the immunity of Mr Berlusconi and Mr Dell 'Utri , transmitted to this House via the Spanish Supreme Court , was submitted in a proper and correct legal form .

The first question which I would like to put to you is this : why did you not consult this House 's Legal Service about your doubts as to the application 's legality or notify Parliament of your concerns ?
In my opinion , the normal procedure in doubtful cases would be to consult this House 's Legal Service , which , after all , is available to you in your capacity as President .
Secondly , you opted instead to consult the Spanish Embassy or Spain 's EU representation about your doubts concerning the application 's legality .
You apparently referred the matter back to Spain 's representation .
So my second question to you is this : why did you allow more than seven months to elapse without demanding a response to your enquiry ?
If I have understood the sequence of events correctly , you referred the matter to Spain 's permanent representation in August 2000 .
You apparently delayed until mid-February before requesting a response .
That is an awful lot of months !
Why did you wait so long , and what , in your view , were the reasons for the delay ?
My third question is this : under the present circumstances , would you now be prepared to involve the relevant committee of this House - in this case , the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , which deals with the issue of immunity - and transfer the responsibility for this matter to that Committee , or do you intend to retain this competence yourself ?
Thank you very much .
I look forward to your response .
Thank you , Mr Schulz .
I shall give clear answers to the three points that you have raised .
First of all , I would like to reiterate that , according to the Rules of Procedure , the request must indeed come from the competent authority of a Member State , and the President of the European Parliament decides whether to refer the request to the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market and announces this decision in Parliament .
It is , therefore , the President of the European Parliament who takes the decision and it goes without saying that the President must be confident as to the admissibility of the request .
In this case , I had several reservations , since the President of the Spanish Supreme Court sent this request directly to me and , for several years , all requests to waive parliamentary immunity have been sent by the government of the Member State concerned , with the exception of Portugal , so we are very familiar with the process .
The Portuguese Government had actually been persuaded to provide us with confirmation that the legal authority in Portugal did indeed have competence .
In Spain ' s case , however , the precedents related to requests from the permanent representation of the Spanish Government and the Spanish Minister for Justice .
It is , therefore , obvious that I was running the risk that the decision I might take would be appealed against , regardless of the question of the competence of the authority that sent the request .
This is not , then , a legal problem on a European level ; it is up to the government rather than the European Parliament , in my view , or its Legal Service , to decide if the legal authority or the government of a country has competence .
The most obvious solution , all the more so because there were serious reservations , was to contact the government of the country in question , to ask if it could confirm whether the President of the Supreme Court can send this request directly to me , even though there is a precedent where this court had used the intermediary of the government several years ago , and no amendment has been made to Spanish law in the meantime on this issue .
With regard to the second question , the Head of my Private Office wrote with this request at the end of August , and I would like to make it clear that he did so on my instructions , as I myself was on an official visit to Poland .
It is not common practice to send a second request to a government of a country if there is no reply .
I think , moreover , that after such a long time , there would have been a great deal to say on this issue .
In any event , it is obvious that there is a problem , since , as you are no doubt aware , I have just received a reply from the Spanish Government to let me know that the issue is very complicated , so complex that it has been referred to the Spanish Council of State to decide , once and for all , which is the competent authority to issue these requests to waive immunity .
It would certainly have been unwise for me to take a decision , either on my own or with the Legal Service , as to which is the competent authority .
You are asking me if I would now refer this matter to the Legal Affairs Committee .
In response , I can say very clearly to you , Mr Schulz , that no , I would not .
I believe that it would be quite rude , when such a delicate question has been referred to an EU Member ' s Council of State and to disregard the fact that this Council of State is looking into this and will come to a decision .
On the other hand , Mr Schulz , I can inform you that as soon as I receive the necessary clarification , as soon as the Council of State has come to a decision , which I hope will be very soon , as soon as the Spanish Government has informed me whether the President of the Supreme Court is competent in this area , and if it appears that he or she is indeed competent , I shall announce in Parliament , as soon as I can , that I am referring the request to waive the immunity of these two Members to the Legal Affairs Committee .
That is all the information that I can give to you .
Madam President , I would like to refer to the letter which you have received from Spain ' s Permanent Representative , which you just mentioned .
I have been a Member of this Parliament since Spain joined the European Union on 1 January 1986 and , for the first time , this Parliament has established the precedent of a petition from a Supreme Court , not being delivered to the competent committee , but being replied to through the Head of the President ' s private office , and the Spanish Ambassador ' s letter addressed to the Head of the President ' s private office , as if he were a second President .
Letters from the Supreme Court are not replied to by the President of Parliament , but by the Head of the President of Parliament ' s private office , and the Spanish Ambassador addresses himself to the Head of the President of Parliament ' s private office .
The issue has been referred to the Council of State , where , after being studied , a suitable response will be given to the petition .
If I were the Council of State , I would write a letter asking the European Parliament whether the head of the President ' s private office is the competent authority to establish what the competent authority is .
No , Mr Medina Ortega , you are slightly mistaken .
There are several precedents .
As you will see , this will actually be very interesting .
Mr Barón Crespo wrote to me to request that an exhaustive document be drawn up listing all the requests to waive parliamentary immunity and detailing the reactions given to them .
I believe that the House , as well as the Committees that have a particular involvement , will find this document very interesting .
It will show , once again , that almost all the requests , except for those from Portugal , originate from governments and that my predecessors were , in several cases , asked to take the same step as myself , that is , to request clarification .
In particular , there was the case of Mr Balfe , the British MEP .
There have been several instances where you will see that my predecessors Mr Gil-Robles Gil-Delgado and Mr Klepsch adopted the careful approach that I did .
I believe that this really is a very significant issue and it is very important because it affects all the Members of a Parliament whose powers , we must admit , have increased .
Members ' protection is a particularly important matter that must be dealt with very carefully , and , I would like to make a serious point that our actions must be completely divorced from our relationships with the Members that these requests for waivers may involve .
Personally , this is the way I currently work and shall continue to work in the future , wherever these requests may come from .
Madam President , Mr Poettering has often spoken out , in this very House , against personal attacks on other Members of Parliament .
I have always respected him for this attitude , in spite of our conflicting political beliefs .
Yet , in the speech he made earlier against the Socialist Group , he insulted a member of my group , Armando Cossuta .
I think that it would do credit to him if he refrained from making such unwise comments in the future .
Mr Schulz , thank you for asking this question .
It gives me the opportunity to tell you that , personally , there is only one aspect of this matter that is not clear to me ; and that is the reason why the President of the Supreme Court did not use the intermediary of the permanent representative of the Spanish Government to send us his request , as he had done so several years before .
I must say that I did wonder about this .
You will say that this matter is not my concern and I should not have reservations - this would have been perfectly straightforward .
If that were the case , we could have , in fact , saved at least forty-five minutes this afternoon and we would not be debating this issue now .
Yet , you are asking me why the Spanish Government has taken so much time to give me a reply .
Well , I can imagine and , in fact , I can see today that it is because there is a genuine problem with regard to competence - it could be called a conflict of competence ...
( Mr Schulz asked the President a question to which she replied ) ... sent by the Minister for Justice and the Spanish permanent representative via the government .
It is very simple .
I repeat , the document that you will receive and which , I hope , will be very detailed , is actually extremely interesting and will give you details of the solutions found for all the situations which have arisen in various countries and the competent authority will always be noted .
I do not think that it is possible Mr Schulz .
I am sorry but you are overstepping the mark a little , and I have been very patient .
I am willing to meet to discuss this with you , if you wish , just as I am willing to see any Member of the House who requests a meeting .
If you wish , we can arrange a meeting so that we can continue this debate .
A number of requests to make points of order have been tabled .
Madam President , I just wanted to say to Mr Swoboda that he sometimes finds it difficult to decide whether he is speaking here as the Vice-Chairman of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , as a Viennese politician , or as a former Viennese politician .
I sometimes get the impression that his statements have more to do with the fact that there are local elections in Vienna on 25 March .
Madam President , in effect , the issue of Parliamentary immunity is controversial , maybe because the provisions of the Treaty were written 36 years ago and it would , as I feel , be appropriate to update them .
Unfortunately , this does not fall within the remit of Parliament .
In any case , we could take the initiative ourselves of adapting our Rules of Procedure to circumstances , for the Rules of Procedure are not very clear either .
Then , with regard to this debate , somebody said that the aim is to protect Parliament and that it has nothing to do with the Italian elections .
It may well be a coincidence , but this debate is taking place the week after the announcement of the Italian elections .
Madam President , I just wanted to make a brief comment on Mr Schulz 's remark about equal treatment .
I am one of the three permanent rapporteurs on immunity issues on the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market .
All I can say is that we genuinely do treat everyone equally .
I also believe that your own approach in the Berlusconi / Dell 'Utri cases is simply an expression of equal treatment .
I , myself , am working on a specific case in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market in which we have been requesting a statement from the German authorities for nine months and have still not received a reply .
In other words , these processes are quite normal ; they are certainly not unusual .
I fully support your approach towards these two immunity cases .
I genuinely believe that the treatment of immunity is not a suitable theme for political discussion in the House .
It is a legal , not a political issue .
That is an important distinction which should be taken into account in the debate , and I am most grateful to you for your approach .
Madam President , on a point of order .
In your legal tour d 'horizon you seem to imply that at some point the UK authorities had asked for my immunity to be waived - or that is how it came through in the interpretation .
I should like to assure you that never happened , although I did give evidence in a case which involved a Member for whom a similar request was made .
Mr Balfe , I was referring to when you gave evidence as a witness .
My predecessor was not sure if the authority that asked if you could appear as a witness was actually the competent authority .
The British Minister for Home Affairs gave a reply that he had no objection to your giving evidence , as a witness , I would stress .
Madam President , unfortunately , I , once again , have to request the floor to inform you and the House of another tragedy at sea .
Last week , the fishing vessel Hansa , flying a German flag and with a Spanish and Portuguese crew , sank in the North Atlantic , off the coast of Scotland .
Six of the 16 crew lost their lives .
European fishermen have , once again , paid their tribute to the sea .
Madam President , I would like you and the rest of the House to be aware that the Committee on Fisheries approved a report on this issue last week which , I hope , will be presented to Parliament during the next part-session .
This is our contribution to this cruel profession , which is increasingly beset by greater insecurity .
Madam President , I would like to ask you , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , to contact the families of the victims in order to express this Parliament ' s condolences and solidarity , and I would like to point out that they all come from Galicia .
I would also like you , Madam President , if you can , to contact the British sea rescue services , whose members , risking their own lives , saved many others .
I shall gladly do what you have asked , Mr Varela .
Madam President , I too wish to speak once again on the subject of deplorable and avoidable deaths .
This time in memory of six Galician seamen who died in a tragic accident while working in Scottish waters a few days ago .
They are to be buried in their own country this afternoon .
At such a time , I appeal to the executive authority of the Union and to this Parliament to take whatever steps are necessary to help improve the living and working conditions in the fishing industry so that we can , as far as possible , avoid this type of accident which , these days , particularly afflicts the seamen of Galicia .
Madam President , less than a fortnight ago you spoke about a previous killing in the Basque country .
In the meantime , 57 people have been arrested .
The conflict in the Basque country bears some resemblance to that in Northern Ireland .
Despite many differences , I can say that Basque nationalists have tried to follow the Irish model .
The Spanish and French Governments unfortunately have not .
They hold the view that the only possible position on armed struggle and the underlying nationalism is to wipe them out .
Until the paths taken in London and Dublin become the main model for Madrid and Paris it seems that the political landscape will remain as it is .
You , Madam President , will continue to back the Spanish strategy , and I will continue to say what my Spanish colleagues dislike most .
That is a very sad reality .
Madam President , I wanted to take the floor in order to expand on your comments at the beginning of the sitting , and to point out that the latest fatal victim of ETA ' s barbarity , the Basque policeman Iñaki Totorika , belonged to the Basque Nationalist Party , the majority political force in the Basque Country .
As you can see , terrorism is indiscriminate and also strikes at democratic nationalists .
As well as expressing my condolences and solidarity with the family and friends of the late Iñaki , I would like , once again , to express , in this parliamentary forum of the European Union , our complete condemnation of this latest attack and of all the murders and violent acts which the terrorist organisation ETA has being carrying out with a view to imposing its ideas through terror .
ETA claims to defend working people and to support a process of sovereignty and peace for the Basque people , and I would ask ETA whether murdering local councillors , cooks , workers and Basque policemen , kidnapping , extorting and assaulting people constitutes their peace plan .
How can anyone believe in a plan that does not respect human rights , and that does not even respect the right to life ?
The Basque Country , which I come from , wants peace above all , and that peace can only be achieved through mutual democratic respect .
Therefore , on the journey towards finding this much longed for peace , ETA ' s actions and any other type of violence have no place , are unwanted and neither help nor protect anyone , and the best thing would be for them to disappear once and for all and forever , so that we can move on to a phase of free political debate and free democratic decision making by all Basque citizens without exception so that we can decide on the best political future for our people .
Madam President , I notice that Mr Gorostiaga is no longer in his seat .
Like those who share his creed , who murder and then flee , he spits out his poison on this House and then disappears like a coward .
Mr Gorostiaga has reminded us that the Spanish democratic justice system has in recent days made a series of arrests .
Those arrested have been people accused of very serious crimes , of collaborating with armed groups , of apologising for terrorism and of supporting organised crime .
These people , who have been arrested on the orders of an independent and democratic judge , will have every judicial safeguard , they will be defended and heard , they will have a fair trial and , at all times , their dignity as people and citizens will be respected , which is not the case with the victims of Mr Gorostiaga ' s friends , who are silenced by a bullet or a bomb , and who are , of course , unable to express themselves freely from the graveyards they are sent to by Mr Gorostiaga ' s associates .

Very soon the Basque Country will have the opportunity to speak freely through the ballot box and then Mr Gorostiaga will see the results of the horror he brings to this House .
Madam President , just as Mr Gorostiaga ' s speeches are a disgrace to this House , the abominations practised by his ETA friends and represented by him are a disgrace to humanity .
Madam President , I am not going to turn this into a procedural issue , but I would like to draw your attention to a situation which is taking place in Spain .
The company Sintel , which is a subsidiary of Telefónica , is in a very serious situation in which its 2 000 workers are currently shut in or camped out in the open air in particularly harsh conditions , demanding a fair solution in relation to their jobs .
On behalf of the workers , I would ask you to communicate this concern to the relevant committee .

Madam President , I came back yesterday from Palestine , from Gaza , where I attended the plenary session of the Palestinian Legislative Council which was able to meet for the first time in six months , albeit under certain conditions : the members of the Palestinian parliament had to enter Gaza using Israeli public transport , they were unable to use their cars , they were subjected to searches and many of them were prevented from reaching their destination because of the territories being sealed off .
On 7 March , in the middle of the night , 33 Palestinian villages - between Ramal and Birzeit , where there is a university - were completely sealed off by Israeli soldiers , who went so far as to use tanks and who dug trenches and destroyed 400 metres of paved land ; 65 000 people are enclosed in those places .
These are actions which , in my opinion , we can in no way endorse .
I , therefore , call upon the President to make representations to Mr Solana and to present a protest at the way the University of Birzeit has been completely closed off .
The students and teachers of Birzeit had not opened fire , nor had they taken any other hostile initiative : they were there simply to study .
The situation has reached dramatic proportions .
Israel cannot continue to violate the Geneva International Conventions and collective punishment is wrong .
I do not endorse military or terrorist acts carried out by individual Palestinians or organisations , but collective punishment must be opposed because it is a form of tribal vendetta rather than a reaction .
I therefore call upon the President to champion a protest to the Israeli government and to ask Mr Solana to authorise an immediate intervention to bring about the reopening of the occupied territories and put an end to the collective punishments inflicted on the Palestinian people , and to bring about the reopening of Birzeit and its university and the restoration of this people 's right to education and life .
Thank you , Mrs Morgantini .
I shall , of course , do what you have asked me to do .
Safe transport of radioactive material
The next item is the report ( A5-0040 / 2001 ) by Mr Hatzidakis , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the Commission communication concerning the report by the Standing Working Group on the safe transport of radioactive material in the European Union [ COM ( 1998 ) 0155 - C4-0034 / 1999 - 1998 / 2083 ( COS ) ] .
Madam President , Commissioner , I should like to start by thanking my fellow member , Mrs Isler Béguin , for her work as the initial rapporteur for this report , and to say that I am sorry she was unable to see the report through to the end and that , as chairman of the committee , I had to take over , because the final version of the report does not reflect the rapporteur 's views .
The subject matter of this report is , as I am sure you realise , a real hot potato which has divided public opinion in numerous Member States of the European Union .
Nuclear energy alone has divided the European Parliament on other occasions , for obvious reasons .
I should like to make it clear from the start , however , that the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism was quite right to choose not to use this report , on which it has been working for a very long time , since before the European elections , as a platform for discussing the question of principle , that is , the question of whether there should even be nuclear energy , and to focus purely and simply on the subject of the transport of radioactive material within the European Union .
It was right to do so , if , for no other reason than , from a legal point of view , it is not up to the European Union to say whether or not nuclear energy should be used , it is up to the Member States .
Rightly or wrongly , I do not intend to go into this now , but that is the fact of the matter .
We in the Committee on Transport had no reason to extend the debate beyond our remit ; the subject of the report is the transport of radioactive material and that is therefore what we were required to focus on .
Having said which , we know that , at international level , we have the International Atomic Energy Agency , which has been issuing recommendations on the safe transport of radioactive material - in the form of Safety Standard No 6 - since 1961 and that , although these standards are not binding , all Member States have incorporated them into their national legislation .
The Agency 's rules place the emphasis on the packages used in transporting the material , meaning that packages governed by the Agency 's rules must be capable of ensuring confinement of the materials transported , both in normal circumstances and in the event of an accident , and guaranteeing the safety of those exposed to them .
Obviously , I agree that safety has absolute priority over profitability and supply and that the nuclear industry must strictly abide by international transport regulations .
We must not overlook the fact that radioactive material is regularly transported over long distances , not only within the European Union but also to and from other continents .
Without quoting specific examples , I need only say two particularly meaningful words , I need only refer to two particularly meaningful sites : La Hague in France and Sellafield in Great Britain , where radioactive material is processed .
There are four particularly important points in the report to which I should like to refer , as pointers , because we do not have as much time as we would like at our disposal .
First , the report stresses that the European Union should make an effort to reduce the volume and distance that radioactive material is transported .
This is the proximity principle and was the subject of a European Parliament resolution back in 1996 .
Secondly , it is most important , as this report makes quite clear , that we cooperate with the Central and Eastern European countries and that they comply with International Atomic Energy Agency regulations , irrespective of whether or not enlargement takes place quickly - as we all hope it will - because there are problems in these countries which could jeopardise the health and safety of European citizens .
Thirdly , as the report stresses , everyone responsible for transporting radioactive material must comply with existing rules , specifications and standards .
Having legislation is not enough ; it must be complied with .
Fourthly , we examined the question of information about convoys transporting radioactive materials and decided that regional and local authorities should be kept informed .
My last point concerns protests by various groups in this area .
We are all in favour of freedom of expression for all European citizens , but it is important to avoid violence .
This , too , is highlighted in the report .
I have to tell you that the report attracted a large majority in committee and that the two main political groups are in agreement , which is why I regret to tell the House that I am unable to accept individual amendments from my fellow members .
Mr President , I am standing in for my colleague , Mr Mombaur , who is unable to attend as he is unwell , to give the opinion of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy .
The committee 's opinion was originally adopted in April 1999 , in the last Parliament , and was readopted by the committee in this Parliament by an overwhelming majority with the original wording .
The draftsman , Mr Mombaur , noted that only two things had changed in the two years .
I should like to quote his comments that : " First , the Federal German Government 's policy of ending electricity production at nuclear power stations after a further 32 years has shown clearly that , at least in the case of the transport of spent fuel elements , safety problems do not exist .
Secondly , it has been made clear that a change of government in one Member State does not provide a legal basis for terminating agreements concluded at intergovernmental level . "
Six conclusions were adopted by the Industry Committee , largely of a technical nature , to emphasise the low levels of radioactivity and exposure involved , particularly in comparison with naturally occurring background radiation .
I note conclusions 1 and 2 concerning the Standing Working Group on the safe transport of radioactive materials in the European Union , which was established in 1982 at Parliament 's request , which call for its work to continue and for its proceedings to be made public .
I am intrigued to see Commissioner Lamy here this afternoon .
Does this means the Commission is intending to extend the trade in nuclear materials beyond the boundaries of the European Union ?
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , I should like to express my warm thanks to all our colleagues on the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism who have made it possible for us to discuss the Commission communication on the safe transport of radioactive material so objectively .
This is not an appropriate theme with which to score political points .
Let me make it quite clear , the most dangerous aspect of the transport of radioactive material today are the demonstrators on the periphery who cut the railway lines in half , dig out railway embankments , and do other similar things .
At the moment , some of them are staging a ' lie-in ' on the railway tracks in Germany .
That is far more dangerous than the transports themselves .
The Commission communication also makes it clear that in Europe , the vast majority of these movements consist of low-grade radioactive material which is being transported and used to benefit people , that is , as medical products .
No one can possibly object to that .
The Group of the European People 's Party , and let me be quite clear on this , we will vote against all proposed amendments presented by fellow MEPs in Parliament , because we believe that in the Committee , we have worked out an excellent compromise which is worth defending at Parliamentary level as well .
Let me stress again , it is not the task of the European Union - as the rapporteur , my friend Konstantinos Hatzidakis , has also pointed out - to prescribe to individual Member States the type of primary energy sources they should use .
If the majority of Member States continue to be committed to nuclear energy today , however , safe and appropriate procedures must be in place .
I hope that the Member States will also genuinely fulfil their obligation to provide information , which is laid down in the communication .
This will be the next test for Germany , when , at the end of March , reprocessed material is due to be transported from La Hague to its final storage site in Germany .
Mr President , today we must assess what this report is about , which is the safe transportation of radioactive materials .
It is a response to the Commission 's communication on recent changes to the International Atomic Energy Agency 's transport regulations .
I say that because there were times during the debate in the committee when the central issue of transportation of radioactive material seemed to get lost in the wider debate between the pro- and anti-nuclear lobbies .
We should , however , thank Mrs Isler Béguin for starting the work , and certainly our chairman Mr Hatzidakis for finishing it , so we can have that debate here today .
The Commission takes the view that the risk associated with transportation of radioactive material is low but that efforts should be made to inform the public and the emergency services of the safety of the transportation process .
A multi-annual plan should also be adopted by the Community .
We broadly support this view .
Sadly , in the former rapporteur 's report , she took a position which included all dangerous inherent radioactivity , went against reprocessing of radioactive material and recommended that the Euratom Treaty be withdrawn and the nuclear sector be covered by a chapter about energy in the Treaty .
We in the PSE felt , as I said earlier , that this was a report on the transportation of radioactive material and had nothing to do with the merits or demerits of the nuclear industry .
That is why we made compromises and I feel at the moment that we have a balanced report we can all support .
On behalf of the PSE , therefore , I can say that we will support the two amendments that we tabled down in the plenary but reject the majority of amendments which either defend the nuclear industry as if no problem exists , or damn it as some form of devil-incarnate industry .
My group believes that the report as it stands , while not perfect , is at least balanced , realistic , objective and addresses the issues that it is supposed to address , namely the transportation of radioactive material .
Mr President , Commissioner , the European Parliament has , once again , missed an opportunity to do some straight talking about nuclear energy .
It has , once again , side-stepped a fundamental debate on the safe transport of dangerous materials , as if nuclear energy were still the domain of experts and the advocates of nuclear energy and that the debate will , by necessity , be passionate and controversial .
I attempted to open this debate at the public hearing on 21 January 2000 when I was the first rapporteur .
The all-powerful nuclear lobby pulled strings again , however .
Although the first report by Mr Maurice was never presented during the previous legislature , the report before us could have been a step forward but that will not happen .
The Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism adopted a resolution , with the full support of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , which reveals nothing of the concern about opinion on the extremely sensitive issues surrounding the transport of radioactive materials , whereas my original report was perfectly in tune with the changing views of European citizens on these issues .
This is indeed a dramatic turn of events , which gives us cause to condemn the subtle workings of the agreements between large political groups manipulated by the pro-nuclear lobby .
So , despite the work we have done , the draft resolution before us runs counter to the original proposals and , as a Member of Parliament , I cannot agree to it appearing in a resolution ; perhaps silence is tantamount to a crime .
Although on many points I had managed to achieve a fair number of compromises between Members who had worked on this matter and tabled amendments , all this work was smashed to pieces the day before the vote in the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism when the main groups refused to vote in favour of our compromises .
The main issues surrounding the transport of radioactive materials , such as transparency , safety and , more importantly , ways of reducing these transports , have been curtailed in the report that was presented to you .
The report adopted by the Chairman of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism is nothing but a paean to the nuclear industry .
As proof of the influence that the pro-nuclear lobby had in the drafting of this change , the amendments presented by the conservatives and the socialists are absolutely identical , word-for-word , as are the acknowledgements from the lobby to the Members , who have gone along with the whole thing .
They want us to believe that the transport of radioactive materials is not a matter for the nuclear industry and that we , the Group of the Greens , are in the wrong debate .
I should like to see an end to this hypocrisy !
Although most radioactive waste often takes the form of small packages to be used in laboratories and medicine , this is not the most dangerous material .
In fact , the transport of radioactive waste presents the greatest risk due to the levels of radioactivity .
To say the opposite would be a manipulation of the truth .
Therefore , we are not being in the least bit provocative in raising the issue of the treatment of these radioactive packages , since we are aware that the entire policy on the safe transport of radioactive materials is based on packaging , which would be guaranteed against all eventualities .
Yet , we are aware that many radioactive products including the most toxic , such as plutonium , are being transported around Europe .
Is it a crime of lèse-majesté to want to see an end to these bombs on wheels ?
In my report , I tried to provide answers to these issues and to raise the critical question about the origin of radioactive materials transportation .
At this point , we reach the issue of the nuclear industry and of nuclear waste reprocessing in particular , since reprocessing in plants in The Hague and Sellafield is what actually causes most radioactive waste to be transported .
If reprocessing did not take place , radioactive waste would not be transported .
That is the simplest solution and it is possible , because we are aware that reprocessing is an economic and ecological anomaly , given what we now know .
The most recent development in the transport of highly radioactive materials is that waste from MOX-fuel processing plants is stored , quite illegally , in The Hague .
This means , Mr President , that it has been illegally transported as well .
There is no point in seeking to curtail the debate , as the report is trying to do .
We might improve it , on the other hand , by voting in favour of the amendments that I have just presented .
Mr President , I very much welcome this report on the transportation of radioactive material within the European Union .
As you are all aware , this is a matter of deep concern to the Irish people , who are particularly upset that there will be increased shipments of nuclear material through the Irish Sea in the near future .
The German Government has already stated that it is ready to restart the shipments of spent nuclear fuel to Cumbria , and the Dutch Government has overseen the transportation of two shipments of nuclear spent material to Sellafield in recent times .
The Dutch Government intends to carry out 17 more shipments in the coming years .
Fighting British Nuclear Fuels and the British nuclear industry is never an easy task - I have been doing it for many years .
That is why I am particularly pleased that the Greater London Assembly set up a committee last week to investigate safety concerns on the transportation of radioactive waste by rail through London .
Trains loaded with spent nuclear fuel from three nuclear plants in the south-east of England regularly cross London bound for the BNFL plant at Sellafield .
They pass through seven boroughs , including West Hampstead , Islington , Hackney , Hammersmith , Fulham , Wandsworth and Bromley .
Cartloads of nuclear waste are regularly stored at marshalling yards in Willesden .
The setting up of this new Radioactive Trains Investigative Committee will hear evidence from British Nuclear Fuels and Railtrack , as well as from representatives from local community groups on this very issue .
It is anticipated that this committee will report back to the Greater London Assembly by the summer .
The committee 's foundation comes only a few days after a train carrying spent nuclear fuel flasks derailed as it arrived at the Torness power plant in Scotland .
I am pleased that the members of the Greater London Assembly are now equally concerned by the shipment of radioactive nuclear materials in England and , in particular , to the BNFL Sellafield plant in Cumbria .
I hope that politicians and local authorities in Ireland can join forces with members of the Greater London Assembly and other groups in England to intensify the battle to see that BNFL close down the nuclear white elephant of the Sellafield plant .
A separate but related matter is that it is high time for a full environmental impact assessment to be carried out on the likely environmental damage that could arise from nuclear shipments across the Irish Sea .
Once again , I call on the European Commissioner for the environment , Mrs Wallström , to invoke powers under the Euratom Treaty to force an independent evaluation of the environmental risks to be carried out for the shipment of nuclear materials in the Irish Sea .
I congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Hatzidakis , on his report .
Mr President , I apologise for arriving a little late , but aircraft being what they are I am lucky to be here at all .
Like Mr Simpson , I speak for the north-west of England , where the nuclear industry is of huge significance - in Springfield , where the rods are manufactured , Sellafield , where they are changed back into something more useful , and Warrington , the headquarters of British Nuclear Fuels .
This industry is never complacent .
It recognises the concerns of people in Britain and Europe about the transportation of nuclear material and takes huge trouble in testing what needs to be done .
Its record in the transportation of dangerous goods is amongst the best .
There has never been a fatality in the transportation of nuclear materials and , if the industry has its way , there never will be .
The debate referred to by Mr Fitzsimons was one that I saw when I was Northern Ireland Minister .
It is tendentious and ill-informed .
It is also an attack - in which , if I may say so , the Group of the Greens is also involved - upon my constituents in the north-west and everyone else who works in this most important and significant industry both in Britain and in other parts of the Union .
This is not the time for a debate on nuclear power except to say that it is the future .
It is one of the greenest ways of generating power anywhere in the world .
The sooner we realise that the better .
I am delighted that my amendments in committee were significant in changing the nature of this report .
I have tabled some more for the vote tomorrow , along similar lines .
I am proud to be associated with the rejection of the original report and , I hope , the passing of the report as amended .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think we should focus on what the report actually says , for I think that substantial parts of it still show the hand of Mrs Isler Béguin .
I welcome that , and I would also like to thank the Committee Chairman who finished the work .
No one would dispute that nuclear energy and the transport of nuclear waste fall within the competencies of the Member States .
Of course , if agreements have been concluded , they must also be adhered to , especially as far as transport is concerned .
Transporting radioactive material is not a risk-free business , as the report points out .
So I think that what the report says is important : firstly , the safety of people and the environment must have absolute priority ; secondly , full information must be provided to the local authorities and community .
Many people in Germany , in particular , are worried at present ; they are upset about what lies ahead .
Being able to voice their opinion and take part in demonstrations is part of that .
We are united in our condemnation of violence against people and property , because it is counterproductive .
For our part , let me say this : the proposal put forward in Germany by a politician by the name of Möllemann to carry out the Castor transports by airship must also be rejected .
It would certainly be impossible to comply with safety requirements and would merely make the transport of radioactive waste even more hazardous .
Mrs Isler Béguin , you and I would probably phase out nuclear energy tomorrow , but we do not make up the majority in the world , or in this society .
So we should concentrate on this communication so that in the immediate future , the transport of radioactive waste is as safe as possible .
If we have then achieved what the German Government has set out to do , namely to agree on and complete the phasing-out of nuclear energy , the two of us might have attained our goal in a few years ' time .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we should not actually have been discussing nuclear safety , but the sworn opponents of nuclear power have changed the report ' s course .
The Group of the Greens do not want to understand the undeniable environmental advantages of nuclear power .
What a paradox !
It is obvious , too , that the Group of the Greens ' position on nuclear power is based on the ideology of 1968 , and they still refuse to engage in frank and honest discussion on the topic .
Their opinions seem to be fixed beforehand , and the facts have no effect on them .
The first version of the report was used as a chance for them to get on their hobbyhorse and oppose nuclear energy .
What is remarkable is that there was no mention , whatsoever , in the report of the Commission ' s action programme , which contains many sensible initiatives .
Fortunately , after the amendments tabled in the committee , we have managed to return from a myopic position to one that goes to the core of the matter .
The transport of radioactive material is in compliance with the regulations of the International Atomic Energy Agency .
The Commission has consulted a working party made up of experts - not politicians , note - from Member States .
The working party considers that the modified regulations will give a considerable amount of additional protection , although the original ones were not regarded as in any way inadequate .
The risks are considered to be small and , thanks to the stringent regulations in force , accidents have been avoided for almost half a century .
This is so despite the fact that certain , though by no means all , opponents of nuclear power try , irresponsibly , to sabotage the transport operation , for example , by loosening rails .
This makes one wonder who is responsible and who is putting public safety at risk .
I urge everyone to keep to the facts .
The Commission ' s remark that the public ought to be told how good the situation is in the final analysis , is , therefore , more than justified .
Because nuclear power increases prosperity and makes for a cleaner environment , it is an inevitable solution to the energy question .
If the nuclear power plants in France were closed down right now , there would be a rush in this Chamber to look for candles .
Mr President , the report goes a long way to meeting our wishes , although there are a few points in respect of which we have tabled an amendment .
Given the sensitive and emotional nature of the topic , the Liberal Group sets great store by a realistic account of the facts , for example by reporting the very diverse expert opinions on the subject of radiation limit values .
Secondly , we believe it would be misleading to suggest that the nuclear industry act in a self-regulating capacity , especially when it comes to safety .
The nuclear industry , too , is subject to internationally binding safety rules on the basis of which consistent standards have been established with which all actors must comply .
Thirdly , recital e ) is right to draw a distinction between , on the one hand , radioactive material which consists of isotopes for medical , industrial and research purposes - which makes up the lion ' s share of such movements - and , on the other hand , radioactive waste and spent nuclear fuels intended for re-use .
That is the most hazardous form of radioactive material , but , relatively speaking , it only makes up a very small proportion of the total .
The distinction between specific nuclear material and radioactive material in more general terms , however , is not clarified elsewhere in the text .
If the Commission were to look into all transport movements of radioactive material , this would duplicate the work of the International Atomic Energy Agency , which is soon to embark upon a similar enquiry .
It would be useful if the Commission were to focus on the transport of nuclear material in the European Union , however .
Fourthly , my group opposes the fact that the wider topic of the duty of consultation , with regard to the transport of all dangerous substances , is addressed in this report .
This is not what the report is about .
The liberals do believe , however , that the local authorities must be consulted on the transport of radioactive materials .
The emphasis should then , however , be on compulsory prior notice of the transport of nuclear material .
Finally , we welcome the IAAE ' s decision to evaluate its transport rules every two years and adapt them , if necessary .
We would like to emphasise that , in the interests of a consistently high safety level , the rules will have to be implemented by all Member States at the beginning of next year .
Mr President , first of all I would like to reassure both Mr Chichester and , perhaps , to a greater extent , Mrs Isler Béguin .
The reason I am representing the Commission here today is not that the issue of the transportation of nuclear materials has been transferred to the stealthy and all-embracing range of activities of the Commissioner responsible for external trade .
It is actually a far more innocent exercise involving the temporary transportation of files between members of the Commission out of concern to lend a hand from time to time . I must specify that I shall not be stockpiling these files .
Basically , then , the transportation of nuclear material , as you have just mentioned , is often approached in a rather emotional fashion , considering the context and the environment in which this industry operates .
We , in the Commission , therefore , fully appreciate the difficult task that you have had in summarising positions which are often rather contradictory .
We feel that the rapporteur , and also the Members of Parliament and the committee members who have participated in this , should be congratulated on this quite remarkable overview .
As several of you have pointed out in the course of the debate , the nuclear industry , like it or not , assumes a significant load in ensuring the security of our energy supply , and we must , therefore , accept the fact that this industry must undertake the transportation of radioactive material .
The key point we see in the report before you is the confirmation that the measures undertaken nationally and internationally provide a high level of safety in the transportation of this material .
That being the case , there is quite clearly a crucial need for transparency in this matter , as in all matters affecting the nuclear sector .
We acknowledge the need for precise and transparent information regarding the risks which the population at large could or can run . We support and are willing to promote this .
Despite the difficulties arising due to the nature of the material and the limitations necessitated by security considerations , like you , we feel it is important to step up the provision of information .
Obviously , this is an area that has never yet been optimised or perfected and , as Mr Piecyk mentioned , it is true that the States are first and foremost responsible for such matters , but that does not stop us working on measures to improve , for instance , the documents dealing with the transportation of such material .
It is not for us to deliver an opinion on the appropriateness of using reprocessing technology .
This is an essentially industrial solution which must really be decided on the basis of technical and economic criteria and in terms of the need to reduce highly radioactive waste .
We can , on the other hand , give our support to the efforts made in research and development , and we intend to do so .
Indeed this is what the Commission has proposed under the Sixth Framework Programme on Research and Development , giving priority to innovation in waste management .
It is also our responsibility to ensure that obligations under the Euratom Treaty , Chapter III on radiological protection , are fulfilled .
Your report expresses the wish to incorporate a chapter on energy in the Union Treaty .
We are all aware that this is an issue that has been discussed on several occasions within intergovernmental conferences , without any result to date .
As our Green Paper " Towards a European strategy for the security of energy supply " emphasises , we feel that the Euratom Treaty fulfils its objectives in a whole range of areas .
It is true that it does not include any specific reference to the transportation of radioactive material .
We consider , nonetheless , that the provisions of this Treaty enable us to perform a supervisory role while maintaining the prime responsibility of Member States .
That is what the Commission wished to say on the subject of this report .
Obviously , we are going to carefully examine all the suggestions made in the report along the lines I have just outlined , that is , with a view to improving our own action within the scope of our resources and our jurisdiction as conferred by the Treaties .
As I said in my opening remark , we feel that this report makes a useful contribution .
It makes it possible to issue an informed opinion to the citizens of Europe and , following the many debates between us on this issue of the transportation of radioactive materials , we feel that it contributes to a reasoned approach to this activity , which will doubtless motivate improvements in terms of transparency , and we therefore consider this report to be most welcome .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
WTO negotiations on the built-in agenda
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0076 / 2001 ) by Mr Schwaiger , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , containing the European Parliament 's recommendations to the Commission on the negotiations conducted within the WTO framework on the Built-In Agenda .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Seattle showed that for the WTO , the USA is no longer the only major power .
As the European Union , we face the United States on an equal footing .
The same applies to the Asian states , and the developing countries play an important role as well .
With almost a 40 % share of trade and services , the European Union has become an important negotiating partner worldwide , which bears responsibility in all areas of the WTO and which should involve all the industrialised and developing countries in this process .
We must do justice to this responsibility by making the European Parliament 's voice heard at an early stage , and by being present to shape the focus of the current negotiations .
So today , we want to fulfil this task and , with our recommendations on the WTO 's Built-In Agenda , make our position clear to the citizens of Europe early on .
We want these recommendations to be taken into account at the WTO 's interim review in April 2001 .
Our individual demands are in line with our proposals at the multilateral round in Seattle .
As that round failed to achieve a result , we now wish to clarify and update our position by putting forward these recommendations on agriculture , services , and specific intellectual property issues .
Today 's debate will not include the full range of issues such as environmental protection , health policy , competition , minimum social standards , etc .
We will be clarifying our position on those areas in a series of further recommendations in a few months ' time , but certainly before the new multilateral round opens in Qatar at the beginning of November .
So I would ask my colleagues from the other interested committees to be patient until then .
I would like to mention Mrs Flemming in particular , who has put forward some very interesting proposals .
They will undoubtedly play a key role in the committee responsible , as well as in Parliament , during the next round .
This report on the Built-In Agenda is only intended to deal with the three areas , not the package as a whole .
Let me pick out a few points .
Firstly , regarding agriculture : as outlined in the Council 's mandate of December 2000 , we want to achieve a balance between trade and non-trade concerns in agriculture .
For example , structural funding for rural development belongs in the green box and thus ceases to be the subject of wrangling within the WTO .
We agree with the Commission 's courageous proposal , which had our full support and which led to the Council of Ministers ' recent decision to remove all trade barriers on all products from the world 's 48 least developed countries .
This is a signal for a close partnership with the developing countries within the WTO framework , a signal which does not diminish in value even in light of the transitional arrangements for ' sensitive ' products .
We also advocate , however , the vigorous defence of the existing European model of agriculture based on multifunctionality .
The precise details are set out in the report .
Regarding services : we wish to achieve further progressive liberalisation of the trade in services .
This must not be a one-way street for the industrialised nations , however , but must include the developing countries as well .
As regards the protection of intellectual property , we want biodiversity to be respected , and we are also seeking a guarantee that in the field of plant innovations , the economic benefit will be shared appropriately between the donor country and the party wishing to commercialise the material .
We are seeking greater transparency in the preparation and conduct of ministerial meetings .
Procedures relating to composition and reporting mechanisms , and to the frequency and timing of formal WTO meetings , must be subordinate to this goal .
In the interests of greater democratisation and improved scrutiny of the WTO mechanisms , we are calling for the speedy creation of a parliamentary dimension , in which the various regions of the world , and the parliaments and parliamentarians involved in the decision-making process in the field of trade , could discuss the reforms of the WTO and introduce and implement effective scrutiny of the WTO bodies .
Mr President , it is deplorable that the draftsman of the opinion on the most important chapter in these negotiations - agriculture - should only have two minutes to speak .
But never mind !
The first point to stress is that the negotiation of an agreement on trade in agricultural and food products only makes sense within a global agreement that also covers other sectors of the economy and other facets of society .
The second point to stress is that the European Union must be willing to make an extra effort to reduce internal support in market access and export subsidies .
For this effort , however , we must demand transparent rules and equivalent action from our trading partners .
The third point is that it is considered essential that the peace clause and the special safeguard clause should be renewed in order to maintain stability in agricultural markets and farmers ' incomes .
The fourth point has to do with the need to preserve the European agricultural model , characterised , as mentioned by Konrad Schwaiger , by the predominance of family businesses and the multifunctional role of agriculture in society .
Yet we have to remember that we must preserve the primary function of agriculture , which is production .
Otherwise , if we do not bear this in mind , our countryside will sooner or later become just an agricultural museum .
Fifthly , it is important to highlight the initiative aimed at the less developed countries , but we must take steps to prevent this measure from being exploited by those not entitled to use it .
As a final note , I should like to recall that the European Union is , today , the world ' s largest importer of agricultural and food products , with a trade deficit of over USD 16 billion , and is , therefore , a net importer .
The United States and all the members of the Cairns Group , on the other hand , are very much net exporters .
In view of this situation , it is quite right that the European Union should be entitled to preserve its agricultural productive fabric , which is the basis for the economic vitality of its countryside .
Falling into line over free trade , pure and simple , would not only mean yielding sheep-like to others ' strategic interests but , in time , it would also be a death sentence for our countryside .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , world trade is becoming increasingly significant .
With the new communications technologies , it is possible , with a click on the computer , to conclude contracts worldwide or enter into legal transactions within a very short period of time .
So it is important , that in Europe , we give far more priority to the WTO negotiations in future , and discuss the fine detail to a greater extent as well .
In my view , the European Parliament has carried out very significant preparatory work in this area , but we should also give careful thought to the structure of our economy .
In Europe at present , we have around 16 million SMEs with a workforce of less than 250 persons ; these SMEs generate 60 % of GNP and provide 60 % of jobs .
So the WTO negotiations are extremely important for SMEs in particular .
I believe that special priority should be given to the protection of intellectual property and the enforcement of protected rights .
Here , a key task is to examine how we should define the level of inventiveness for patents , for example . Some countries require a very low level of inventiveness and , therefore , grant a great many patents very quickly .
Other countries in Europe are very strict , and start off by making checks worldwide to establish whether the level of inventiveness is adequate . That is why it is necessary , in my view , to have this debate .
In this context , industrial applicability - which is also a condition of patentability - should quite obviously be discussed at the WTO negotiations as well , so that we can ensure that disputes in this area are avoided .
I also believe that the precautionary principle is very important for our future .
It is also important , however , to make product safety a priority for SMEs , and ensure that with third-party certification , de facto exemption from liability can be achieved .

Mr President , Commissioner Pascal Lamy , I should like to congratulate Messrs Konrad Schwaiger and Arlindo Cunha on the reports and documents they have presented here , and also highlight the contributions made by all our colleagues in both the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy and the Committee on Agriculture .
I should like to stress three points in this report that I believe are essential .
Firstly , paragraph 22 on the question of services , calling for GATT agreements not to restrict the scope of the Member States to approve rules which recognise the specific nature of the provision of public services , particularly in the areas of education , health and culture .
I see it as an essential anchor for the preservation of multiculturalism and the need to state that not everything can be liberalised , that liberalisation must firstly and ultimately serve the citizens , who are the ones who should benefit .
A second point I should like to mention has to do with the protection of intellectual property , and particularly paragraph 28 , which points to the limited scope of the negotiations on protection of intellectual property under the Built-In Agenda .
This , of course , is directed at Commissioner Pascal Lamy .
The third essential point , already mentioned here by both Konrad Schwaiger and Arlindo Cunha , has to do with our safeguarding of the multifunctional role of agriculture .
This aspect is fundamental not as a slogan , not as a way for us to overcome our weaknesses , but as a way for us to reconcile quantity and quality .
Although what Arlindo Cunha said is true , that " the primary function of agriculture is production " , it is no less true that this production must be encouraged with quality in mind .
And this new Built-In Agenda has appeared just as the climate and context in Europe is one of uncertainty and mistrust over the quality of certain products .
Therefore , when we assert the multifunctional role of agriculture , we must recognise that this priority must also include the strictest public health measures as well as consumer protection and support .
I believe this is an essential role that Parliament needs to highlight at this time . Since I know Commissioner Pascal Lamy ' s positions on this , I am sure that this role will also be performed .
Finally , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I must point out and , indeed , stress that there are other points to be included in this agenda that we must not forget , as the rapporteur said , but they will be part of the November 2001 round . They concern the social , environmental and defence aspects of a sustainable development model , so that what is globalised is not just wealth but also progress and economic and social development .
First , two questions addressed to the Commission .
Paragraph 9 of the draft report talks about the need to preserve the peace clause and special safeguard clause for a provisional period .
I am very curious to know what your views are on the preservation of those clauses as the talks proceed .
Secondly , paragraph 22 , which Mr Seguro just mentioned .
I understand that GATS do not necessarily affect publicly controlled utilities .
I was wondering if you could perhaps expand on what the implications of GATS might be on utilities which have already been privatised .
Now , two observations .
Firstly , it seems to me that there is a unique opportunity for increasing common ground between the EU and the US as far as agriculture is concerned .
This is principally because of the profligacy of the American Government in supporting American farmers to an ever greater degree over the last few years , in a sense removing the moral authority that the US has had in the past in accusing the common agricultural policy of being wasteful and distorting .
I wonder if you really feel there is an opportunity for you and the US to find new common ground in the agriculture talks .
Finally , you will not be surprised to hear that I wish to stress the importance of the latter part of paragraph 40 .
The Nice Summit might have been a halting step forward in terms of efficiency , but it is a serious step backward in terms of legitimacy and transparency as far as the conduct of the EU 's trade policy is concerned .
This is notably exemplified by the way in which the 133 Committee continues to take important and highly political decisions in the trade field without any published records or public account .
In view of the lacuna which has opened up after the somewhat pot-pourri result of Nice , I urge both the Commission and the Council to look very favourably at the idea of an Interinstitutional Agreement in this field .
If not , the moral authority of the whole European Union on transparency and legitimacy is seriously weakened in the WTO .
Mr President , I find the report by our fellow Member , Mr Schwaiger to be generally positive .
Indeed , it follows on from the great efforts made by the Directorate of the Commission to redefine our trade policy and to ensure that trade serves the objectives of sustainable development .
Having said that , I have four comments to make .
The first is that , while undertaking a new round of talks on the basis of a wider agenda is still more than ever a fine objective , the mandates granted by the Council cannot be said to be satisfactory as they stand .
In this instance it is not a matter of bartering trade concessions in return for environmental or social clauses , but rather of taking a different tack in negotiating on trade in order to ensure that it is in better accord with the societal models and state regulation requirements .
In this respect , the talks scheduled in the Built-In Agenda are a test , which brings me to my second point .
The agriculture line is not without its grey areas .
There is , admittedly , an increased awareness that trade in agricultural products must be compatible with independence in terms of food supply , public health and land use , yet we are at a disadvantage due to the postponement of reform in the common agricultural policy until after 2006 .
Indeed , the report speaks of the need to safeguard the model , though it is more a case of the need to change the model .
Regarding trade , while it is essential to reduce export subsidies , we reject the calls to bring them into line with world prices , as this is a blatantly productivist move .
Thirdly , the line on services is not satisfactory .
There is talk of ' further progressive liberalisation ' .
That is a unilateral objective .
The Commission , moreover , states that trade policy is not a goal in itself , but it must help support the social model .
Yet , in our social model there are services of general interest , and in developing countries such general interest services have yet to be formed .
I shall , therefore , endorse the development of trade compatible with , or contributing to , the promotion of services of general interest .
The European Union wishes to keep some sectors , such as , education and culture outside the domain of free trade .
That is not enough .
We have to work in the context of universal public assets .
Indeed , it would be marvellous if the Directorate could provide us with a communication on the ways in which free trade and services of general interest may be complementary and compatible .
There is one last point I should like to raise on a major problem of governance .
We must work with civil society as we do with the developing countries and allow a frank exchange of views .
This is something the Directorate does , but not the States , and Parliament is lagging behind .
It is the responsibility of every single one of us .
This is an approach that is critical in ensuring the success of the organisation of world trade .
Mr President , the cruel distribution of power between the rich and the poor was very much brought into focus in Seattle .
In any event , the Commission last year committed itself to improving the position of the developing countries .
Improved market access for the least developed countries is a case in point .
The General Affairs Council , which was held at the end of February , also pointed along the same lines .
The long transitional periods , however , for bananas , sugar and rice are most regrettable .
Given the significance of their agricultural sector , market access for developing countries is crucial .
High EU standards , with regard to the environment and health , should not embrace protectionism vis-à-vis the developing world .
Restricted market access is only appropriate for products which constitute a threat to health or the environment .
The European requirements must be accompanied by assistance in meeting these standards , such as technology for environmentally-friendly manufacturing processes .
As price competition is increasing , we need to shift our agricultural support measures from price intervention to direct income and investment support .
Alongside this , the free exchange of services also impacts on the developing countries .
Are their fragile economies given the opportunity to prepare for competition ?
Without a sensible policy , they will be overrun by wealthy and specialist service providers before they know it .
Decision making in the WTO must give the developing world the chance to offer a counterweight to the interests of the rich trading blocs .
After all , justice requires policy as well as the useful instrument of free trade .
Finally , I would like to express my appreciation of the sound work done by the rapporteur .
Mr President , Mr Schwaiger ' s report on the negotiations conducted within the WTO framework on the Built-In Agenda , in our view , raises three questions to which , I hope , our debate is going to provide answers .
Firstly , surely it is dangerous to negotiate separately on the Built-In Agenda ?
Admittedly , the negotiations on agriculture , services and certain aspects of intellectual property , as they are termed in the Built-In Agenda , were already programmed by the Uruguay Round and may , therefore , be considered as not having been legally affected by the failure of the general negotiations in Seattle .
It seems to have been implicitly accepted that discussions on these areas will continue separately , but is that actually reasonable , given that all these subjects are effectively interdependent ?
Moreover , as I understood it , the European Union ' s previous position has always been that there should be nothing but comprehensive negotiation .
Should the failure at Seattle not lead us to rethink the entire emphasis of negotiations ?
My second question is as follows : Paragraph 1 of the motion for a resolution we have before us calls on the Commission to conduct the negotiations on the Built-In Agenda on the basis of the guidelines given by the Council from before Seattle .
Yet is the situation really still the same ?
There have been great strides forward in public opinion regarding the regulation of international trade .
The failure of Seattle was an initial indicator of this , but opinion has developed apace since then , particularly under the impetus of a number of agricultural crises .
Admittedly , the 1999 negotiating mandate already took into consideration the requirement for a multifunctional agriculture and an agricultural policy incorporating concerns unrelated to trade .
At the same time , however , it expressed the necessity of pursuing the liberalisation of trade as a priority .
Is that still compatible with developments ?
Do we not need further deliberation on the subject ?
For instance , I am struck to note that , among the new concerns to be taken into account , people always cite product safety , environmental protection , food quality , animal welfare , justifiably so , but never independence in terms of food supply .
Yet , Europe ' s self-sufficiency in terms of food is absolutely crucial , and is very closely associated with all the other objectives we deem necessary .
This has been demonstrated by means of a negative example of our dependence in terms of vegetable proteins , which we unfortunately had to accept at Blair House and which has led us to overuse animal meal .
In the light of these events , do you not consider that the Blair House agreements need to be renegotiated ?
My third question is this : How are the future talks to be monitored by the Council and the interested Parliaments ?
This point was clarified in some of the drafts for the Treaty of Nice by , either , a rewording of Article 133 , or , a new protocol stipulating very precisely how the Council should supervise the Commission during the WTO negotiations to ensure that it does not deviate from the common position .
All these excellent provisions , however , have disappeared from the final version .
Similarly notable by their absence are any provisions on parliamentary scrutiny .
Hence our proposal - I am coming to my conclusion , Mr President - before opening further negotiations , should we not first reopen the issue of increasing our control of the negotiators ?
We think this an essential precondition in order to properly safeguard the interests of the citizens of Europe .
Mr President , the World Trade Organisation is a tremendous economic success story .
It has been such a success that our citizens are often rather alarmed by it , and suspect that it is rather sinister .
So it is the task of the European Parliament , in particular , to instil confidence in the positive and sustainable nature of the WTO process .
On behalf of the PPE-DE Group , therefore , I greatly welcome the fact that Mr Schwaiger 's report has again included safeguarding cultural diversity in the catalogue of demands .
Our objective must be to explain to people , in credible , informed and comprehensible terms , that this process to which we are committed has the vision to achieve four goals on the basis of sustainable development : lasting economic growth for all , the protection of our environment , compliance with appropriate social standards and the preservation of cultural diversity .
As the European Union is not only an economic community but also a community of values , we should continue to promote this approach beyond the Union 's borders as well .
Mr Schwaiger 's report provides a fresh and very sound basis on which to proceed .
Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to make three points which could be of interest in the context of Konrad Schwaiger 's report .
Firstly , as you will see from the additional amendments which have now been proposed for this week , there is a great deal of interest in this issue within the House , and this interest generally tends to focus on a small number of themes .
So my first question is this : are the TRIPs negotiations really all that promising ? Should they continue as before , or is it time for a review ?
Should more be done in the field of agriculture ?
How can effective consumer protection be safeguarded ?
There are many other questions as well .
I would also like to ask you about the Built-In Agenda , which is now being negotiated and which is due for review in March .
How great , in reality , are the differences between the parties negotiating on the Built-In Agenda ?
What impact is the agricultural crisis in Europe having on these negotiations , and how far have the negotiations progressed overall ?
Or is it more a question of business as usual ? Are we simply carrying on as if nothing has happened ?
The second point which I should like to raise is this , you have produced a document which indicates that you would like to see greater flexibility in the forthcoming WTO negotiations .
Flexibility is a very broad term . I greatly welcomed this document but I am sure that it will spark off many political discussions in this House as well .
You can interpret it in any number of ways , so let me put a few questions to you .
Does this document signal a move away from the European Union 's previous strategy , which , until now , has been based on the principle that we have always had , and wanted to have , a comprehensive role , which has included competition and investment , for example , but also all the ' soft ' issues such as social standards , labour standards , and progress on environmental issues ?
Does this document signal a move away from that ?
Does it mean that you will need a new negotiating mandate or is the old one enough ?
What impact will this have on cooperation with the European Parliament ?
In this context , I am most grateful to Mr Clegg for pointing out , yet again , that Article 133 is not acceptable to us in its current form .
This is nothing new to you , and we are on the same side here , but the Council is listening , and perhaps the Council will be prepared , one day , to introduce an amendment with us .
The third point I would like to make is as follows : you met Mr Bob Soellig in the United States .
I gather from the press that the mood of the meeting was very good , which is not surprising given that you are old friends , so in that sense I hope we can look forward to a rosier future in transatlantic relations .
What are your specific expectations , however , of these good relations with regard to the fresh negotiations taking place within the WTO framework ?
Will there be positive signals , and will these positive signals mean that in June or July we will have a negotiating strategy which will take us to Qatar ?
And will this negotiating strategy include the developing countries as well ?
Mr President , the report on the WTO negotiating package quite rightly calls for agricultural issues to be retained as an essential element of the negotiating mandate within the framework of the existing agreement .
There must be no trade-off of concessions in the agricultural sector in exchange for concessions in other negotiating areas .
This is necessary in order to safeguard the continued existence of the small-scale agricultural landscape , rural employment , environmental and resource protection , and modulated agricultural programmes , and to protect them from the impact of global market liberalisation .
Adopting and guaranteeing a high level of consumer protection in the EU makes substantial demands on agriculture in particular , and is the main prerequisite for fair trade in agricultural products without border controls .
Over recent decades , the European food industry has benefited considerably from global market development , especially as regards the processing of agricultural products with high , or the highest , value added .
As the second-largest exporter of agricultural products , and by far the largest exporter of processed food , the European Union , therefore , has a significant interest in a well-functioning system of global trade .
What is important for the negotiations is to ensure that the actors from sustainable agriculture are not played off against one other , and that this form of agriculture is harmonised .
The issues of food safety and rural employment , consumer protection and the environment , as well as the sparing use of all resources , are viewed in different ways by the various actors , who also afford them different political priority .
At the same time , the WTO should be focusing on issues which are moving up the public agenda .
They include health , the environment , and social affairs , and not just as three separate issues .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur very warmly on his report .
I am a passionate supporter of the WTO , as he is , because I believe that it offers poor countries the opportunity to integrate with wealthy nations .
As a member of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , I am also most grateful to Mr Schwaiger for taking the view that consumer protection , animal welfare and health are very important issues which we will deal with as priorities at a later date .
If we fail to do so , we can expect to witness situations such as the Seattle débâcle time and time again .
In advance of this debate , however , I should like to raise two specific issues .
I think that it is appalling for the WTO to impose or consider imposing sanctions on the European Union simply because the European Union is trying to protect its citizens from hormone-treated meat .
We now have scientific proof that one hormone in particular is carcinogenic , while there is a strong possibility that a further five are also carcinogens .
The precautionary principle must apply to the WTO as well .
Secondly , in the European Union , a number of states - notably Great Britain and Austria - have banned animal testing of cosmetics .
The majority of citizens and consumers in the EU want to see this ban extended throughout the European Union .
I think that the WTO will have to accept that it is possible to be very successful economically yet remain sensitive to the pain and suffering of God 's creatures - animals - and that we must respect animals as well .
Mr President , just a couple of small points at the outset : clearly the Seattle Ministerial Conference failed to agree on a new round because developing countries refused to proceed with trade liberalisation .
They made it clear that they did not feel that their concerns about the implementation of the Uruguay Round had been met and therefore they were not prepared to go any further .
They were insisting , as they continue to do - as you know , Commissioner - on implementation .
Secondly , we need in this Parliament to be much more aware of the need to monitor international obligations , in particular since no reference has been made here today to the ACP-EU Cotonou Agreement and its agricultural trade protocols .
The EU must be much more sensitive to these concerns than it has been in the past , though I pay tribute to the Commissioner , especially as regards access to markets .
Now I want to touch briefly on the rather shadowy side of globalisation which is typified for me by access to medicines and the clear need for a review of TRIPs .
Eleven million people will die of preventable diseases this year .
In Zambia , treatment of one member of a family for pneumonia will take up the family 's entire monthly budget .
This is of deep concern .
As you are aware , the pharmaceutical companies have taken the South African Government to court about its Medicines Act of 1997 .
This act would allow parallel importing and would authorise the genetic production of patented medicines for the government 's non-profit , non-commercial use .
Four million people are HIV-infected in that country and the South African Government believes it has a constitutional duty to do this .
Would the Commissioner agree with me that the TRIPs is neutral on parallel imports and actually allows for compulsory licensing ?
And would he agree with me that there should be a reduction in patent protection , reinforced health safeguards and a ban on the threatened use of trade sanctions ?
Mr President , the growing concern of peoples regarding the implications of the worldwide liberalisation of trade , which was so clearly present in the Seattle demonstrations and the Porto Alegre world social forum , is reflected to some degree in this report , which highlights the need for transparency in the way negotiations are prepared and conducted , enhanced parliamentary control , and respect for the precautionary principle and the principle of sustainable development .
The report is not , however , coherent in the positions it adopts , and it ultimately supports the continuation of liberalisation , particularly in respect of the trade in services , and we consider this to be negative .
With regard to agriculture too , although it includes certain changes made by the Committee on Agriculture specifically to ensure food safety and food quality , it does not take into account other major amendments , such as the one we tabled on the review of the Blair House agreement , with particular regard to protein-rich plants , given the BSE crisis and the part played by animal meal .
It also ultimately advocates the continuation of the trend to liberalise agricultural trade , which we do not support .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , agriculture is not like other commercial or industrial products . Unlike a captain of industry , the farmer cannot simply decide to relocate his means of production to wherever the manufacturing conditions are most favourable : where the wages are low , the sun always shines , and there is enough rainfall .
So different rules must apply to agriculture , and food safety and food security - in other words , food sovereignty - must be the first commandment for every individual state .
The multifunctionality of agriculture must also be recognised and enforced by the World Trade Organisation , and that means that agricultural funding must be based on ecological and social criteria as well . The task is not , and I must make this quite clear , to engage in new forms of agricultural protectionism targeted especially at developing and threshold countries .
Again , they must be looked at separately in this context .
It also means , however , that the European Union cannot dump its many surpluses with high export subsidies at global market prices in order to disrupt or even destroy markets elsewhere .
There are countless examples of this .
And one thing is clear ; at the prices shaped by the global market , no one can possibly produce agricultural products under socially and ecologically compatible conditions and still make a profit .
That is amply demonstrated by the current agricultural crisis which we are witnessing here in the European Union .
We must , therefore , focus primarily on the European internal market , and those who wish to produce for the global market should do so , of course , but they should do so without subsidies and support from the European Union .
One thing must be clear : food safety and consumer protection must have absolute priority .
There is one basic rule which we must not ignore : people everywhere in the world need healthy food , drinking water and air to breathe .
Unless we have these three basic elements of life , everything else is irrelevant .
Mr President , Commissioner , there are always advantages and disadvantages in being the last speaker to make a quick point in a debate .
First of all , I should like to briefly mention one issue which you may be able to respond to directly .
What is the situation with regard to the operating agreement ?
Even if it is not yet in force , it is clear that it is potentially explosive , especially for the future of all that we have been discussing .
Is a review planned , and what form can and will this take ?
That is my first question .
The second really follows on from everything we have been discussing here .
My main concern is how acceptance of the negotiating process can be achieved in light of the current overall political situation .
What is the Commission planning to do ?
What are the options for the European Union ?
There is a great deal of cause for concern .
The WTO is what it is .
But what it lacks , above all - especially in terms of achieving acceptance - is transparency in almost every policy area .
The demands which we have put forward in paragraphs 30 to 40 of the report point in the right direction .
As ever , all that is lacking is the will to implement them .
This lack of transparency leads to a great many overly-dramatic , interest-led articles in the press , such as the one I read at the weekend in the Financial Times , which attacks the WTO 's public image .
Of course , the venue for the WTO Round - or the Ministerial meeting first of all - is not the best choice in terms of image .
What does the Commission think it can do , in terms of a general information campaign , to bring about change ?
And are you considering more specific initiatives to enable developing countries to participate in the decision-making process , e.g. by covering their legal costs and taking other similar measures which could be arranged on a bilateral basis ?
Mr President , I should first like to sincerely thank Mr Schwaiger and the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy for this excellent report .
It provides valuable support for the positions adopted by the European Union and , indeed as Mrs Mann did , I was pleased to note that it had aroused great interest among the Members of Parliament , judging at least by the number of amendments that have been tabled .
Basically , the considerations and concerns you express in this report are broadly in line with those of the Commission which , of course , as some of you have said , go beyond the scope of the Built-In Agenda which is our current objective in Geneva .
Like us , you seek to set up a framework for the liberalisation of trade in the form of a set of mutually accepted multilateral regulations , you wish to increase the transparency of WTO negotiation procedures , you wish to improve the integration of developing countries into the multilateral system , you wish to safeguard European models in agriculture and public health , and likewise in the fields of the environment and public services .
This is basically a summary of the European Union agenda for the first round of negotiations .
We have always considered that progress on the Built-In Agenda , the subject of your report , would be facilitated by being incorporated in a wider agenda .
Your report basically highlights the same argument and , in making this point , I am responding to Mr Berthu ' s comment .
We are making very slow progress in Geneva in what are really the preparations for talks on agriculture and services , while we know full well that only a comprehensive round will really be able to catalyse any relaunch .
That is the stage we are at today .
I shall endeavour to comment briefly on the matters you raised in your report , particularly on agriculture , services and intellectual property , which were often brought up in the speeches I have just heard .
Concerning agriculture , we agree with you .
Firstly , I confirm that the European Union ' s negotiating position is indeed shaped by Agenda 2000 .
Secondly , the needs of developing countries are top of our list of concerns in agricultural matters , and this , indeed , was the objective of the ' everything but arms ' initiative which I must thank you for supporting .
Thirdly , you wish to safeguard the European farm model , considering the many roles it plays in social , environmental and food-related matters , and this meets with the full agreement of Franz Fischler and myself .
Let me reassure Messrs Seguro and Cunha on this point , the promotion of considerations in agriculture unrelated to trade and the safeguarding of our own farm model continue to be key components of our negotiation objectives .
Regarding the precautionary principle which you have just stressed , I think it is clear that BSE and , more recently , foot-and-mouth disease inevitably raise questions of this kind . Do we have the multilateral framework needed to deal with these questions ?
At the international level , we feel that the Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures is appropriate as it stands and does not therefore need to be renegotiated as such .
The Commission , however , like the Council , shares the wish expressed again by Mr Kreissl-Dörfler to look into the precautionary approach in this sector .
We have presented proposals in this respect and we shall continue to debate the issue in the multilateral negotiations .
That is part of our agenda .
To my last point on agriculture , in answer to Mr Clegg , there is indeed a ' peace clause ' or , to be more precise , a non-aggression clause , which exempts the field of agriculture from disputes on subsidies until the end of 2003 .
We think this non-aggression pact is beneficial to all parties and that is something that all parties should bear in mind when this issue is raised next time , that is , at the end of 2003 .
The ' peace clause ' is not a Damocles ' sword hanging over the head of Europe alone . If indeed it is a Damocles ' sword , then it is also threatening the other heads around the negotiating table in Geneva .
Our position on services is , briefly , as follows .
Firstly , in our position at the head of the league of service exporters and importers in the world , we have conflicting commercial interests .
Secondly , we wish to take development issues into consideration .
Thirdly , and this answers Mr Herzog and Mrs Fiebiger , we are fully aware of the effects upon government policy of negotiations on services and we therefore agree absolutely with your recommendation as to the special nature of public service provision .
The agreements already signed or yet to be signed under GATS , the General Agreement on Trade in Services , do not commit European States to a policy of privatisation or deregulation .
In the sectors related to government and to public services of health , education and culture , we must and we shall therefore safeguard our legislative prerogatives , our social and cultural identity and our high levels of consumer safety and protection .
On intellectual property , let me stress one point that Mrs Kinnock raised and which is highlighted in a topical court case in South Africa , where the pharmaceutical industry is in conflict with the South African Government .
I shall not comment on the case in question , since it is sub judice and it is not customary for the Commission to comment on such cases , but I would like to give you a clear explanation of the Commission ' s policy on the issue of transmissible diseases affecting developing countries .
This is a matter that was referred to us last summer .
A high-level international Round Table on the subject was held in Brussels in September 2000 .
The Round Table recommended a global approach based on three aspects , firstly , stepping up support from development policy , secondly , reducing the price of essential medicines , and thirdly , resuming high level research into such treatment .
Following close on the heels of this Round Table , which brought together developing world governments , international organisations and the Member States , as well as a number of non-governmental organisations , we have just adopted a specific action programme based on this approach . Indeed I believe we are starting to see the first practical effects of this , with several pharmaceutical companies making commitments to reduce prices .
What role does intellectual property have to play in this context ?
In our opinion , it has an essential role in stimulating innovation and research .
This is clearly stated in the GATT TRIPs agreement , but we should say just as clearly , Mrs Kinnock , that there are cases where exemptions to patent law are permitted and are authorised under the TRIPs Agreement .
It is termed ' compulsory licensing ' and is authorised in cases where exceptions are justified on public health grounds or in a health emergency .
The agreement permits , and makes provision for , such flexibility and our position on this continues to be what I have been stating in public for several weeks - all the agreement and nothing but the agreement .
It is true that there is , as yet , no real international consensus on a balanced interpretation of these provisions but we have undertaken to promote this clear position : intellectual property is to be protected but exemptions must be maintained and applied where stipulated , both in the WTO , WIPO and elsewhere .
I shall answer Mrs Mann very quickly , though this may take me slightly over my allotted five minutes .
We have indeed started to readjust our pre-Seattle mandate in the light of the concerns expressed by a number of developing countries .
At this stage we do not need any official amendment to that mandate .
We shall return to that matter when the time comes .
In reply to her question on the United States , it is true that I spent part of last week in the States .
I return with a generally favourable impression of the administration , but one point is clear , and I must remind the House of this : US trade policy depends more on Congress than on the administration .
That brings me straight to the institutional aspect of your report .
We agree that the parliaments should be involved to a greater extent in the WTO debates .
In terms of our internal procedures , we have , as you know , lost the ' Battle of Nice ' , which , to tell the truth , we were the only ones waging and , hence , we have to go back to the spirit of the framework agreement on relations between Parliament and the Commission which we adopted in July 2000 .
I think that this framework agreement contains all we need to organise cooperation between our institutions and if we have a few outstanding problems on the settlement of disputes , then I am perfectly willing to discuss this question , if it is understood , however , that the settlement of disputes is not negotiation nor the establishment of internal legislation , but an executive prerogative .
So , while I am happy to discuss and to provide information , none of us should confuse the management and settlement of disputes with legislative prerogatives .
Ladies and gentlemen , the next phase before us is the Conference of Ministers in Qatar , from 9 to 13 November , this year .
It goes without saying that , in the intervening period , we shall continue to work relentlessly with the competent parliamentary committee on the agenda and the progress that we are able to make .
I must stress that now is the time to consider the practical arrangements for taking part in the Qatar Conference .
My intention is to adhere to the practice we established for Seattle in terms of the membership of your own delegation , and in Qatar I shall be counting on the active participation of some of the Members of this House in promoting what appear to be , according to this report , our common objectives .
Thank you , Commissioner Lamy .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
COM in the sugar sector
The next item is the report ( A5-0081 / 2001 ) by Mr Daul , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council regulation on the common organisation of the markets in the sugar sector [ COM ( 2000 ) 604 - C5-0534 / 2000 - 2000 / 0250 ( CNS ) ] .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , today Parliament has to decide on the proposal for a Council regulation on the common organisation of the markets in the sugar sector .
In its explanatory statement , the Commission stresses that the COM has satisfactorily fulfilled many of its objectives and legitimately proposes that the status quo with regard to prices be maintained , but only for two years and with adjustments contradicting the assessment initially made by the Commission .
It , moreover , proposes to carry out a series of particularly delicate and complex studies in record time to provide a basis for a proposal for fundamental reform in two years ' time .
The Council was not wrong-footed by this approach and opted to renew this COM for a further five-year period .
This draft comes before us at a time when the agricultural industry is experiencing one of the worst crises with which it has ever had to deal .
Is that , however , sufficient reason to reform a COM which , even in the estimation of the Commission , has fulfilled its objectives ?
I do not think so .
That is why I think it reasonable to allow this COM to continue to operate on the present basis for a period of five years .
This is the proposal I put to you today as your rapporteur .
My first observation is this : from a great many of the various parties I contacted in preparing my report I heard fairly constant criticism of the excessive Community price for sugar .
To clarify the reasons for this situation , I think I ought to point out that the common organisation of the markets in the sugar sector is atypical in more ways than one .
This organisation of the markets is actually based on a production quotas system .
This entails strict supervision of the volumes produced .
In addition to this self-regulation between production , importing and exporting , the producers must bear the bulk of the expenditure incurred due to this COM .
The EU budget handles only the financing of the sugar exports corresponding to the preferential imports granted to developing countries which are beneficiaries of the sugar protocol annexed to the Cotonou Agreement .
Consequently , the burden of this COM is particularly light as far as European Union finances are concerned in relation to the importance of the sugar beet sector .
It is true that the corollary of this situation is a specific internal price .
Throughout the debates leading up to this report , there were many participants who took the opportunity to highlight the artificial nature of the Community price in relation to the world price .
This criticism which has been widely expressed in various reports and media also needs some clarification .
Firstly , we have to put into context any reference to a world price , since it cannot be seen as representative of the transactions actually carried out .
Secondly , the objectivity which the European Parliament must display in this matter leads me to point out that , in real terms , the Community price has been in a steady decline for around fifteen years .
Moreover , 75 % of sugar is consumed in the form of processed products .
The price of these sugar products fluctuates quite independently of the price of sugar .
I should note , moreover , that such products are no more expensive in the European Union than they are in other countries .
My second observation is that several studies refer to the lack of competition within the European Union in the sugar sector .
Competition is specifically one of the points warranting in-depth study on the part of the Commission services within the next two years .
For the time being , there is one observation that must be made .
There is healthy competition between sugar manufacturers because intra-Community trade is more significant than the Commission indicates , accounting for over 30 % of sugar consumption , as such , and 26 % in the form of processed products .
Finally , to my last observation regarding the effects upon the Community market and the ACP countries of the decision adopted 15 days ago by the Council on the initiative for the Least Developed Countries .
We have just discussed this , and this initiative too is in keeping with the European Union ' s commitment to launching the round of multilateral talks , a matter on which Parliament is to deliver its opinion tomorrow .
Basically , I think that , for the ACP countries , this initiative will have significant implications , which have not been assessed clearly by the Commission .
That is why both the studies which the Commission wishes to undertake in the context of a reform of the COM in sugar and the assessment it is to undertake in 2005 of the transitional phase of the LDC initiative are of fundamental importance .
It must take account of the concerns of the ACP countries , which traditionally export their produce to the European Union .
Ladies and gentlemen , I wished , in the five minutes available , to share these observations which I thought important , before you declared your opinion on the matter tomorrow .
To sum up , I should like to thank the Commissioner for his contribution , and I hope that this evening he will be able to expand a little upon his point of view of Parliament ' s draft text . I would like to thank all the officials in Parliament ' s secretarial service for the invaluable help they have given me in drawing up this report , as well as all the fellow Members who took a very active part in this draft .
. ( NL ) Mr President , the Committee on Budgets is also of the opinion that the current regulation on the common organisation of the markets in the sugar sector should be extended by five years , that is to say for the duration of the current financial perspective .
That is not a blank cheque , however .
We believe that sugar should , in the first place , be treated as any other arable product .
In 2002 , the common organisation of the markets in all other arable products will be up for evaluation , and we believe that this should also apply to sugar .
Should it , by that time , prove necessary to review the regulation on the common organisation of the markets in the sugar sector , we will also need to establish whether there are any funds for compensating the farmers .
That is , after all , what we did when the common organisation of the markets in other arable products was about to undergo far-reaching reform .
Everything hinges , therefore , on the question of whether we can scrape together the funds to compensate the farmers when we give the regulation on the common organisation of the markets in the sugar sector a thorough overhaul .
The Committee on Budgets does share the Commission ' s view that the storage levy can be abolished .
If we are to evaluate the regulation on the common organisation of the markets in the sugar sector in 2002-2003 , we need factual information at our disposal in order to execute this task effectively .
We believe that a number of studies must be carried out , first of all with regard to the impact which the change in the sugar regime will have on ACP countries which currently benefit from preferential access rights .
Which sections of the population will be hit hardest as a result ?
What will be the impact of a possible price cut for producers on consumer prices ?
Can parallels be drawn between the current situation and what happened , for example , to the price of a loaf of bread when the price of wheat was reduced ?
What will be the effect of a change in national quotas on , for example , a European quota system ?
Finally , we would like to know the actual level of competition within the European sugar market .
Is there or is there not room for genuine competition ?
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in recent weeks and months when agriculture has been debated , there has been much talk of a change of direction in agricultural policy .
I certainly do not wish to address these topical problems here , but I do think that some aspects of the debate have been neglected .
What I am getting at is the fact that surely it can hardly be right to pillory the whole of European agriculture right across the board or to condemn wholesale the achievements of the common agricultural policy .
The European sugar market policy , of all policies , has done nothing to deserve a judgement of this kind .
The common organisation of the markets in the sugar sector is like a horse on the road to victory , as has also been repeatedly stressed in this debate .
For many years now , consumers have been supplied with a safe basic foodstuff , and this at reasonable prices .
Some critics think and claim that sugar is too expensive , however .
Mr Daul referred to this , but it should set alarm bells ringing ; firstly , because these critics are hardly concerned about the well-being of consumers but about their own profits ; secondly , because the production of a basic foodstuff in compliance with European environmental and social standards has a legitimate price and thirdly , because , measured against consumers ' purchasing power worldwide , the sugar price which we have in Europe can probably also be described as one of the lowest .
Some people also say that the common organisation of the market in sugar is a dinosaur .
It has been in force for 32 years , since 1968 , but of course it has been repeatedly adapted .
That is why it is now also necessary to have a longer period of validity , of at least five years , as the rapporteur , Mr Daul , has said .
It would be wrong to change the compensation system for storage costs ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , the Daul report on the sugar sector is exceptionally well thought out . It responds to the needs of all sides , while remaining within the bounds of the possibilities and balances offered by the common agricultural policy .
The proposals made in the report really do serve the interests of Community sugar beet and sugar cane growers in respect of their employment and standards of living .
They also respond to the need for programmed production given that , as I am sure you are aware , beet is a four-year crop grown in rotation with other arable crops .
They also protect consumer interests in terms of both prices and quality specifications .
The dates on which the current regime expires have been brought into line with the deadlines agreed in Berlin .
This adjustment is extremely important not only because all the interested parties know the exact date on which the regime changes and will comply with it , but also because we have a specific offer to table at the forthcoming WTO negotiations .
The system for producing sugar from sugar beet is a self-financing system .
Most of the expenditure under this system is incurred from granting export refunds .
The highest level of export refunds allowed by the WTO is the 2000-2001 level .
It would be a tragic mistake if the EU were to change the regime before it is obliged to do so and can demand something in return .
Finally , the sugar sector is a sector which needs considerable investment if it is to function properly .
No such investment will be made unless there are at least medium-term prospects .
So we are delighted to give our support to the Daul report .
Mr President , Commissioner , the Commission has tabled a proposal for a common organisation of the market in sugar which must be seen as an extension to the requirement under the GATT agreements that the EU gradually reduces its export support for agricultural products , especially sugar , under guarantee of production quotas .
This system of quotas expires at the end of the production year on 30 June 2001 , and the Commission proposes that the current system be continued for a period of two years , with certain changes of limited scope .
The Commission omits to say how the period 2003-2006 is to be funded .
The Commission proposes that the price be kept at the same level but that the quotas be reduced by 115 000 tons .
Moreover , the compensation system for storage costs is to be abolished , together with the requirement to maintain minimum stocks .
The aforesaid reduction in the production quota will mean that the market for sugar from the world ' s poorest countries can be opened in accordance with the ' everything but arms ' principle .
That is something we are able to support .
As I mentioned before , however , what is then missing is information from the Commission to the sugar industry and the sugar producers about funding during the period 2003-2006 .
We therefore support the Committee on Budgets ' amendments in relation to the financial perspectives in Agenda 2000 , and we wish to extend the organisation of the market to 2005 / 2006 .
At the same time , however , we demand that the reform of the organisation of the market be in place no later than in 2003 .
Mr President , Commissioner , the common organisation of the markets in the sugar sector shows that reasonable results can also be achieved with administrative resources .
I remember our debate here on the common organisation of the market in pig meat .
Mr Mayer , you know that at that time I said that at some point I would remind you of the vehement opposition to this from your ranks and the calls for a free market .
At the time I said that I would come back to this when we discussed the organisation of the market in sugar but of course you were also in two minds .
If I remember correctly , Mrs Schierhuber in fact voted for the arrangements then in force for pigs , but now we are debating sugar and I do not think that the organisation of the market in sugar should be completely abandoned ; a number of aspects simply need to be amended .
Production must be adjusted strictly in line with consumption in the European Union .
This also implies that the sugar which we take in addition to this from other countries - for example , the ACPs - is not re-exported .
It is also quite reasonable for us to accept sugar from the least developed , poorest countries .
I am in favour of the quantities being laid down so that we do not have cyclical trade here , however .
This means that we need to repatriate our quotas . There must be no more C sugar and no more exports of sugar at farmers ' expense !
Because even if the money is forthcoming it is , after all , still dumping .
The practice of the European Union providing public money to help out with storage costs must also stop .
I am in favour of the sugar market being self-supporting .
Then it should be sustained in this way .
One final thought : in my view there is much more that could be done in the sugar sector from an ecological point of view .
Nitrogen use has fallen out of necessity because it caused sugar yields to fall , but , quite apart from this , more can be done in terms of sugar cultivation , and we can make it compulsory for the sugar factories to accept a particular proportion of eco-friendly sugar .
Mr President , the aim of the proposed regulation on sugar , which comes under the austere budgetary approach agreed in Berlin , is to make drastic cuts to overall agricultural spending .
In order to justify these spending cuts , an attempt is made to paint a dismal picture of the current situation , thereby paving the way for drastic restrictions on quotas , prices and farmers ' incomes and , ultimately , drastic cuts in Community production .
In order to avoid the social tensions which directly applying such pioneering measures would provoke , the Commission 's chosen method is to apply them gradually , until such time as they can all be applied , without respite , under a new regulation to be approved and to apply from the 2003-2004 marketing year .
As part of this method , it proposes to freeze nominal prices at 1983-84 levels for a further two years , thereby cutting actual prices and incomes , irrespective of the fact that the extended freeze on sugar beet prices eroded actual prices by 33 % between 1982 and 1999 .
It also proposes to reduce quotas by 115 000 tonnes and to abolish storage so that the Community budget can save EUR 300 million a year .
These proposals will drastically reduce the actual price of beet and farmers ' incomes .
Further reductions in quotas , together with similar cuts in all agricultural produce , will leave even more farmers high and dry and yet , there is not a single proposal as to what crops they should grow .
Because these transitional measures form part of systematic cuts across the board ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , I also welcome the opportunity to make a brief contribution to the debate on the common organisation of the market in sugar .
I congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Daul , on his work , which I have no difficulty in supporting on behalf of my group .
The common organisation of the market in sugar has already undergone several reforms , including an agreement to reduce quotas by 500 000 tonnes for the 2000-2001 marketing year .
In addition , institutional prices for sugar have declined continuously since 1985 by 36 % in real terms .
The present system has brought stability to the sector and enabled the Community to be a modest but regular exporter to world markets .
It is important for Parliament to put down a marker with regard to the Commission 's efforts to draw back prematurely from decisions taken in Berlin , which , in the case of the sugar regime , were to remain in place until 2006 .
This will only undermine farmers ' confidence in the ability of Europe and its institutions to bring stability to a sector already bedevilled recently by falling income and unstable markets .
There is a danger that the current unprecedented crises in the livestock sector - mainly BSE and foot-and-mouth - might be used to introduce far-reaching reforms to the common agricultural policy which would not otherwise have been contemplated .
Instead we should direct our energy and resources to bringing stability to the sector , restoring consumer confidence in food and investing in promotion and market development .
Central to any future reform must be income stability for farmers .
Fewer and fewer people are attracted to farming as a way of life , particularly when more rewarding work is available elsewhere .
Mr President , the EU ' s organisation of the market in sugar is far and away the most protectionist in the world .
It costs billions and has led to enormous inefficiency in the allocation of the world ' s sugar production .
It is incomprehensible that the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development should wish to see the system extended to 2006 , especially when the Court of Auditors has pointed out that the Commission has withheld relevant information and ought to have dealt with the issues of the economic costs of surplus production , the effects on world market prices and developing countries ' income and the impact on the environment .
You do not know whether to laugh or to cry when , in Recital 2 , the Commission writes that account must be taken of the interests of consumers , knowing full well that the organisation of the sugar market triples consumer prices for all products containing sugar .
In spite of everything , that is not , however , the worst of it .
What really tops it all is the fact that the failure to reform the policy on sugar has obstructed the ' everything but arms ' initiative whereby the world ' s 48 poorest countries would be given access to the EU ' s market .
It is an initiative which , in the worst case , would have increased imports of sugar by approximately 100 000 tons per year .
It is outrageous that the EU ' s farmers cannot countenance such imports when they themselves each year pump 8.8 million tons of EU-subsidised sugar out onto the world market .
It is deeply disheartening for this House that Parliament ' s Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development should want to be still more protectionist than the European farming lobby .
I would therefore call upon everyone who wishes to look after the interests of the developing world and of consumers to vote against the report .
Commissioner , I am somewhat concerned , not about Mr Daul 's outstanding work , but about the method .
The world of agriculture is going through a stage with which you are quite familiar and which I therefore do not need to describe again .
We , in the world of agriculture , need to know what kind of market we are supposed to be building over the next ten years . Although , on the one hand , the rules imposed by globalisation - that is the opening-up of our markets - can on no account be extended , on the other hand , we must also take into full consideration what is an asset and a valuable resource for Europe as a whole .
Well then , when we come to tackle this reform of the common organisation of the market , we must not wait for the horse to bolt before we fasten the stable door : the safeguard clause is going to expire next year .
In the sugar sector , it is imperative for us to have a different relationship with the ACP countries but , at the same time , we are already working within Europe on a process of liberalisation , revising quotas and reducing export support , the implication of which is , however , that opening up the market will reduce competitiveness .
Clearly , therefore , at a time of change such as this , if even the low cost sectors are damaged by agricultural policy interventions , there is certainly going to be some concern in the world of agriculture .
Mr President , this report represents a huge missed opportunity .
I urge Parliament to think about what kind of message we will send to the European tax-payer and the farmers in the candidate countries if we roll over again , as Mr Daul proposes .
I have no problem with Mr Daul personally rolling over for the sugar producers - as he is one .
He can roll over as much as he likes , but this Parliament should resist any temptation to roll over the sugar regime yet one more time .
Why is it that with increasing pressure on farm spending , any real chance to reform the CAP is greeted with a shrug of indifference in this Chamber ?
This report demonstrates how powerful the farming lobby is , although pressure for reform is mounting , not just from European citizens but also from far-sighted farmers themselves , who recognise that the current regime is clearly unsustainable in the long term .
It has remained unaltered for 32 years and its highly protectionist nature has kept the EU sugar price at three times the world level , discriminating unfairly against consumers and damaging the competitiveness of the industry .
We now know that the WTO and enlargement commitments mean that another roll-over would wreck the EU 's international credibility .
A recent Court of Auditors ' report concluded that the sugar regime leads to substantial costs for the EU budget and for the consumer .
So what we need is serious , well-thought out reform .
The long-term ramifications of Mr Daul 's plans to do nothing will mean deeper and deeper quota cuts shrinking the industry and threatening employment .
We have sadly been bombarded by a series of unfounded claims on storage levy and the ACP , ignoring the fact that the money saved could actually be redirected towards other agricultural expenditure .
I am angry with the outcome of this report and concerned that the unanimously agreed view of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy was ignored by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , as a member of the Committees on Budgetary Control and on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , I follow the developments of our ailing agricultural policy closely , yet with a passion .
Anyone who reads the Court of Auditors ' special report on the reform of the common organisation of the market in sugar will be astonished to learn , paragraph by paragraph , about the shortcomings of this common organisation of the market .
Rapporteur Daul does not breathe a word about this report by the Court of Auditors .
The new European Commission , on the other hand , did .
It had the courage to come up with a reform proposal and adjustments , but I notice that our Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has dismissed those proposals and has instead embraced a short-sighted policy and opted in favour of short-term success .
It has capitulated before the interests and the sweet-voiced lobbying of the sugar industry .
It is a policy which clashes with the interests of the farmers themselves and is mainly directed at the industry .
Ladies and gentlemen , I cannot endorse this report .
It makes a mockery of sound financial management .
The net costs of over-production in 2000 amounted to EUR 800 million , almost as much as the sum which we agreed on a few weeks ago to combat the BSE crisis .
The average supply of white sugar accounts for 14 % of the production quota of 2 million tonnes .
That is the case , even though the Commission is of the opinion that only 0.4 million tonnes , or 3 % , is necessary to accommodate unexpected shortages .
This translates into an annual cost of EUR 30 million .
Moreover , the consumer is faced with a market in which only five companies hold more than 50 % of the EU quota .
In most sugar-producing Member States , the entire national quota is in the hands of only two companies .
Talk about competition !
This policy is opposed to the interests of the consumer , the environment , high-quality production and the developing world .
I would ask you to reject this report and at least to take into account the remarks made by the Court of Auditors .
Mr President , the Commission is making carefully-worded proposals to reform the common organisation of the market in sugar , pending a more drastic reform in 2003 .
Rapporteur Daul is right to reject these plans from the Commission .
Liberalisation of the sugar market makes little sense if it does not benefit the consumer .
Only the soft drinks multinationals and foodstuffs industry stand to gain from liberalisation .
Those who lose out are the hundreds of thousands of European farmers who grow sugar beet .
Whether or not developing countries will benefit from a market which is not protected is very much called into question .
Now , a number of developing countries are allowed to export a fixed quota of sugar to the EU , for which they receive more money than on the global market .
Ninety per cent of the costs incurred in the European sugar budget of EUR 800 million benefit these countries .
When reforming the common organisation of the market in sugar , the Commission needs to look beyond liberalisation and compliance with the WTO rules .
I would call on the Commission to carefully study the different scenarios and take enlargement into consideration before it presents us with new proposals in 2003 .
Mr President , can I congratulate Mr Daul on his report and first of all say that I will be supporting it tomorrow .
I will be supporting my electorate , who are large sugar producers , and I will not be supporting the multinationals who are lobbying very hard .
I would just say to you Commissioner that I worked on the 77 Protocol which was very much involved with helping the developing world countries .
I heard Mrs Gill talking about the way in which the consumer was going to benefit .
Let me make it absolutely plain to all of you here today , that the consumer will not benefit from a reduction in the price paid to British and European farmers for sugar .
They certainly do not in the rest of the world where sugar is much cheaper .
Why is it that I am being lobbied by the biggest single user of sugar in the world , a US company , specifically to get the price down ?
I heard Commissioner Lamy speaking before about trade relations with the US .
Will the United States be reducing the price that they pay their farmers for their sugar as we are going to do , or are they going to continue with their very high support ?
Mr Daul , you said that the sugar regime was a special agreement .
I would argue a little bit with you on that because I believe it is unique .
First of all , the tax-payer does not pay for it .
Secondly , it benefits farmers directly , unlike many parts of the present CAP , and thirdly , the sugar protocol itself helps some of the poorest countries in the world .
It is very important that we continue to support those countries .
I worked very hard to get them support and I intend to keep that support for those ACP countries .
We have a saying , Commissioner , in the UK , if it is not broke , don 't mend it . Please do not try to mend this system .
Mr President , we must certainly tackle the issues of overproduction and high prices in the Community market , in addition to the problems caused by CMO rules .
I support the rapporteur 's basic proposal , however , to extend the current system until 2006 , in accordance with what was established at Berlin , in that I see the need to allow time for production conversion and diversification so that the , albeit necessary , measures do not lead to a drop in income for producers and cause acute social hardship in some of the afflicted areas where the product is produced .
I feel that it is necessary to reach agreement on the basic proposal , and we will support this proposal .
Mr President , extending the present European sugar regime is the best solution for producers , consumers and developing countries .
The Daul report makes a sound case for extending the EU sugar regime , a regime which , compared to other areas of policy , is very cheap for the European Union .
Setting aside specific regional policy in certain parts of the European Union and the funds needed to import from a large number of ACS countries , the policy is actually financed entirely by the farmers themselves .
It is therefore striking that the costs of this policy should form the subject of another dispute .
The policy is said to be expensive and cost the consumers dearly .
In fact , the first argument can be refuted on the basis of the agricultural budget , which demonstrates that expenditure on the policy is mainly earmarked for the measures with regard to ACP countries and regional policy , and not for the common organisation of the market itself .
As for the second argument , one cannot compare apples and oranges , and that happens whenever a small proportion of the global market , mainly a surplus market , is compared with the consumer price in Europe .
For example , when internal European cereal prices were brought into line with the global market , it appeared that the consumer in Europe did not in any way benefit from the lower producer prices .
In terms of meat prices , too , we observe that consumers hardly notice a reduction in prices for many producers .
It is therefore better to opt for a policy in which producers are given a valuable role in a tough competitive context , both in Europe and elsewhere , instead of a spurious position in the discussion between consumers and producers .
But I expect that we will again be entering into this discussion during the mid-term review of European policy .
With regard to the ability of 48 of the poorest countries to access the EU market , we should do better to opt for a kind of ACP formula , rather than state before the event that a policy will be wiped out completely with this measure .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , over the last few months , we have examined the common organisation of the markets in the sugar sector in great detail and have held intensive and controversial discussions , not only with the Commission , but with all those who are in favour of total liberalisation of the sugar market .
I should therefore like to congratulate the rapporteur very warmly because he has , in my view , succeeded in achieving a very good result in his report .
Time and again it is said that sugar is too expensive and that it needs to be cheaper for consumers .
I should simply like to refer to the BSE crisis .
It shows that , although farmers are seeing prices fall by up to 30 % , the consumer still pays the same price for the meat in the shops .
I therefore fully support the extension of the organisation of the market in sugar until the marketing year 2005 / 2006 .
In my opinion , this is the key point in this proposal .
This end date also coincides with that in the Berlin agreement , in which CAP funding is established for six years .
We farmers need a policy on which we can rely .
The sector 's stakeholders , the sugar beet producers as well as the sugar manufacturers , need to be able to look far enough ahead to make appropriate investment decisions .
In this context I should like to mention the imminent accession of new countries . I do not think that it would have been very prudent to establish a new COM for only two years , as originally proposed , because this would only have caused confusion and led to uncertainty .
As far as the arrangements for storage levies are concerned , I can only fully support the rapporteur when he advocates that they should be maintained .
They are an important instrument to keep the market stable and they have proved their worth over 30 years .
It would be very short-sighted to disturb the equilibrium in a market organisation of this kind - which works perfectly - simply for the sake of reform .
Mr President , with some difficulty we have been able to reach Strasbourg to participate in this debate which is so important to the future of European agriculture and to the COM in sugar in my country and in my region .
I find it difficult to understand the Commission ' s proposal to reduce the quotas by 115 000 tonnes or reduce storage aid in order to save EUR 300 million , as well as reducing time limits .
I believe that these are substantial changes , which are unjustifiable .
And why until 2003 ?
I would like the Commission to tell us whether it thinks that , after 2003 , there will be more resources and this provisional amendment will be justified .

I would like to congratulate Mr Daul on his work on the Commission ' s proposal and on the special sensitivity he has shown in relation to each of the problems which we have raised , with regard to which he has been able to reach a compromise and has included them in his report .
I would like this provisional amendment , tabled by our parliamentary committee , in which it opts for maintaining a system of quotas without modifying the system of prices , to be taken into account by the Commissioner and that the Commission will change its position in the way proposed by Mr Daul , whose report we agree with on all its fundamental aspects and which we are prepared to support tomorrow morning .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , allow me , before I comment on the factual questions , to express my sincere thanks to the rapporteur , Mr Daul , and also to the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and the Industry and Budgets Committees , whose Members were involved in the very thorough examination of the proposal to reform the common organisation of the markets in the sugar sector , for their dedicated work .
I now turn to the content .
What are the most important points in the proposal tabled by the Commission ?
The Commission believes that a fundamental reform of the common organisation of the markets in the sugar sector is necessary .
Such a reform can , however , only be justified on the basis of a detailed analysis .
That is why the Commission has ordered two studies , the results of which are expected to be available in mid-2002 .
The first study will examine concentration and competition conditions in the sugar sector , but not only in this sector , also in other large sectors of the agricultural and food industries .
The second study will investigate the various possible options for a fundamental reform of the common organisation of the markets in the sugar sector .
In the meantime , the Commission is proposing to extend the main mechanisms of the current organisation of the sugar market for two marketing years .
In addition , it is intended to reduce the overall quota by 115 000 tonnes , which is 50 % of the structural surplus under the WTO 's export restrictions .
Compensation for storage levies is to be abolished in order to increase competition and reduce the incentive to produce C sugar .
This will also save the EAGGF EUR 300 million a year .
The requirement for producers to hold minimum stocks is to be abolished , since this is no longer justified in the light of the current supply situation in the Union .
Finally , production refunds for sugar used in the chemical industry are , in the future , to be provided by the sector itself .
I now turn to the amendments to these Commission proposals .
One group of amendments in Mr Daul 's report basically seeks to extend the current arrangements for the sugar market for a period of five marketing years without introducing the changes proposed by the Commission ; this is provided for in Amendments Nos 2 , 15-18 , 22 , 26 , 29 , 68 , 69 , 70 and 71 .
The Commission can agree to extend the current organisation of the market in sugar for a longer period than the proposed two years , but only if the remaining key points in the Commission 's proposal are accepted .
The Commission cannot therefore accept a series of amendments for the following reasons .
Amendments Nos 3 , 4 , 23 , 24 , 31 and 56 seek to leave the basic quotas and the estimated maximum supply requirements of the refining industry unchanged .
This is unacceptable because the Commission 's proposal to eliminate at least part of the structural surplus is essential in order to fulfil our obligations under the WTO .
Neither is the Commission in a position to accept Amendments Nos 36 , 45 , 57 , 60-62 , 65 , 67 and 72-75 because they would either increase the quotas even more , cut them very , very drastically or redistribute them .
Amendments Nos 1 , 5 , 8 , 12 , 13 , 19 , 25 , 27 , 28 , 30 , 39 and 40 seek to maintain the compensation for storage levies .
I cannot accept this either because the abolition of the compensation system will create increased competition , remove the incentive to produce C sugar and , in addition , bring considerable savings of budgetary resources .
Amendments Nos 6 , 21 and 40 provide for the minimum stock system to be kept .
I cannot take this on board either because , given the extent of the current surpluses , a requirement of this kind is not justified .
Amendment No 40 expresses the wish that the EAGGF should continue to participate in the funding of the production refunds for the first 60 000 tonnes of sugar used in the chemical industry .
This would seem to me to be inappropriate because exemptions can no longer be justified within a self-financing system .
Amendments Nos 19 , 14 , 37 and 38 seek to make it possible once again for Italy , Spain and Portugal to grant national aid .
This national aid has already been granted for too long as it is and has caused significant distortions of competition .
As early as 1995 it was therefore decided to abolish it .
It would , therefore , be a serious mistake if we were to reverse this decision of 1995 , in the present time .
As far as Amendments Nos 33 , 63 , 64 , 66 , 76 and 77 are concerned , I can assure you that the Commission will make every effort to ensure the necessary coherence between the sugar proposals and development policy .
There is therefore no need to spell this out in the proposals .
Amendments such as Amendment No 20 for example , in which a derogation from the concept of a refinery is sought for the Azores , or Amendment No 36 , which seeks to have quotas adjusted in order to fulfil the WTO requirements , must also be rejected .
This is because our proposal already provides for an adjustment of this kind in Article 10 .
Finally , I should like to reiterate my thanks for the work which you have done and hope that you will acknowledge that , in expressing its willingness to extend the system for more than two years , the Commission is , after all , also taking an important step towards accommodating Parliament 's concerns .
Commissioner , thank you for your comprehensive response .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Information and communication
The next item is the oral question ( B5-0011 / 2001 ) by Mr Graça Moura to the Commission , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , on the EU ' s information and communication strategy .
Mr President , Commissioner Monti , as Chairman of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , it is my duty tonight to explain our motive for tabling this question .
Interpreting the contributions of my committee , I feel that the Commission has not always made much effort to provide an effective response to the issue of communication .
The subject was debated a number of times within the committee and , on 14 April 2000 , a year ago now , Commissioner Reding informed us that she was going to present a communication , a project , a strategy , but , so far , nothing has happened .
There are delays which we cannot fail to highlight because we feel that the European Union 's strategy is closely linked to information and communication .
I believe that these are not rhetorical phrases but genuine questions specific to European integration , to the integration of a Europe which we want to be institutional and political as well as economic .
The citizens must be kept informed , made aware of the European Union activities , at least where the three most important issues are concerned : enlargement , monetary union and European defence policy .
Therefore , if the objective , as was stated at the Lisbon meeting , is for the economic side of things , for the economy to be knowledge-based as well , we cannot ignore the fact , Mr Monti , that the Union , which cannot and must not remain merely economic , is in need of a huge effort in terms of the citizens ' awareness and their participation in the integration of this Europe if it is to become a political and civil Union as well .
There is thus a contrast , and I would like to make this absolutely clear , between a euro which becomes tangible notes and coins , a currency that becomes a single currency , the euro , which will come into circulation next year , and a Charter of Fundamental Rights which was adopted at Nice , even though it has not been incorporated into the Treaties .
My own personal conviction on this matter is that , although there is much criticism of the post-Nice process , every endeavour has been made to lay the foundations for a European Constitution .
There had to be an initial stage of the establishment of certain fundamental rights of the European citizens first , and the project which has to be advanced and the development of the necessary cooperation between the Commission and Parliament are linked precisely to the possibility of designing , of formulating a European Constitution which establishes and affirms the rights of all the citizens .
The process is a tedious one , however .
There was a desire to do everything at once , forgetting that the institutional and legal processes are slow moving and must gradually involve the participation of all citizens .
Well then , the issue of communication - as you see , Commissioner , this is not a piece of make-believe but something which is innate in the nature of the relationship between the institutions and the citizens and in the will to build a Europe of the citizens as well as an institutional Europe - is closely linked to a strategy , to a genuine communication project which , I regret to have to say , on behalf of the Committee , is lacking , despite the numerous debates which I have called for and which have taken place in committee and , quite frankly , despite the appeals made by all the groups to Commissioner Reding and President Prodi .
We are appealing once again , this evening , to you , Mr Monti , for the motive for the question is linked precisely to this issue .
I am sure that you will take these considerations fully on board , or rather , I must add , we must both take the issue on board so that the relationship between the Commission and Parliament is a productive , transparent and lasting one , as it is right that it should be in this legislature and as we are making every endeavour to ensure that it is .
The Commission must take notice of what the Parliamentary committee and Parliament as a whole are trying to make them understand and are stating repeatedly .
Therefore , if this evening 's debate succeeds in furthering a closer relationship and obtaining a genuinely convincing response from you , then I think it will have been a very useful initiative .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank the Chairman of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , Mr Gargani , for clearly illustrating the question on a subject to which the Commission , too , attaches the utmost importance .
I will try to respond to the different parts of the oral question point by point .
First of all - point one - the communication on information policy planned by the Commission will be presented before the end of the summer and will then be presented to the Interinstitutional Committee , the Parliamentary Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , of which you are Chairman , Mr Gargani , and the Parliamentary Committee on Budgets .
With regard to the development of information technology - point two - the Commission is taking this into account in a number of ways : combining all the communication instruments in a single Directorate-General , moving from a paper medium to an electronic medium , developing the second generation Europa server in accordance with the recommendations of the Lisbon Summit , and harmonising and developing the websites of the Union Representations with simplified portals linking all the departments of the Commission .
Thirdly , the Commission is enlisting the help of experts and professionals to develop its information policy , particularly as regards large-scale campaigns , such as those duly highlighted by Mr Gargani , on the enlargement of the Union and on the euro .
The Commission is also enlisting the help of these professionals to provide training on information technologies ; the citizens are being consulted via the countless debates on Europe organised in the context of the Intergovernmental Conference which will be stepped up on issues relating to the Future of Europe .
The Representations and networks of public information centres make the practical concerns of the citizens known and , by listening to what they have to say , we can adapt the information strategy to the countries or other specific factors .
Fourthly , what are the pillars ?
The main pillars announced in April 2000 by Commissioner Reding will be included in the Commission communication .
Decentralisation will be examined in relation to some sectors of common interest and the Commission 's new information policy will also take into account the principle of subsidiarity , which was clearly emphasised , moreover , by the Lisbon Conclusions .
Fifthly , the Commission intends to develop a regional dimension for its information policy , in particular by means of paying closer attention to the regional press and the questions of local authorities .
It also intends to continue to develop information centres - Infopoints- and what is known as rural carrefour , European documentation centres , in order to achieve sufficiently comprehensive regional coverage .
The large communication centres such as those in Paris , Lisbon or Rome , which are often supplemented by regional and local networks , are a good example of cooperation between the institutions and the Member States , and they are points of reference for public information .
The Internet is accessible at regional level , and the Commission also has eight representation offices in different regions of the Union .
Sixthly , the Commission has combined all the communication instruments in a single service with the aim of stepping up the attention paid to opinions and reacting quickly through the most direct channels .
It established , through the network of Representations and regional offices , a rapid alert system capable of identifying the communication difficulties raised by certain matters of European relevance in order to be able to react with focused messages which are more suitable for a certain type of audience .
With regard to public relations , within the framework of the action ' The Future of Europe ' , the Commission is going to launch a large-scale operation of listening to the citizens , in order to better identify the information that they wish to receive , by whom they wish to be informed , where and by what means of information .
This action is part of the continuation of Dialogue on Europe , an action in which the European Parliament has participated fully .
With regard to the seventh point , the Commission is going to implement assessment mechanisms and parameters to measure effectiveness .
The first way to assess an information policy is to carry out opinion polls in the 15 Member States .
The standard Eurobarometer has been supplemented by a special Eurobarometer which can provide a more detailed , country-by-country analysis .
The year 2001 will see the launch of studies on the cost-effectiveness of the Representations .
Other monitoring instruments will be provided within the framework of the modernisation of the Commission 's resource management policy and , in particular , its Press and Communication Service .
Finally , Mr President , with regard to the eighth and last point , the Commission has instructed its Press and Communication Service to develop a new initiative on cooperation between Parliament and the Commission in terms of information .
A Technical Group on cooperation has started work and all the main questions relating to the institutions , the euro , enlargement and the actions regarding the Future of Europe will be the subject of common communication strategies .
There have been initial agreements between the Commission and the Member States on huge information campaigns about the euro .
This effort must be continued and increased manifold .
The Commission 's appropriation for information is currently EUR 90 million , that is the equivalent of one copy of a newspaper per citizen per year .
The size of the task in hand means that every Member State will have to bear the cost of the investment which is allocated to it , seeing as the provision of information on Europe concerns all the authorities .
I would like to thank Mr Gargani again for having drawn our attention once again to these extremely important subjects .
I have attempted , insofar as I am able , to present to you the main guidelines of the responses , and I can assure you that my colleagues in the Commission who are responsible for the matter are working extremely hard to respond to this great challenge .
Mr President , Commissioner , you had a rather thankless task , my dear Mr Monti .
I cannot imagine that you felt very comfortable this evening , because I should like to say to you that , although I hear your words , I cannot believe them .
That is the problem .
For months now , we have been waiting for something which will now - as you have again indicated today - perhaps be available in the summer , God - or whoever is going to do the work you mentioned - willing .
I mean , if you take a dossier away from one area of an organisation then you must surely know where you are going to reallocate it .
This portfolio has been taken away from people who have actually been doing a fairly good job over the last few months and years .
During the course of the project they learnt more about it .
Now it has been put on someone else 's desk and is in limbo .
This is a dreadful state of affairs .
It is like a poor orphan .
No one really cares about it ; no one is really responsible for it .
That is why I actually think that what sounded good in theory has not yet developed into anything worthwhile in practice .
We have already been waiting for the communication for ages , and I am eager to know when it will be forthcoming .
Over and above what is , of course , also in our written contributions , I should like to suggest to the Commission that it , perhaps , does not need to create so very much that is new ; instead it should concentrate much more on harnessing those who are doing fantastic work on the spot .
They do exist .
There are networks which work incredibly well and it should use them .
When I consider that you praise the Info-Points here !
Well , I know of an Info-Point which is doing a great job , but which cannot survive on the money from the European Commission , which never arrives until the end of the year or the following year .
Today they do not know whether they will still exist next year .
How are people supposed to work there and be motivated to motivate others ?
In my view there is much more to be done in this field .
Of course , we all of us want to act in concert and to achieve the best results together but this will only work with decentralisation .
You said it yourself .
So let us not reinvent the wheel , but let us deploy all those who really are able to convey the concept of Europe with local colour , and not only the bit of Europe that is in Brussels !
Mr President , Commissioner Monti , we all realise that we are facing a crisis in terms of our press and communications policy for the Union 's institutions .
Our institutions are regarded with contempt at worst and apathy at best .
But if you look at the work that we actually do in the European Union , it is high-quality work of great significance to all of our citizens and has an impact on their everyday lives .
Why therefore cannot that message be put across with greater alacrity and greater effectiveness , by the Commission in particular ?
Last week , at an event in my constituency , trade unionists were taken aback at the sheer breadth of legislation that we had been able to enact , and ensured that Member States enacted , in favour of their rights .
Yet that message does not seem to get through to them on a day-to-day basis and we have to ask why .
I very much believe that although we are an elected House and the Commission is not , and although the Commission has one part of the policy process and we have another , we in fact have shared interests .
I spend much of my time trying to destroy the myths that are growing up about the European Union and although I welcome the statement of the Commissioner , particularly on public relations and rapid rebuttal , I still feel unassisted by the Commission in what we are trying to do .
I regret that it has taken until now to get a communication on this issue .
I have to ask why the interinstitutional talks on this issue are still stalled ?
I also have to ask why , when the Commission is ambitious enough - quite rightly - to want to reform the whole of European governance , it does not put at the centre of that strategy a radical reworking and modernisation of its communications and information policy .
Quite honestly , we have an awfully long way to go in terms of delivering the policy that the people deserve .
These questions must be answered because going forward with the White Paper on governance cannot be done in all sincerity , unless there is a commitment by the European Commission to come to terms with the problems it is experiencing within its organisation .
Certainly it will have a partner in Parliament in attempting to rework the system radically .
In my own country , my party is famed for its spin-doctors .
I am not necessarily advocating such a development in the European Union but we must look - and that is why I welcome your words Commissioner - at the whole question of public relations .
If we are to realise the European project that we here in this room want , then we must have a voice that can sell that project and at the moment I am afraid we do not .
Mr President , Commissioner , it is extremely important that we explain to the people of the European Union and of the applicant countries what the European Union stands for .
This is a task which the Commission has been all too lax about .
During the hearings of the new Commission in September 1999 , Romano Prodi said , and I quote : " ... the new Commission will be putting much more effort into communicating properly with the citizens of Europe , giving them open access to information " .
I should like to have seen the President of the Commission here this evening .
For now , one and a half years later , nothing has happened .
Almost a year ago , the Commission promised , in its work programme for 2000 , to present a strategy , but nothing has happened .
This year again , the Commission has promised to do something about the matter , but rumour now has it that , when it comes to this area , there is , if anything , chaos in the organisation of the Commission .
Allow me just to point out a couple of the practical problems with the EU ' s information policy , or lack of information policy .
The information is too centralised , it is all prepared in Brussels and it is not directed at target groups according , for example , to gender , age , geographical considerations and the level of education of population groups .
There are also some thoroughly topical and practical problems .
The large Europa server on the Internet is updated too slowly and erratically , and bureaucrats can remove information from the Europa server as it suits them .
There are too many bureaucratic obstacles to accessing information .
EU information is now treated as a branch of the EU ' s Offices for Official Publications .
Is it reasonable that copies of the Official Journal of the EC which are more than three months old should have to be paid for ?
The Official Journal should be available free of charge on the Europa server .
Too much information is only available in the EU ' s main languages .
Go , for example , into the Rapid database , where you will see , for example , that even Romano Prodi ' s speeches are only available in two or three languages .
We have eleven official languages in the EU , and all eleven must be used .
The key words where the EU ' s information policy is concerned must be decentralisation and coordination , including in exchanges of information between the Commission and Parliament .
There must be a determination to make optimum use of the information technology now available .
I am very anxious to know how the Commission will get to grips with the task .
I assume and hope that , as Mrs Pack also mentioned , the Commission ' s offices in the major European cities will be involved and that they will be given tasks and responsibilities , as well as means to address and inform the man or woman in the street .
Commissioner , this task has now become a matter of urgency .
Mr President , I am speaking in this debate in my capacity as Vice-President of Parliament , responsible for information and communication , and also as co-chairman of the interinstitutional group on information and communication .
Mr Monti , you have told us that the Commission attaches great importance to information and communication policy .
It may attach importance to it , but it is in absolutely no hurry , since this House has been waiting impatiently for a year and a half for the delivery of the great document on information and communication that Mr Prodi promised us .
And , after a year and a half , we have been told that Parliament and the Commission will be producing this together .
Frankly , Commissioner , in this area , the Commission compares very badly with a tortoise .
You have said that information and communication are of great importance .
Mr Prodi is no doubt aware of certain image problems he has as President of the Commission , which have repercussions for the whole College of Commissioners .
I suppose that he is also aware of the trends in participation in European elections over the last decade , and I suppose that he is aware of the vicious campaign being waged against the European Union and its institutions by very powerful sections of the media in certain Member States .
Mr Monti , when we were told that we had to produce this document together , we got on with the job and we already have a document prepared .
We have produced it in three months .
Can it be that this humble Parliament has more resources , more power , more intelligence or more possibilities than the Commission ?
I doubt it .
With whom are we supposed to negotiate politically on this issue ?
You said your ' colleagues responsible for the matter .
Who are they ?
We do not know them .
We would like to know who they are .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , my impatience is growing , not only as a Member of this House , but also as rapporteur for the information campaign and as a Member of the Interinstitutional Committee .
Sometimes my impatience gives way to disappointment .
Like the People 's Europe initiative , the major European projects , such as the introduction of euro notes and coins , the reunification of Europe , the debate on fundamental rights and a European constitution , the debate on competences ( who is responsible for what ) , the post-Nice ratification procedure and the post-Nice process - I use the expression major political European projects advisedly - need an information and communication campaign .
Despite the call for subsidiarity and decentralisation , the Commission and the European Parliament need to exercise joint professional management of the content .
The current unsatisfactory state of affairs is the cause of the questions , criticism and disappointment about the dilettantism of the information policy , the announcement strategy and the delaying tactics .
I ask myself the following questions : what has happened since 14 April 2000 ?
Where is the master plan which we were promised at that time ?
Where is the specific timetable and programme of measures ?
Where is the clear division of responsibilities in the Commission ?
On 14 April , Commissioner Reding spoke here .
A few days ago , Commissioner Barnier deferred answering the question about whether he would be taking over responsibility for this .
Today you have stood in for us .
Where is the proof that you are serious about a joint Commission and European Parliament approach ?
There is no clear strategy .
We do not need a re-nationalisation of information policy .
The Commission is not simply a channel for EU funds ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , my hearty thanks to all the speakers in this important debate .
I will , of course , relay the points made , firstly to Commissioner Reding and then to the rest of the Commission .
I would like to make a few brief comments .
In the first place , like you , ladies and gentlemen , I am absolutely convinced that Europe means more than just Brussels , and therefore decentralisation - although with a common perspective , of course , and Parliament and the Commission at the centre - is one of the key factors in the Commission 's information policy lines .
While it would appear correct to always strive to do better , I would also like to say that , in reality , the situation is not as negative as it might seem at first sight .
In the space of a few weeks , the Commission has , in fact , transferred responsibility for information policy from DG EAC to DG PRESS and also the officials who deal with it .
Since 1 January 2001 , DG PRESS has been responsible for managing all the budget lines related to the activities transferred from DG EAC , Heading B3-3 of the budget .
The adoption of the formal Organigramme for the Press and Communication Service is linked to the decision to appoint a Commissioner with responsibility conferred upon him by the President to monitor the matter .
This type of appointment , which is not an easy thing for a Commission to introduce in the middle of its mandate , should be possible in the very near future .
I would add that the transfer operation from DG EAC to DG PRESS involved the transfer of 104 people and EUR 90 million , dedicated to public information .
Clearly , this transfer raises logistical problems , but these will be resolved by the summer .
The Representations are continuing to perform their role of informing the public , which , in actual fact , they have never ceased to do , but they are now working together with DG PRESS instead of DG EAC .
Let me also make one or two observations regarding cooperation with Parliament , which we all consider to be of prime importance .
Regarding shared premises , everything that could be done has been done , and more , since most of our branches now accommodate representatives of Parliament .
As part of information campaigns , a tripartite Parliament , Commission and Member State body has been set up according to conventions that are now well-established , to general satisfaction .
Regarding information networks , particularly the larger information centres , such as Sources d 'Europe in Paris , or the Jacques Delors Information Centre in Lisbon , parliamentary information and visibility are ensured , even though the Commission is forced to note that Parliament has not responded to its repeated calls to become involved in the administrative structure of these centres as a fully committed partner .
Moreover , on the financial aspects , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission considers that cooperation with Parliament , while admittedly it was in need of development at the beginning of the 1990s , has now matured in a generally satisfactory manner .
The diverse institutional roles of our two institutions and consequently , apart from the messages we have in common , the existence of two specific and diverse viewpoints , suggest that there may be a limit to the execution of our respective mandates .
If I may , I would point out that Parliament should perhaps consider the fact that its political reservations regarding budget lines are , in fact , holding citizens ' information services hostage and not the Commission as such .
May I finally make a point that I think underlies much of what has been said .
Mrs O 'Toole , in particular , welcomed the emphasis on public relations .
We all realise that so much more has to be done .
The many positive messages need to be brought more clearly and visibly to the final users , our citizens .
I conclude with one reference to a small part of communication policy which I happen to know best because it is in my area , competition policy .
Even in such an apparently technical area as competition policy we need to bring the message to the consumers .
That is why , with the help and support of Parliament , we have recently initiated a six-monthly event called ' the Competition Day ' which tries to bring out more clearly and concretely the benefits of competition policy for consumers .
I can assure you that all my colleagues are working along similar lines and I hope that the overall communication on information policy to be presented by the Commission before the summer will go a long way towards meeting your concerns .
Thank you , Commissioner .
At the end of this debate , I received a motion for a resolution , pursuant to Rule 42 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Shipbuilding
The next item is three oral questions to the Commission :
( B5-0014 / 2001 ) by Mr Langen , Mr Gomolka , Mrs Langenhagen , Mr Jarzembowski , Mr Valdivielso De Cué , on behalf of the Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , on the situation in the Community of shipbuilding ;
( B5-0019 / 2001 ) by Mr Barón Crespo , Mr Westendorp y Cabeza , Mr Schulz , Mrs Erika Mann , Mr Rapkay , Mr Piecyk , Mr Duin , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the situation in the Community of shipbuilding ;
( B5-0152 / 2001 ) by Mr Brie , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , on the state of the shipbuilding sector in the Community .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the question about the state of the shipbuilding industry in the Community is prompted by deep concern about the future of this sector .
On the one hand , international competition remains extremely distorted .
The market , which is characterised by artificially low prices , in particular from Korea , can still only be described as extremely anti-competitive .
On the other hand , the demands made by the European Parliament in its resolution of 14 December of last year have so far , either , not been met at all , or , only to an insufficient extent .
It remains unclear how the European shipbuilding industry can be supported so as further to improve its international competitiveness .
It remains unclear how rigorously the Commission has responded to Parliament 's call for a dispute settlement procedure to be initiated with the Republic of Korea before the World Trade Organisation .
The decisions made so far in this respect by the Commission , and also by the Council , have been inconsistent and illogical in important areas .
On the one hand , they have established that Korea has clearly violated the agreements made ; on the other , they have so far neglected to take immediate and appropriate action against this .
This can only be to the detriment of European shipyards .
Only in May 2001 , when the situation is examined more closely , will it be recognised that the Union 's shipyards have been at the mercy of persistently unfair competition for almost half a year .
This means additional burdens and dangers in an already complicated situation .
It may be disastrous for individual companies .
In this acute situation , competition is being distorted and livelihoods are being threatened , and the European Union risks suffering serious strategic damage if action is not taken more quickly and more systematically against obvious unfair practices .
The course of events so far really does seem rather odd .
Allow me to draw a comparison between this and a sporting competition .
How do you think a competitor feels who has just recovered from a serious illness and is sent into the boxing ring ?
There he comes up against a tough opponent who , despite having been proven guilty of taking drugs several times , still has not been banned .
On the contrary , the prizes are increasing .
This is an opponent who already habitually hits below the belt , while the referee looks on indifferently and the judges argue about what the drug-taker 's illegal punches are worth - full or half points !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin my speech this evening by pointing out some of the facts .
Civil sector shipbuilding in Europe still employs 250 000 people , and it is a high-tech industry .
Shipbuilding is an industry for developed countries , not an industry for low-wage countries .
Finally , public aid for shipbuilding is now no longer possible in Europe , as was confirmed by the Council of Ministers on 5 December .
Yet the same Council gave the Commission a mandate to propose to the next Council in May 2001 a mechanism affording protection against unfair competition from Korean shipyards .
Personally , I feel we are heading for a conflict with Korea , and that no solution will be found between now and then .
I would like , finally , to remind you that the Council asked the Commission to look into the possibility of facilitating access to aid for research and development .
In such circumstances , our discussions will focus on whether shipbuilding will be taken into consideration in the Sixth Framework Research and Development Programme ( FRDP ) .
The fifth programme actually contained a line on " land transport and marine technologies " including the draft presented by Commissioner Busquin , based on focussing resources .
This line no longer exists .
Of course , the industry expressed its concern to me , in my capacity as rapporteur , and to many of my fellow Members .
This evening , then , I would like to ask you in the strongest terms , Mr Monti , to please outline just what you intend to propose , in response to the requests from the Council of 5 December , in order to facilitate the return to forms of aid for research and development , to support and undertake commercial measures against unfair competition by Korea and , finally , to propose an appropriate temporary aid mechanism , while awaiting the outcome of the procedure in the WTO .
Mr President , as far as the general situation is concerned , I would echo fully the concerns and criticisms expressed by the two previous speakers .
I would ask you to bear with me , however , if I concentrate exclusively on the situation of the shipyards in eastern Germany .
In the image of the boxing ring , which Mr Gomolka used , the east German shipyards must , in addition , climb into the ring wearing handcuffs .
They are facing rigid restrictions on production capacity and , of course , I know that these were the condition for high subsidies in the nineties .
But firstly , they are managed bureaucratically and secondly , no account is taken of the fact that these shipyards do in fact also continue to invest during the general process of rationalisation .
The resulting growth in productivity triggers further cuts in the workforce .
The Commission has very good statistical data about the dramatic situation in eastern Germany , Commissioner .
It is one thing to read that one in every three people there is seeking work , however , and quite another perhaps to experience it first-hand .
I do not wish to be misunderstood .
I am very well aware that since 1990 the Union has acted in great solidarity with east Germany and that the Commission has done a great deal .
Of course , the Federal German Government is also called upon to act here .
But in the specific case of the shipbuilding industry , the decision lies , above all , with the Commission .
I think that the Treaty of Amsterdam offers sufficient room for manoeuvre for political action to be taken and for the saving clause on capacity restrictions in the Treaty to be used in 2001 .
In my view , it is necessary , firstly , to make the quotas more flexible so that they are no longer annual but are applied for the remaining five years ; secondly to factor-in the impact of rationalisation and take this into account and , thirdly - and I really support this point - to reintroduce general production aid for as long as South Korea causes these gross distortions of competition .
Mr President , I would like to thank the three Members of Parliament for their contributions .
I would like to start by emphasising that the Commission is fully aware of the importance of European shipbuilding and of the specific difficulties encountered by many shipyards .
We are fully aware of the nature of these difficulties .
The expansion of South Korean shipyards , which are already heavily in debt , has been made possible by further loans from financial institutions which do not operate under market conditions .
Various forms of indirect State intervention have enabled South Korea to keep capacities in production which , had the normal commercial criteria been applied , would have had to be reduced in order to be able to meet effective market requirements .
This surplus capacity is acting like a dead weight on the world shipbuilding market and even threatening the future of some European yards .
The Commission feels that unfair competition practices in the international shipbuilding sector need to be tackled by means of appropriate mechanisms .
This means , first and foremost , through talks and , as a last resort , in the WTO .
Although Commissioner Lamy is in a better position than I am to give you detailed information about the current state of these talks , I can assure you that the Commission is continuing to make every endeavour to negotiate a solution to the problem .
It is , of course , willing to raise the issue in the World Trade Organisation and is currently making the necessary preparations to initiate the procedure .
Commission Lamy made this quite clear to the South Korean authorities during his meeting with them in mid-February .
Should the current international talks fail to lead to a solution , the Commission has undertaken to refer the matter to the Council by 1 May and to propose a temporary protective support mechanism .
This does not mean reintroducing the former provisions on operating aid laid down in Article 3 of Regulation 1540 / 98 .
The third report from the Commission to the Council on the situation of world shipbuilding states clearly that the operating aid arrangements under said regulation have not provided a solution to the international trade problems .
It is precisely the typical negative consequences of operating aid that have led the Commission to express a generally negative opinion on this type of aid .
Shipbuilding was the last industrial sector in which this type of aid was still authorised .
You are , of course , aware that the Commission favours those types of aid in which the distortion of competition caused by a case of State aid is offset by a positive incentive effect .
This is why , in its decision of 29 November , the Commission decided not to extend the operating aid provided for in Article 3 of Regulation 1540 / 98 .
The third report from the Commission to the Council on the situation of world shipbuilding , which I have just mentioned , confirmed that contract-related aid involved a range of negative effects on the single market .
This aid was burdensome , unfocused and distorted intra-Community trade .
The Commission is considering very carefully the form that the temporary mechanism should take if we cannot reach a satisfactory solution through talks with South Korea .
On the one hand , we must steer clear of the problems we have encountered in the past and , on the other , we must find a useful instrument which will supplement both the current international talks and a WTO procedure , should this prove necessary , enabling Community shipyards to compete on an equal footing under standard conditions .
This mechanism should specifically discourage the unfair practices of South Korea for as long as the WTO procedure takes to reach its conclusion and target those market segments in which European industry has suffered directly as a result of the unfair trade practices of South Korea .
I can assure you that we are working on the preparation of the proposal with all speed .
We will make every endeavour to ensure that it is ready within the timeframe set by the Council , should it be needed .
Parliament will , of course , be kept informed of our progress .
In the meantime , there must not be any doubt as to the Commission 's determination to take up a position in defence of those Community shipyards which are suffering the consequences of unacceptable international trade practices which distort competition .
Aid for research and development was mentioned , in particular .
May I add here that R & D is of vital importance if European industry is to be able to tackle the competitive challenges it faces in the medium to longer term .
It therefore seems appropriate for the Commission to examine whether any adaptation of the existing rules in this area is needed .
This work has already started in collaboration with industry .
I should like to add that the Commission recently adopted - Mr Caudron made a reference to that - its proposal for the Framework Programme on research and innovation for 2002 to 2006 .
The proposal opens up the possibility of supporting shipbuilding-related research and innovation within several of the new proposed actions .
Examples are : " flexible and intelligent production systems , included in the third priority theme ; intelligent transport , included in the sixth priority theme ; or under the heading ' anticipation of scientific and technological needs of the Union ' " .
I note in this connection that R & D aid and other types of aid allowed under the shipbuilding regulation - because , as you know , there are several - will not result in the same level of aid as offered by operating aid .
It appears , however , that the available measures concerning R & D aid have not been fully explored and exploited .
I therefore believe that Member States and industry should make a bigger effort there .
Mr President , I shall now turn to the last point raised regarding the production restriction on the yards of the former East Germany .
I would like to start by explaining the origins of the capacity restraints and the reasons why they have been imposed .
Capacity restraint was imposed on the yards of the former Democratic Republic of Germany by a special Council directive , adopted in 1992 , which contained a derogation from the prevailing regulations on operating aid applicable at that time to Community shipyards .
The aim of the derogation directive was to make it possible for the yards in question to carry out all-embracing , urgent restructuring and thus become competitive on the market .
To this end , these yards received ongoing financial aid .
It must be stressed that the aid was intended to ensure the survival of the yards in question , which would not have been able to operate on Western markets without carrying out a far-reaching restructuring process .
The granting of substantial aid , however , required compensation measures to be adopted in order to offset the distortive effect of the aid on competition .
This is why the Council imposed capacity restraints on the yards concerned during that period , precisely to offset the distortion of competition caused by the large amounts of aid granted .
The capacity restraints were established for a period of ten years , which is until the end of 2005 .
My departments have the task of monitoring observance of these restraints .
The legislative framework applicable to the restraints , however , does stipulate that , after the first five years , a Member State may request that the Commission bring the restraints in question to an end or review them .
With regard to the question of whether the Commission intends to avail itself of the possibility provided for by the legislation in question to assess whether a review of the capacity restraints would be justified , I would stress that the Commission 's leeway in a decision on this matter is extremely limited .
The Commission is bound by the provisions of the directive in question , according to which , when it assesses whether any revision of the capacity restraints is possible and justified , it has to take into account the existing balance between supply and demand in the shipping industry at world level .
I am willing to examine the possibility provided for by the prevailing legislation of reviewing the current restraints . I am willing to examine any proposals made in this area .
The issue will have to be carefully examined , however , in the light of the relevant legislation and the Commission 's monitoring practices .
We are aware of the fact that the East German shipyards ' share of the European market fell from 11.3 % in 1994 to 6.9 % in 1998 .
I must point out , however , that this is not so much the result of the imposition of capacity restraints as the general trend of the shipbuilding industry in Europe .
Europe is a still a world leader in top-of-the-range cruise shipbuilding .
Since the mid-nineties , there has been a considerable increase in demand for cruise ships , which represent a large part of the total value of European shipbuilding .
East German yards , however , produce other types of ships such as portacontainers .
Therefore , alongside the increase in production of top-of-the-range cruise ships in Europe , the share occupied by East German yards has fallen .
The fundamental question would therefore not appear to be the quantities produced so much as the yards ' specialisation in certain types of production .
Mr President , I was delighted by the Commissioner ' s explanations .
At the moment , however , our shipbuilding industry is , unfortunately , in a very bad way .
I would like to remind you that the issue we are dealing with today is by no means a recent one .
Quite the opposite . For more than two years we have debated and condemned the unfair practices , originating mainly from Asia , which our shipbuilders are being subjected to .
At the moment it is exclusively the Commission ' s responsibility to define the defence mechanisms for protecting our shipbuilding industry , or what remains of it , in the face of Korea ' s unfair practices .
After so much time during which the European sector has been decimated , while people signed friendly agreements , carried out consultations and held meetings , it is now time to act decisively .
The Commission must adopt a strong position on this issue and unequivocally defend our industry , by approving , as soon as possible , an ambitious plan which provides aid for operations , research and development and , of course , environmental aid .
Only through a raft of measures of this type can we protect and compensate this important industry which , on more than one occasion , has felt abandoned by the Community authorities .
This would also send a clear and powerful message to the Government of South Korea and would possibly persuade that government , in the medium term , to change its current policy of commercial dumping .
Finally , I must point out that it is our duty to guarantee an atmosphere of fair competition on a world scale so that this industry , on which so many families in Europe , Spain and in my region , the Basque Country , depend , may move forward .
Mr President , I very much welcome what the Commissioner has said , for three reasons .
Firstly , because although we are about to invoke the WTO dispute procedure , it is an unwieldy procedure and we may lose capacity in the interim .
Secondly , because although I can understand the context and rationale for withdrawing the shipbuilding intervention fund , I am nevertheless convinced that we need to have structural measures , particularly in the areas of research , construction of oil and drilling vessels , chemical carriers and cruise liners .
While the second report clearly outlines the inadequacies of China 's development in this area - poor management , corruption etc. while they are outside the WTO , I do not think we can be sanguine about the potential that they might develop .
Therefore we need to take action very quickly .
In a constituency where we have lost 10 000 shipbuilding jobs in the last ten years , I welcome the measures that you have outlined tonight but hope that we can move faster and further in the coming months .
Mr President , Commissioner , the third Commission report to the Council on the situation of world shipbuilding has once again confirmed that Korean shipbuilders continue to sell ships at prices that do not cover costs and repeatedly violate the WTO ' s antidumping code .
The disguised cross-subsidies of the Korean Republic , its monetary depreciation and its accounting systems , which are not transparent and do not respect internationally agreed principles , continue to harm the whole of the world market and equally affect Japan , the United States and Europe .
On the other hand , the international agreement in the form of an agreed minute between the European Community and the Government of the Korean Republic has not persuaded Korea to fulfil its commitments , since the mission of antidumping experts sent by the Commission has failed .
Therefore , and while these Korean violations continue , as well as condemning the situation to international bodies such as the WTO , the OECD and the IMF , we ask the Council and the Commission to either once again extend or implement state aid linked to contracts , or to urgently establish other adequate mechanisms , in order to slow down our continuous loss of jobs and in legitimate defence of our shipbuilding industry .
This must be done now .
It is all very well to negotiate , but the best way to persuade the other party to take us seriously is by making it feel that we are able to defend our interests and are prepared to do so .
Mr President , the Belfast shipyard Harland & Wolff is a famous shipyard which used to employ 27 000 workers and now employs just over 1 000 .
This is largely because of unfair competition , and certainly what is happening in the Far East illustrates that .
There is something else , however , of vital importance to this Parliament : is this unfair competition now being introduced here ?
A few days ago our shipyard was to close because it failed to win the contract to build two ships .
The company made a very interesting statement after Harland & Wolff were turned down .
We need to see that there are no hidden subsidies in EU countries that hamper fair competition between shipbuilding countries .
Mr President , Commissioner , in two minutes or even less , it is terribly difficult to express the full extent of our disappointment that so far nothing has been done to help European shipbuilding .
I do not believe that this will be the last time that we discuss this matter in this Parliament .
Mr Monti , you are quite right to say that shipbuilding , research and development and intelligent maritime transport are our future .
I would so like to believe this , from our position in the here and now .
We know that shipbuilding is the last industrial sector to be subsidised .
We know that this is an anathema to you , and actually it is to us too , but the shipbuilding industry needs help quickly , help which is relevant to its current situation , not long-term subsidies - please do not misunderstand me - but financial help until the market has returned to normality .
This is not just about Europe any more ; nor is it just about South Korea .
I know from my own experience - I have just been to China and Hong Kong - that other nations are observing us and that our attitude is setting them a bad example .
We , therefore , need to make positive statements , redouble our efforts and implement our shipbuilding standards and our intelligent maritime know-how with conviction .
In actual fact this is not just about a few jobs ; it is not just about a sector of the economy whose difficulties we have , after all , been able to overcome so successfully up until now .
It is in actual fact about the new image of a modern European Union .
That is why we are asking you so urgently to provide help .
I have got to know you personally , Mr Monti , through our discussions on the maritime sector and have come to hold you in high regard .
Believe me that we do not wish to discover that our trust in you has been misplaced .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Korea also has poor and problematic conditions of employment , and it is getting worse .
We could , therefore , say that aid does not beget healthy competition in the shipbuilding industry either .
It would be very awkward if the aid scheme returned . We would be seeing this sort of Korean time bomb situation here within the Union if certain types of ship were given financial support , and some not .
We therefore have to avoid a situation that would lead to new problems within the Union .
It was interesting to hear about the plans .
I think the WTO solution to this dispute should be expedited .
Commissioner Monti , what are you doing , besides using the opportunities presented under the sixth framework programme , with regard to this work , acutely serious and extremely important as it is to us all , in this highly technical , modern area ?
Mr President , this debate revolves around two or three main themes .
There is not much disagreement among us .
First of all , I share fully in the deprecation and concern about Korean behaviour .
I said this very clearly and that is why we are applying pressure .
There is the preparation of the WTO action and there is the preparation of the temporary focused support mechanism .
Of course , and several speakers made this point , the system that we had in place until the end of last year was not really a good one .
Why ?
It was unhelpful vis-à-vis the Korean threat and harmful to our own single market .
The fact that it was unhelpful relative to the Korean threat is more than demonstrated by the facts .
The Korean threat has persisted in spite of the contract-related operating aid .
This has brought about major distortions within the single market and I found expressed in very different ways and words the concern about this adverse impact within the single market by a wide range of speakers from Mr Paisley to Mr Paasilinna .

A second theme that clearly emerged is that there must be a number of measures to support shipbuilding in Europe .
I agree with the remarks to that effect made by several Members and I would like to thank in particular Mrs Langenhagen for her kind words of appreciation .
All the attention has been focused on contract-related aid which is no longer there .
Let us have a look at the list of those other forms of aid providing an incentive effect to EU shipyards which are still there after 1 January 2001 under Council Regulation 1540 : aid for environmental protection in line with the general Community guidelines for such aid , aid for research and development in line with the general Community framework for such aid and I have already underlined this , aid for innovation which is not allowed in any other industrial sector except the automobile sector , regional investment aid for upgrading and modernising existing yards , but not involving the creation of new capacity , subject to certain caps below the normal regional aid ceilings , aid for rescue and restructuring in line with the general Community guidelines for such aid , subject to certain stricter provisions , aid for partial and total closures contingent on genuine and irreversible reductions of capacity .
In addition to these forms of aid , aid in the form of credit facilities for shipowners in accordance with OECD rules will also continue to be permitted .
In addition , as I said , we are exploring the ways in which further , more intensive use of existing possibilities for aid could be obtained .
That goes equally for national aid for research and development as well as possible Community funding measures .
We can conclude that the previous system was both unhelpful for its declared objective , that is Korea , and vastly harmful within the single market . It had to be discontinued .
It has been discontinued .
This does not mean that the Korean problem is being ignored .
We are working very hard on it both in terms of a strong negotiating posture and in terms of preparing , if necessary , the introduction of a temporary defence mechanism which , being more focused , would also be more productive than the old-fashioned system that has been scrapped as it had to be .
Thank you , Commissioner , for your response to the questions .
The debate is closed .
( The sitting was closed at 9.55 p.m. )
Opening of the Session
I declare the 2001-2002 session of the European Parliament open .
Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
( The Minutes were approved )
Mr President , I rise to ask whether you share my concern about the recent decision of the European Court of Justice in the Bernard Connolly case .
Do you agree with me that this is an outrageous affront to free speech and that it flies directly in the face of the so-called Charter of Fundamental Rights ?
If so , will you please write to the European Court of Justice expressing our concern over this issue .
We have taken note of your comment , Mr Helmer .
Mr President , I addressed the House in January on the issue of the frequency of flight cancellations in Amsterdam .
I said then that one in two flights were being cancelled .
Well , the same thing happened again yesterday : once again , the flight from Amsterdam was cancelled .
I would ask the President to come to a better arrangement with Air France .
We will do something about it , Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel .
Decision on urgent procedure
Chairman of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development . Mr President , the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development rejects the request of the Council for urgent procedure .
It is our opinion that we have time to write a proper report .
We will not delay with this report as there are agreements among the parliamentary groups that we will complete this report by May and put it to the vote in Parliament in May , so that there will be sufficient time to vote on this matter .
Another reason why we do not want an urgent procedure is because , as you know , in Nice we were not able to secure participation for the European Parliament in decision-making in the agricultural sphere .
If we agree to an urgent procedure now , we would relinquish the possibility of participating , as we would then be out of the picture altogether .
It is our opinion , however , that the Council is very divided on this issue and that the decisive proposals and decisive formulas for compromise must be found by the European Parliament . I therefore ask that the request for urgent procedure be rejected .
( Parliament rejected the request for urgent procedure )
Agenda
I would like to remind you that , yesterday , Parliament adopted the decision , in principle , to include Council and Commission statements on foot-and-mouth disease on the agenda .
Since the agenda is extremely full , the only way to include this point without having to remove something else would be to cut short Question Time .
Therefore , with the agreement of the other institutions , I propose the following change to the agenda for tomorrow 's sitting :
5.30 p.m. to 6.15 p.m. : Council and Commission statements on foot-and-mouth disease , followed by a 30 minute debate .
Moreover , I propose not to follow the statements with the tabling of motions for resolution ;
6.15 p.m. to 7 p.m. : Question Time to the Council .
Are there speakers for and against the motion ?
Mr President , I think that is a good suggestion .
We discussed this yesterday .
We were fairly unanimous in the opinion that we should amend the original decision of the Conference of Presidents to bring it up to date .
When something is done for current reasons , then , of course , something else is bound to suffer as a result .
That is clear .
We do not gladly forgo Question Time , but if that is the only option , then I fully support it on behalf of my parliamentary group , too .
Mr President , while I may not see any other option at the moment either , I would nevertheless like to protest against the fact that Question Time increasingly seems to be regarded as fair game , so to speak , when it comes to scheduling . In other words , every time there is a bottleneck , Question Time is cut short .
I do not think this is right , as Question Time is safeguarded in the Treaties .
It is a fundamental parliamentary right .
I think it is ridiculous that we always cut corners in this area .
Members submit their questions within the time stipulated and have a right to receive answers to those questions .
( Parliament approved the amendment to the agenda )
Carriers ' liability
The next item is the report ( A5-0069 / 2001 ) by Mr Kirkhope , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the initiative of the French Republic for adoption of a Council directive concerning the harmonisation of penalties imposed on carriers transporting into the territory of the Member States third ­ country nationals lacking the documents necessary for admission [ 10701 / 2000 - C5-0470 / 2000 + 14074 / 2000 - C5-0005 / 2001 - 2000 / 0822 ( CNS ) ] .
Mr President , this debate on my report is most timely , coming as it does only two days ahead of the first formal Justice and Home Affairs Council under the Swedish Presidency .
Progress on the directive and framework decision setting common penalties for facilitating entry and residence in the EU will be on the agenda at that Council meeting .
When I was the UK Minister responsible for carriers ' liability and other immigration issues , I always found that although the UK had strict rules on carriers ' liability the system itself was open to criticism for being to some extent unbalanced and unfair .
Some carriers were exempt from attention and in the EU as a whole the discrepancies between the way different nation States treated this issue led to loopholes and weaknesses in what should be an area of cooperation and coordination .
Because the burden-sharing was clearly unfair , we have an opportunity here .
The French Presidency took the initiative but I hope my report has improved upon that initiative in a way that will be seen to be fair and reasonable in dealing with what is undoubtedly a very difficult problem .
My report ensures that carriers ' liability extends to all transport to the EU of third-country nationals who are undocumented .
That is fair and , although individual carriers ' groups will be upset that there should be any liability at all , if it is spread across all the responsible carriers it will help them all .
I also believe , however , that the responsibility of carriers should be limited .
Some have suggested that they should actually be required to retransport the people they have carried or remedy the situation .
That would be draconian and excessive .
Carriers should , of course , report the matter to the police or other appropriate authorities , who would then take the necessary steps .
It is only fair that , if an individual is subsequently granted asylum , the penalty on the carrier should be repaid .
That has not been the case up to now but it is included in my report .
The final point is that penalties must be approximated throughout Europe .
At present some countries have no penalty whatsoever , some impose a very small fine and in some countries the fines are perhaps too penal .
Approximating the fines will help to stop this activity and make people work together .
It is important that we deal with this matter .
Carriers must not be left alone ; the authorities have responsibilities too .
We wish to be humanitarian but this is an issue that can and must be dealt with by the EU as a whole .
On that basis , I commend my report to the House .
Mr President , the illegal trafficking in human beings has become one of the most horrendous crimes that we see and it must be tracked down and eradicated through the law and through international cooperation .
The European Union governments committed themselves to this in the Tampere conclusions and it also requires the necessary cooperation of the countries of origin and especially operators involved in the transport of passengers .
The problem is how to harmonise the various legislation of the Member States and to seek formulas for approximation .
There is no doubt that transporters have to take on the obligation to verify whether foreign nationals meet entrance requirements .
The formula proposed by the present initiative to establish a minimum fine of no less than EUR 5 000 per person transported does not seem unreasonable . We should also , however , impose the confiscation of vehicles used by transporters , not merely as a possibility but as a mandatory penalty .
It also seems necessary to ensure that the transportation of people who may be eligible , under the Geneva Convention , to apply for asylum , should not be punishable .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in summary , the Union ' s governments should make the greatest possible efforts so that transporters , border police and customs police fulfil their obligations in a duly coordinated fashion , and prevent mafia networks from trafficking in human beings .
This is not the only way to combat illegal human trafficking .
We must share responsibility for this serious problem which the whole of European society is obliged to confront .
It is therefore urgent , ladies and gentlemen , that this initiative , which we have been discussing for several months , should become reality as soon as possible .
Mr President , I would like firstly to acknowledge the work and efforts of Mr Kirkhope .
In particular , I acknowledge the difficulties we know he has faced during his work on this initiative .
But this lack of a clear approach and these difficulties which Mr Kirkhope has experienced , have largely been due to the lack of clarity and the changes which the Council has introduced into the text , confirming that there is no unanimity on this issue .
This makes work very complicated , not only for Mr Kirkhope , but for the whole of this House and , of course , for those of us in the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs who have tried to improve the text .
We must remember that the European Council , at its meeting in Tampere of October 1999 , as we all know , agreed that the different but closely related issues of asylum and immigration require the creation of a European Union common policy , and elements were established which should include cooperation with countries of origin , a common European asylum system , the fair treatment of nationals of third countries and the management of migration flows .
Also highlighted was the need to adopt a broad focus on the management or regulation of migration flows , including political issues , human rights issues , development issues and , of course , the fight against illegal immigration and human trafficking , which involves the countries of origin and of transit .
For all of these reasons , I believe it is essential , not only in the case of this initiative , but of others which we are going to deal with next today , and of those which we are no doubt going to continue debating over the coming years , that the European Union adopt clear and fair principles which , of course , comply with the United Nations Geneva Convention of 1951 .
The European Union ' s response to illegal immigration should not be restricted exclusively to strictly controlling it .
We must not shirk our responsibilities for defending and promoting human rights .
These rights must be reflected in this initiative .
We must regulate migratory flow through all the mechanisms at our disposal , but we must accept that a sufficient number of people can be received so as to prevent illegal immigration and eliminate the mafias that control it .
I would like to remind this House of Article 31 of the Geneva Convention , which states that there must be a real and well-founded fear of persecution in order to justify illegal entry into the territory of a country of asylum .
In these cases , such people may use false documents as the only way to escape from imminent threats to their life or freedom .
We must therefore guarantee that carriers are exempted from penalties in relation to asylum seekers with a view to creating an area of freedom , security and justice .
Our objective is to improve the management of migratory movements within a framework of close cooperation with the countries of origin and of transit , stepping up the fight against this type of immigration and combating the criminal elements involved , while at the same time safeguarding the rights of the victims .
It is a pity that this text presented by the Swedish Presidency does not offer any real progress in relation to the initial text of the French initiative .
Unfortunately , the reality of immigration requires global , coherent and coordinated initiatives and not one-off actions , like this one , which is limited to implementing Article 26 of the Schengen Agreement .
It is essential that we safeguard the institution of asylum .
We must exempt carriers who transport foreign nationals from penalties , if those foreign nationals then seek asylum once arriving in the receiving country , even if the request is subsequently rejected . Nor can we oblige carriers to examine the motives of the asylum seeker and thereby perform the role which falls to the Member States .
We have therefore deemed it necessary to request the withdrawal of the present text in the hope of achieving a better initiative , which would contribute to the creation of a real Community policy on this issue .
Mr President , two factors play a role in this proposal .
The first one is to crack down on the smuggling of human beings as an element of organised crime .
There is broad consensus that we need to make every effort to prevent the systematic organisation of illegal immigration .
All too often do we read and see accounts of human beings being treated in a most degrading manner .
The example of the Dover Chinese has left us all with a sick feeling in our stomachs .
The other element is the right to asylum .
People who escape poverty , misery or war cannot be blamed for their actions .
What would we do in the same situation ?
Europe has always adopted a humanitarian stance , and it should stay that way .
In other words , we must strike a balance between upholding the Geneva Convention relating to the status of refugees on the one hand and cracking down on crime on the other .
In this respect , another factor comes into play with regard to this proposal .
Today ' s proposal is not about whether we should or should not introduce penalties for carriers .
All Schengen countries have had such a scheme in place for many years and apply it .
But the non-Schengen countries too , such as Great Britain , as stated earlier by the rapporteur , and Canada , for example , apply similar penalty mechanisms .
Today ' s proposal only aims to harmonise these penalties .
All in all , the ELDR Group is of the opinion that these two factors must be brought into closer harmony with each other .
That is why we have tabled Amendment No 11 by Mr Watson and Baroness Ludford , on the basis of which this penalty scheme does not apply if a person is seeking asylum .
We hope that this amendment will be adopted and therefore consider the harmonisation to be acceptable as a whole .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on the subject of the Kirkhope report , I would like to say that the problem must indeed be addressed .
However , my group has a number of concerns : we must avoid a situation where the innocent become the victims , namely carriers and freight carriers in general .
They are often under heavy social pressure , must adhere to certain times and are sometimes oblivious to the fact that they are transporting people .
Carriers may be middlemen in the criminal network , in which case they should be penalised for the trafficking in , and smuggling of , human beings .
But they can also help combat the criminal network by reporting the fact that there are people being transported in their lorries illegally .
However , the carrier may also be a taxi driver who picks up people in Sangatte or the centre of Calais , for example , and takes them over the border .
Should he perhaps check their documents ?
Additional problems can occur for people who are in fact travelling with documents , but ones which are difficult to verify .
Another scenario is of people hitching a lift and declaring that they will be seeking asylum , but not doing so immediately and disappearing underground .
I would like to be clear about who will be checking all these documents in future .
In my opinion , there are not enough people available to check all documents .
Mr President , this proposal is about dealing with symptoms of an exceptionally serious disease .
Unfortunately , it is a proposal which not only ignores the disease but also exacerbates both the symptoms and the disease .
The idea , of course , is that it should act as a deterrent , but I should like to know whom it is imagined will be deterred .
Whom is it imagined will be intimidated by this proposal ?
Those who think it will act as a deterrent are the humanitarian organisations , church people and those who have their hearts in the right place and who have to account for where their money comes from and how they use it .
Whom is it imagined will profit from this ?
It will be the Mafia and other unscrupulous people .
Take a country like Afghanistan which is now almost surrounded by closed borders .
Pakistan does not want to take any more refugees .
There is no room for more camps in the locality , as some of us call it .
The camps cannot hold any more people , but there are always people who are obliged to become refugees , and they have to pay to get out .
Whom do we want them to pay ?
The Mafia , or the church and humanitarian organisations ?
If we increase the penalty , then we see the price rise .
People who have to become refugees will pay dearly for the proposal we are discussing now .
A heavier penalty will also mean that there will be fewer suppliers in this market .
Fewer people will offer to help future refugees .
Those who remain will be the Mafia .
They will be able to charge their own price , and they will eventually have a monopoly over this area .
I understand that there are Member States which are very worried about this proposal .
I understand that the Swedish Presidency is alarmed by it .
I would urge them very strongly to use their right of veto in the Council and put a stop to it .
In addition , I would recommend that , in the discussion of the proposal , at least two things are ensured .
Firstly , a distinction should be drawn between organisations which intervene for money and for profit , and organisations which do so for humanitarian and compassionate reasons .
This distinction crucially determines the situation into which we put refugees .
Secondly , I think that it is important that we do not pass on our responsibility to just any old carriers .
It cannot be right for some employee of Sabena , Air France or SAS to be made responsible for assessing what should happen in an asylum case .
That is our own responsibility .
Mr President , the world is full of conflict and dictatorship , hardship and poverty and it is the innocent victims who pay the price .
Organised crime gangs with vast resources at their disposal are operating with impunity .
We need more international cooperation between law enforcement agencies .
It is no secret that in some countries politicians and the police are profiting from people-trafficking and tipping traffickers off when operations are about to be mounted against them .
Many of the issues being debated this morning , such as immigration , temporary protection for displaced persons and the level of harmonised penalties to be imposed on carriers transporting people without the necessary documents , are bound up with this dark world of conflict and criminal opportunism .
In the last ten years there has been an unprecedented rise in forced and voluntary migration worldwide .
The conflicts in the former Yugoslavia and Kosovo and elsewhere led to sudden large population movements and the need for temporary protection .
At the same time , asylum issues are growing in importance .
Last year 390 000 people applied for asylum in the European Union .
The United Nations estimates that the modern slave trade is now worth GBP 5 billion and 10 % of illegal entrants to Europe come via the Balkan route .
According to the UNHCR my own country , Ireland , came third in Europe after Slovenia and Belgium in the number of asylum seekers it received last year , compared to the size of the total population .
Asylum seekers in Europe were mainly from the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia , Iraq and Afghanistan .
The number of applications from Iranians more than doubled .
These people do not get the welcome in Ireland that one would expect , especially considering our own history of migration .
It must reluctantly be said that the Irish have been less than generous in their acceptance of the population movements affecting them .
It is a new phenomenon to us , but it saddens me to see people that I believed to be decent and compassionate acting in a racist and xenophobic way - and that includes many of the people in my own constituency .
I say that with deep regret .
Mr President , on behalf of the Members of the Bonino List , I would like to announce that we are going to vote against the Kirkhope report and against the French Presidency 's proposal , which is yet another repressive proposal on migration .
There is no doubt that the considerations expressed by Mrs Cerdeira , Mrs Sörensen and Mrs Frahm and by the last speaker appear to be well-founded , but in order to be able to evaluate the report and the proposal , we need to take into account a question of principle , and that is that we have reached the point where we are going to have to resort to fragmentation on the issue of immigration policy , for otherwise we would have to admit , or rather the Council , above all , would have to admit that it is unable to regulate this phenomenon or rather that it failed to predict what might happen , that it failed to prevent it and that it is still unable to regulate it through government proposals .
We are bombarded by proposals from the Council and the individual Member States which , on the one hand , say they want to create a common , overall immigration policy while , on the other hand , they are integrating and harmonising areas of repressive law , without defining in any way the contents and criteria which will be - or rather which ought to be - at the basis of the future European immigration policy .
We do not feel that the report and the proposal in question can make any contribution to the quest for an immigration policy ; on the contrary , in our opinion , it is precisely these proposals which contribute to events such as the Dover incident , where human lives were lost .
We are just helping the mafia to grow richer .
Mr President , I would like to call to mind once again that the French initiative before us is aimed at combating illegal immigration , and I would like to thank Mr Kirkhope expressly for his balanced report .
The idea is to prevent illegal immigration attempts from the very outset - as a rule in the person ' s home country .
At present , carriers are indirectly encouraging illegal immigration in that no checking of travel documents is carried out .
An attempt to enter illegally cannot be detected by the border authorities until the point of arrival in a Member State of the EU .
A simple and efficient solution is being proposed here by the Commission .
The carriers should check on departure whether passengers have the necessary travel documents or visas and , if need be , refuse to carry the people concerned .
To guarantee that these checks are carried out and at the same time take steps to discourage people from knowingly abetting illegal immigration , uniform fines should be introduced in the EU .
This is the only way to ensure a common and coherent stance as regards illegal immigration .
The proposal that the fines should be waived if a request for asylum is made , however , is counterproductive , since as a rule asylum is almost always requested .
For this reason , the fine imposed on the carrier should only be refunded if the request for asylum is subsequently granted .
It is perfectly reasonable to expect carriers to check the documents required for entry into the destination country along with their travel tickets or flight tickets .
This must be made to apply to all types of passenger carriers , including railway companies .
The carrier cannot , on the other hand , be expected to take charge of passengers ' return transportation .
This should be handed over to the national police or other appropriate authority .
This is the only way to ensure that the persons concerned are really returned in a proper manner .
A criticism that may be levied at this proposal too , however , is that important aspects of a common policy on immigration and asylum should be considered within the framework of an overall concept and not sneaked into the legislative process prematurely as individual measures .
Mr President , firstly , I would like to associate myself with my group ' s concern at this proliferation of partial and fragmented measures , which are sometimes incompatible with the Treaties and almost always incompatible with the Community approach , and about which we are uncertain as to whether they come from the Member States or from the Council .
As some speeches have demonstrated , these responses are dangerous because they offer false and apparently simple solutions to problems which are real and complex .
I believe these types of proposal - and we shall see more in the course of the morning - are completely unviable without a global framework which implements the decisions of the European Council in Tampere . It must implement all of them , as the Commission is trying to do .
The Council ' s tendency to introduce repressive aspects , when the reference frameworks for an essential common immigration policy are still not clear , is a problem , Mr President .
The Commission has presented us with a document which intends to deal with the problem of human trafficking .
I would like the Commission to also provide us with a document which defines both human trafficking and common penalties , and that this should fall within the framework of a common immigration policy .
Mr President , we are going to penalise carriers who carry people lacking the appropriate documents .
This is good .
All traffickers in human beings know that they are committing a crime .
Absolutely all of them know it .
I do not believe , however , that we are going to stop them through this kind of measure .
I regret the rapporteur ' s position on this issue , because our committee has normally shown a degree of unanimity in not accepting this kind of proposal .
Furthermore , with regard to this one , I have certain particular concerns which have been expressed here : the increased responsibility for control on the part of private individuals , and the serious and real problem of refugees .
I do not believe that carriers are guardian angels and they are not going to accept the possibility of penalties when they are helping people who are truly in danger .
I think we should bear this in mind .
Mr President , my group has therefore decided , by majority , to request the rejection of this proposal and for the French and Swedish Presidencies to ask the Commission to present a global proposal on a future common immigration policy for the Union .
Mr President , first of all , I am not against cooperation against organised crime and illegal immigration in itself , but I am totally opposed to carriers ' liability in principle .
I believe it is a back-door privatisation of immigration procedures and , as others have said , it passes the responsibility for checking documents to check-in staff or drivers rather than leaving it with official immigration staff who should be well trained in a non-racist and humane way .
It is a pity that this service was left out of the Article 13 anti-discrimination directive by the Council .
I object strongly to the backing-winners approach of ' your money back ' if you have transported a winner in the asylum-seeking stakes .
Like others , I also believe that this is an initiative which is wrong in pragmatic terms , being part of a piecemeal approach to creating a common immigration policy , which we have seen far too much of in this House already .
We must have the framework first and then look at how it is best implemented and whether such harmonisation is appropriate .
This fragmented approach is neither coherent nor sensible .
I would commend to the House the amendment which has been supported by three groups : Amendments Nos 10 , 11 and 13 .
There are other amendments to this report also worthy of consideration .
I shall be supporting Amendment No 12 .
Mr President , the Kirkhope report is not a contribution towards a progressive common policy on asylum and refugees .
The obligation laid down in the Schengen Convention to return passengers , a practice that has failed and has quite rightly been condemned by church and human rights organisations , is to be extended and tightened .
Airline staff are already being forced into the role of auxiliary police as a result of it .
The Member States are simply creating the conditions that guarantee the profits of the gangs that engage in human trafficking .
If carriers who fail to meet their so-called obligations will in future be expected to pay a fine of up to EUR 5 000 , one can imagine where this will lead .
The EU will become even more of a community of closed doors .
This is surely not the way in which we want to deal with refugees and immigrants in future .
More than 2 000 people lost their lives last year on the external borders of the Union , according to the estimates of the anti-racist human rights organisation UNITED .
This is a situation that is intolerable in the extreme .
If we want to go down the road of common European framework legislation in matters relating to asylum , then we must also see to it that asylum-seekers are able to come to us .
Otherwise , any directive , even one that is formally based on the Geneva Convention on refugees , is not worth the paper it is written on and fundamentally violates the spirit of the Convention .
Please allow me to conclude with a remark about my own country .
Unfortunately , the German Interior Minister today is one of the most important protagonists for a European policy of closed doors .
Germany is blocking efforts in almost all areas to make refugee and immigration policy more humane .
Every proposal from the Commission that moves in this direction is rejected by the German Interior Minister .
A proposal like the one we have before us on the table today would undoubtedly be supported without reservation by Mr Schily , since he breathes the spirit of defensive measures and tightened controls .
I call upon all of you here not to allow the spirit of a Europe of closed doors and defences against people who seek our help to win the day .
Vote against the Kirkhope report !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there is absolutely no question that we are all in favour of sensible management and control of immigration , including by means of protecting the external borders of the Union .
I believe that we are all in agreement as regards this and that there is no need to argue about it .
However , I think we also agree , on the other hand , - and Mr Kirkhope especially , as a former British Home Affairs Minister , will agree with me here - that we will ultimately not achieve very much with all these individual measures and that we are dealing with an area in which we are not seeking to solve the basic problems but , by taking small steps , at least to achieve something .
If this is the case , then it is also clear that our discussion must be as free from ideology as possible .
If we also agree , then , that we want an ideology-free discussion and we know that illegal immigration can never , in fact , be completely prevented - in other words , there will always be illegal immigration , no matter what happens - then , of course , we have to admit that we can ultimately achieve very little with penalties for carriers alone .
If we are in agreement about this too , then we must also acknowledge , Mr Kirkhope , that if we want to do something , then we have to engage in discussions with the carriers themselves .
I am currently engaged in discussions with representatives of the international transport trade unions and I think there is still room for finding common ways forward on this .
But when one speaks with these companies , Mr Kirkhope , one realises that your proposals are not at all helpful and that they attempt to frame the French initiative , which itself was already rejected by the carriers , even more restrictively .
At this point , I ask myself why we are dealing at all with a report that no one supports .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , not everything that is legal is also legitimate . Not everything that is illegal is also illegitimate .
We have spoken a great deal here today about crime .
In my opinion , however , it is not a crime to help needy people who wish to enter the EU actually to do so , simply because this is illegal ; the crime is the closed-doors policy of the EU .
This is acknowledged even by the UNHCR .
In a study of those who traffic in human beings , the UNHCR found that the problem lies with the fortress policy of the EU and that the only way to change this situation is to open the borders further , not to introduce measures against the so-called smugglers .
There is a second problem that I would like to raise in connection with this report , which wants to call the carriers to account to a greater extent .
In Germany this has led to racist behaviour , and has even led the authorities to call upon taxi drivers to behave in a racist manner .
They have said that you can tell if someone is illegal or not when he is standing on the German-Polish border and wants you to provide him with transport ; taxi drivers themselves have no powers to check these people ' s papers .
They have been told that these people are easy to recognise !
No human being is illegal , and one cannot possibly tell whether or not a human being is in an illegal situation .
A final point that has made me very sceptical is that , at the time when there were still two Germanies , the GDR and the FRG , in the 1970s , Germany ' s supreme court reached a decision stating that people smuggling was legitimate , in other words exactly what I was talking about , and that it was even legitimate to demand money for this .
Commercial assistance to refugees , therefore , which you are more or less criminalising here , was at that time highly commended .
This makes me fear that the whole issue is being exploited , that we do not dare to take action against the refugees and those who have been made illegal , and therefore need new victims .
This is why you are seeking out those who assist refugees , irrespective of whether or not they are being paid .
It is they who need our support so that more people are able to cross the border cheaply .
Mr President , may I start with a remark on procedure .
These debates in Parliament on initiatives from Member States are somehow incomplete because there is a piece missing .
The author of the initiative does not take the floor and does not address the arguments of Parliament .
The Commission , I must tell you very frankly , is in a very awkward situation in these debates because we are not the authors of these initiatives .
We do not even have the right to present an amended proposal , we just participate in the debate .
So , it is difficult for the Commission to take the floor and defend the proposal , or attack the proposal , because , up to a certain point , we are sidelined in this debate .
Of course , I share your concern that a piecemeal approach is not the adequate way of addressing this very sensitive issue of illegal immigration .
We have tried to give some support to a coordinated and integrated approach to illegal immigration and to immigration as a broader issue but we need to address the initiatives that Member States raise such as the current one .
Therefore the Commission will confine itself to three main remarks .
The first , which perhaps is a pure truism , is that the issue of carriers ' liability is a very complex and sensitive one .
Like some of the previous speakers , the Commission thinks that carriers ' liability may be an efficient tool in fighting illegal immigration but the effectiveness of carriers ' liability depends to a large extent on a well-balanced approach .
Such a well-balanced approach is extremely difficult to achieve because it is necessary to take into account the legitimate interests of all sides , not only the Member States but also the persons in need of humanitarian protection , and the interests of the transport industry .
Your discussion this morning and the discussion that is going on in the Council have shown that it is extremely difficult to strike a balance which is acceptable to everyone .
I do not think that we are privatising the fight against illegal immigration .
I must say that I see it very differently .
I think that the management of immigration falls within the responsibility of Member States , of public authorities , but we have to call upon civil society to be engaged in the management of immigration .
This broad concept brings not only the responsibility of carriers but also the commitment of NGOs into the common management of immigration policy .
So , we have one strict criterion to analyse the French proposal .
The initiative should be welcomed if it provides added value to the already existing provisions of Article 26 of the Schengen implementing convention .
The draft we are considering today is only a first step .
In the long run it will be necessary to go further and look coherently at all means of transport including freight transport .
Therefore , the Commission , for its part , will assume its responsibility on this issue and we will try to prepare the ground in close cooperation with all interested parties for a more harmonised European approach .
We think that we will be able to bring along a proposal covering all means of transport and built upon close cooperation with humanitarian organisations , with the carriers themselves , and , of course , with law enforcement agencies .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
Temporary protection for displaced persons
The next item is the report ( A5-0077 / 2001 ) by Mr Wiebenga , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a Council directive on minimum standards for giving temporary protection in the event of a mass influx of displaced persons and on measures promoting a balance of efforts between Member States in receiving such persons and bearing the consequences thereof [ COM ( 2000 ) 303 - C5-0387 / 2000 - 2000 / 0127 ( CNS ) ] .
Mr President , I concur with what Commissioner Vitorino stated a moment ago , namely that , essentially , the EU Member States have failed to set up a European asylum policy .
In Tampere in 1999 , the government leaders may have been brimming with good intentions , but they never got beyond drawing up a wish list .
The European Commission ' s scoreboard , dating back to 2000 , lists the necessary measures in a more readily understood format .
However , it already appears that the Council meeting of Ministers for Justice will fall short of the goals which have been set .
This also applies to the setting up of a reception scheme for displaced persons .
The present draft directive is the third proposal which is being presented to the European Parliament , no less than four years after the first one in 1997 .
The European Parliament endorsed the first two , but the Council of Ministers is struggling to reach a decision on these .
It has never been exactly clear which Member States thwarted the proposals , as everything is done behind closed doors .
The Council of Ministers has remained silent , and that is once again European asylum policy at its worst .
This attitude is reprehensible , for we would do well to remind ourselves of what is actually at issue .
This proposal provides for situations such as those which occurred a few years ago in Bosnia and later on in Kosovo , situations in which the mass influx of displaced persons has to be absorbed by the European Union , situations in which people are being driven away from house and home , where villages are burned to the ground and where people are at their wit ' s end .
This affects hundreds of thousands of people at the same time .
Of course , they deserve a dignified reception .
Of course , the European Member States should share out the responsibility fairly and squarely by making sound agreements .
This has not happened to a satisfactory level in the past .
And we can already foresee that , when a similar tragedy soon strikes Macedonia or maybe Algeria , the European Union will , once again , not be prepared .
Mr President , the European Commission has done a good job .
The present proposal outshines the previous two proposals .
The sharing of responsibility among the Member States has now been included in the scheme and is now inextricably linked to it .
That aspect , therefore , will enter into effect at the same time as the rest of the scheme .
And there are many other aspects which have been arranged far more efficiently than in the previous proposals but which I will not elaborate upon at this stage .
That is the good news .
I would now like to mention a few aspects where there is room for improvement .
The first thing that springs to mind is the link with the Geneva Convention relating to the status of refugees , particularly the key principle of it , namely the non- refoulement principle , the principle that refugees cannot simply be returned home .
This must be spelled out more clearly in the proposal .
The Council of Ministers must be tied down to deadlines when it takes decisions on the implementation of the temporary protection of displaced persons , and the European Parliament - this , too , is an old complaint , Mr President - must be more involved in the decision-making process .
The proposal falls short in one area : that of the sharing of responsibility - we used to talk about the sharing of the burden , this is now referred to as the sharing of responsibility - between the Member States .
What is at issue here is which Member States make what effort with regard to the reception of the large numbers of displaced persons .
In the case of Bosnia and Kosovo , countries such as Germany , the Netherlands and Austria received large numbers of displaced persons , whilst other Member States did too little .
The Commission now proposes , first of all , to share the financial burden on the basis of the Refugee Fund .
Mr President , it is my conviction as your rapporteur that this aspect really needs to be reinforced .
This is first of all about implementing the EC Treaty which expressly stipulates that the Council must help strike a balance between the efforts of the Member States in this field .
The word ' balance ' encompasses more than the word ' solidarity ' which is in the proposal at present .
More than anything , we need to distribute the displaced persons across the Member States proportionately : hence Amendments Nos 4 and 11 .
I naturally hope that these will be adopted by this House .
Also , the provision must be deleted whereby Member States can opt out altogether from receiving displaced persons .
Quite the reverse : every Member State must be able to justify its supply of reception facilities very well , and that is set down in Amendments Nos 31 and 32 .
Mr President , all things considered , we have a reasonable proposal before us which this House will hopefully be able to accept .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , behind the incredibly complicated title of the draft directive lies a relatively straightforward problem .
What we are dealing with here is the issue of sharing the burden of receiving refugees from civil wars .
It is as if the awkwardness of the title in itself makes it clear just how uncomfortable the underlying issue is for Europeans .
The way in which Europeans have so far handled the issue of burden sharing can only be described as a complete tragedy .
The problem is one that we have been familiar with for many years .
We know from painful experience what happens when civil wars break out in an area such as the former Yugoslavia , and people flee in their tens and hundreds of thousands - and , of course , they go wherever they can be sure of being safe from persecution and war .
In the past , this has meant especially Austria , but also Italy , the Netherlands and Germany .
In the Bosnian war , for example , my country received more than twice as many refugees as all other countries put together .
This is the reason why those concerned have been pressing for a solution to this problem for years .
But so far this has not been enough to make the Council produce anything more than declarations of solidarity with those receiving refugees .
May I remind you of the very unfortunate attempts of Commissioner Vitorino ' s predecessor , Mrs Gradin .
Those interested might care to take a look at these .
This is why I am grateful to you , Mr Vitorino for taking up these problems energetically after Tampere .
I would like to add that , unlike the previous agenda item , this is not an initiative by a Member State but an initiative of the Commission and the Commissioner responsible .
To that extent , you are also responsible for it .
Much as I welcome what you have done in principle , I also have some objections concerning particular details .
The issue of burden sharing is tied to one single problem .
Will it or will it not be made a rule that all Member States must receive refugees ?
If , Mr Vitorino , you adhere to the principle known as two-sided voluntary action , meaning that refugees should be able to decide for themselves which Member State they wish to enter , and that Member States should only take in refugees voluntarily , then everything will remain exactly as it is and absolutely nothing will change .
The burden of receiving refugees simply cannot be offset by financial contributions .
The first thing that has to happen is that Member States should not to be able to back out by making a financial contribution ; instead it should be obligatory for all Member States actually to take in refugees according to a certain system . This system would , of course , take into account the absorptive capacity of each country and all other conceivable viewpoints ; it would also , of course , ensure that families are not torn apart and also , of course , on a quota basis , take into account the wishes of the refugees themselves .
But it must be laid down in writing that every Member State has a duty to make a personal contribution in terms of receiving refugees .
This is the first weak point in your draft .
Thankfully , this has been corrected by the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , and I hope that Parliament will go along with the opinion of the Home Affairs Committee .
The second point , Mr Vitorino , relates to family reunification .
The indeterminate concept of the family that you use cannot be imposed upon all the Member States .
Those wishing to permit the entry and residence of all eligible relatives in addition to the core family may do so .
Member States cannot , however , be forced to do this ; it must be included on an optional basis .
This is our second serious objection .
Mr President , I wish to begin by congratulating the rapporteur , Mr Wiebenga , on his report , which gets to the heart of the problem we are facing at the moment : temporary protection for people in the most difficult circumstances .
I regret that Mr Nassauer has ignored what the rapporteur said about the use of language and has talked about " burden sharing " , because the issue is actually how different Member States accept their responsibilities and try to treat people in very desperate circumstances fairly .
The rapporteur also referred , quite rightly , to the Kosovo crisis , in which Member States failed to take on their responsibilities and poorer states , such as Albania , were left to deal with large numbers of refugees .
With the new mechanism that should be avoided .
If there is a mass influx of refugees into the Community , Member States will have agreed in advance to share the responsibility .
This temporary protection needs to cover not only spontaneous mass influxes into the Community territory but also non-spontaneous influxes , when people have been airlifted out of difficult areas by Member States , or perhaps other parties , and possibly assisted to come to the EU .
We must ensure that appropriate provisions are in place .
Another very important point on which my group has tabled an amendment , Amendment No 44 , concerns the speed and the workings of the directive .
When a refugee crisis occurs , it is absolutely imperative that the Member States act as quickly as possible .
I applaud the rapporteur for introducing a time limit for the Council decision .
However , my group has tabled an amendment to bring that forward .
We do not believe that three months is acceptable . We are asking that it should be one month .
I am fully aware of the logistical and organisational difficulties that this presents , but action needs to be immediate and an emergency Council meeting is a small price to pay for ensuring that those in need receive protection .
Amendments Nos 45 and 46 concern the rights of individuals .
When they are in Member States they have the right to asylum and protection .
We should ensure that these people are not forced to return to their countries if that is going to create desperate problems for them .
Member States must try to do more to integrate refugees into society .
Young people should be put into education and adults given the opportunity to work as quickly as possible , so they can be seen as active and useful participants in society .
We hope that situations like Kosovo will not happen again , but if they do we must ensure that we are prepared .
My group will be supporting this with the amendments to which I have just referred .

Mr President , I welcome Mr Wiebenga 's report , not only for its strengthening of the practical arrangements for sharing responsibility for Kosovo-type situations which I am sure our citizens can relate to as a demonstration of European solidarity , but also for Mr Wiebenga 's insistence that a regime of temporary protection must not undermine and become a substitute for the Geneva Convention and the rights of beneficiaries to apply for asylum .
Mr Wiebenga has added some useful , strengthening amendments to the clause already in the Commission proposal : for instance , on insisting on non-refoulement , to insist that the Dublin Convention shall not apply and that the host Member State shall consider the asylum application , and on the involvement of UNHCR .
All these are to be welcomed .
I am sorry that the PPE-DE Group insisted on forcing amendments to the article on family reunion .
I feel the clause about unmarried partners which says that Member States may admit an unmarried partner if the legislation of the Member State treats unmarried couples in the same way as married couples is slightly perverse .
I would have thought that it would be rather odd to treat them differently if domestic legislation did not .
The other point I want to make is the contrast between Mr Wiebenga 's report and the previous one by Mr Kirkhope .
Mr Wiebenga 's report is based on a Commission proposal in line with the Tampere conclusions and the scoreboard .
It passed through our Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs constructively , without major dissension and results in a report which sensibly improves the Commission proposals .
What a contrast to the series of Members States ' proposals . Mr Vitorino said politely what many of us in Parliament are saying rather more rudely , that the Council and Member States need to get their act together on asylum and immigration .
Mr Wiebenga 's report has been a model of how we can work constructively between the Commission and Parliament .
All we need is the Council to work as constructively with us .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I should like to congratulate rapporteur Wiebenga on his report .
With the mass influx of immigrants who escaped the conflicts and the attendant dangers in former Yugoslavia , Europe was , for the first time since the Second World War , faced with forced migration on a scale which was , both qualitatively and quantitatively , outside the range of our experience hitherto .
The draft legal framework for temporary protection in the case of mass immigration has been developed in the past decades and varies from Member State to Member State . They apply different social rights schemes which people enjoy during temporary protection .
Some Member States recognise the right to work and family reunification , others do not .
The new Commission proposal includes all the conclusions of the Treaty of Amsterdam ' s implementation and reproduces the discussions in the Council , as well as the response of the Member States to the refugee crisis in and around Kosovo .
The proposal forms part of the recent Commission initiatives with regard to the asylum policy on account of the new Convention .
However , the NGOs have expressed concern that a temporary protection scheme might undermine the international policy for the protection of refugees if no guarantee is given that sufficient precautionary measures have been taken to prevent misuse .
The Commission recognises this risk when it states that temporary protection is a responsibility which is of crucial importance to the European Union , but it needs to spell out that it does not intend to undermine the protection of refugees .
We therefore share the rapporteur ' s opinion that the proposal for a directive contains a considerable number of improvements on the previous two proposals .
The sharing of the burden among the Member States is no longer separate from the stipulations .
Despite this , I would like to quote a critical example : let us not forget the refugees in Sangatte and Calais , who are desperate for temporary protection provision for displaced persons .
Mr President , I should also like to thank the rapporteur for his report and the Commission for the fact that this proposal has finally been presented and will hopefully soon be put into effect .
And I was so glad to hear Mr Nassauer use the word solidarity .
I thought it was a good word until I realised what he meant .
It was solidarity with ourselves .
It is interesting that Mr Nassauer - and the PPE-DE Group , I assume - think that this proposal should primarily be about distributing the burden .
I thought it was supposed primarily to be about saving people 's lives , that is to say the lives of people who are victims of war or civil war or other similar events leading to mass displacement and the need for aid .
It is , of course , absurd , really . The world 's poorest countries in Asia and Africa do not need special rules on mass displacement , but that is what we need in the rich , well-organised EU .
That is how matters stand , however .
The authorities in our countries have not been able to demonstrate sufficient flexibility within the present rules , and this proposal is therefore clearly necessary .
There are still a few problems with the proposal , I think , but , when all is said and done , my group will end up supporting the report and , thus , this initiative , because it is so patently necessary that we get it implemented quickly .
And I will , at any event , do everything I can to prevent the issue of burden sharing ' s being made into something which can turn victims of catastrophe into hostages in our own internal battles and our solidarity with ourselves .
There is a need for solidarity in this world , not with ourselves but with the world outside .
Mr President , I would first like to congratulate the rapporteur on his report , which really addresses the problem , and to thank him for it .
Austria has always played an important part when it comes to receiving refugees and displaced persons , and has also contributed more than its fair share to solving the resultant problems .
I would particularly like to thank Mr Nassauer for adding to what the rapporteur has said in this respect .
However , it is high time a satisfactory pan-European solution was found to this problem . It is not enough just to call for solidarity between all the Member States .
As regards reception of persons by the Member States , the Commission proposal only talks about Community solidarity , but this concept needs to be firmed up in the spirit of Article 63 ( 2 ) ( b ) of the Treaty .
The purpose of the directive as described in Article 1 should also include the idea that displaced persons should be allocated to the Member States with due regard for their absorptive capacity .
However , the solidarity mechanism operating between the Member States should also cover both aspects , that is to say both the financial and personal aspects of solidarity .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , at this point I would like to return to the two points on which we are critical of the Commission proposal .
The first is the issue of dual optionality in the allocation of refugees from civil wars , that is to say the possibility that a refugee has to select a country , and a country 's right to reject any refugee .
The founding fathers created the ' European home ' as a place for solidarity , above all .
This solidarity can still be seen today , for example when European funding is used to support structurally weak regions .
So not only is the call for more equitable burden sharing as regards receiving refugees justified , but also burden sharing itself is an expression of solidarity between the peoples of Europe .
As various Members have already pointed out , only a few Member States bore a share of the burdens resulting from the civil wars in former Yugoslavia .
It is all very easy for Mrs Frahm to talk big , because she comes from a country which has not , so far , exactly distinguished itself when it comes to such acts of solidarity .
Unlike the governments at the Nice Summit , we , as directly elected Members of the European Parliament , are obliged here to overcome national differences and to opt for a European solution founded upon a quota-based allocation of refugees in accordance with Member States ' absorptive capacity .
Otherwise , dual optionality will render the positive approach adopted in the Commission 's proposal superfluous .
The second important point is family reunification .
Here , too , a fundamental principle of our Community is at stake - subsidiarity .
Today it will be decided whether the EU should reserve for itself , in a centralist way , the process of defining and regulating what constitutes a family , or whether in the first place the concept of a nuclear family , which is common to all Member States , should be taken as a basis , with regulations going any further than that being at Member States ' discretion .
The compromise amendment tabled by the rapporteur , Mr Wiebenga , provides for the latter .
This follows this House 's tradition of fighting the attempts of the Brussels bureaucracy to arrogate to itself the powers of the Member States .
Today , you have a chance to demonstrate what this concept of subsidiarity means to you .
I urge you to vote for the fair traditions of this House and for the fundamental principles of our Community of values , and not to be swayed by purely national interests and party political calculations .
I urge you , when it comes to these important issues , to vote for Mr Wiebenga 's compromise amendments .
Mr President , I would firstly like to congratulate the rapporteur on the effort he has made to improve this report .
In recent years , Europe has had to face situations which we thought had been eradicated once and for all in our part of the world .
In view of these events , I believe that we can no longer ignore our moral and political obligation to establish mechanisms to deal with a humanitarian catastrophe , when all other prevention mechanisms fail .
The European Union must act as one on this .
I wish to say on behalf of my group that we are in favour of distributing responsibilities amongst the Member States .
I am not going to use the word burden because , having seen the faces of men and women in refugee camps in Macedonia , who are just like you and me , Mr President , it seems to me to be horrendous and repugnant to call them a burden .
I believe that it in doing this we must take clear account of the situation and show a degree of flexibility , which the rapporteur acknowledges , simply to listen to the will of the refugees and to prevent them , as a result of their temporarily weak position , from effectively becoming a burden to be transported to where we , completely regardless of their views , decide .
I also wish to congratulate the rapporteur on the effort which he has made to clarify the time periods , to clarify that , in this case , it is especially important to respect the time periods within which things are decided , and to support the amendment which our group has presented in order to specify and to reduce these time periods .
In relation to family reunification , I wish to say to Mr Nassauer that I do not understand this obsession you have .
The Right has convinced us , even the most stubborn of the Leftists , that the family is a necessary asset and an important pillar of our society .
Is this only the case for Europeans ?
Mr Nassauer , are you on the Right going to leave your mother or brother in a situation of special need if a violent situation arises in your countries ?
Can we not , for temporary protection , take account of these especially serious situations which can cause particular anguish , and bring these people to the European Union together with their families ?
I truly believe that we can take account of them .
With regard to the definition of the family , it seems to me that the Commission ' s position that each Member State should apply its own definition of the family is more than reasonable and we are going to support this position .
I hope that the Council does not make us wait another four years for a decision on this issue .
I believe that Mr Wiebenga did not realise that he was taking on such a great responsibility when he produced his first report and that he will not mind being rapporteur for this issue for life .
Mr President , I too would like to thank Mr Wiebenga for his sterling work .
I can tell you that it is a very rare occasion indeed when all Dutch groups agree on refugee policy .
Although we offer our unqualified support to the report as a whole , my group would now also like to make a few observations , of which I should like to mention two .
The first concerns the much-debated Article 13 ( 1 ) .
The Commission suggests that Member States which equate unmarried couples with married couples in their national legislation should also do so in the case of family reunification .
It is not , therefore , a matter of imposing family law standards , but about equal treatment within a Member State .
It is , in my view , a modest proposal , but it touches upon an important principle .
I am , therefore , disappointed that this is being played down in the report , more specifically in Amendment No 22 , which turns this modest proposal into an empty statement .
It now claims that Member States are entitled to reunify unmarried couples .
That does not require European agreement , for that is already the case now .
The Commission proposal relies on solidarity among Member States and their generosity in offering reception capacity , but there is no big stick .
The rapporteur attempts to make the reception scheme less non-committal , and I support him on that , but solidarity is not given any financial leverage .
Like the rapporteur and some others here , I am convinced that a sharing of the financial responsibility at European level is necessary to prevent Member States from passing the buck to one another .
I also believe that it is unwise to start moving people around unnecessarily .
Pursuant to Article 24 , the Refugee Fund has to provide for financial solidarity .
But this fund has a maximum of EUR 10 million annually at its disposal for displaced persons .
That just about covers the cost of two tents and a hot-water bottle .
Unless this fund grows substantially , I fear for Europe ' s hospitality .
Mr President , the proposal for a directive defining a European temporary protection regime in the event of a mass influx of displaced persons from third countries replaces the proposals for joint action on the same subject that we discussed in 1997 but that were not implemented because of what I regard as justified reservations on the part of several Member States .
Unfortunately , although today 's proposal is more flexible on certain points , it remains open to several serious criticisms .
The first is that to introduce this temporary protection comes down to creating a second status . That status is parallel to the status of refugee , of beneficiary of political asylum recognised under the 1951 Geneva Convention , but much broader than that .
The beneficiaries under this new system would not just be persons who satisfy very specific criteria for the grant of political asylum but also very broad categories of third-country nationals who apparently had to leave their country of origin for a variety of reasons .
Article 63 ( 2 ) of the Treaty of Amsterdam does indeed provide for the introduction of this kind of regime , but it refers only to temporary protection .
The Commission proposal , however , although theoretically confined to protection for not more than two years , risks creating de facto situations very likely to continue for longer than that , since provision is made only for the voluntary departure of the persons concerned .
We regard that as a serious defect of the Commission 's proposal .
Our second major criticism is that although the States must give their assent to the physical allocation of the protected persons - which represents some progress over the earlier version - the new text seems , in fact , to absolve the Member States of their responsibility .
This problem could have been avoided if the basic decision by the Council to launch the temporary protection regime had been taken unanimously .
But the Commission proposal only provides for a qualified majority decision , which , in our view , was not legally necessary and basically seems quite inadequate for such a serious issue .
Mr President , within this disordered debate on certain aspects of immigration , we are dealing with a proposal for a directive of great importance because it attempts to regulate the fair and coordinated efforts which the Member States are obliged - and I stress , obliged - to make to receive displaced people and refugees from third countries .
Let us not lose sight of the fact that we are dealing with a humanitarian problem of the highest order .
Nobody wants to abandon their land , their culture or their family .
The first question is therefore how to understand and show solidarity , so that we can assist these people and make their terrible situation less burdensome .
As well as immediately meeting their humanitarian needs , we also face the problem of where to place these refugees , as this debate is demonstrating .
Is it a proper solution to distribute them numerically according to a system of quotas , thereby replacing the two-fold principle of respecting the will of the Member States and of the refugees themselves ?
I sincerely believe not .
Would it not be fairer to use the European Fund for Refugees , as Spain proposed , and give it more financial resources than it has at the moment , in order to help the Member States receiving more refugees ?
I believe so .
The problem is also that a great number of asylum requests are rejected because they do not come from genuine political refugees , but from economic immigrants .
As is also being demonstrated here , we are facing a very confused debate in which there is no definition of the different types of economic immigration as opposed to those involving asylum for humanitarian or political reasons .
The issue is to resolve the problems created by the current asylum procedure , and thereby make the number of asylum seekers much more reasonable and make the distribution of responsibilities fairer .
Finally , ladies and gentlemen , I am pleased that those people who have committed criminal acts for supposedly political reasons have been excluded from temporary protection .
This is a further step by the European Union in the fight against terrorism .
The amendment presented in committee by the Spanish delegation of our group endorses a vote in favour of the report despite some of our reservations on certain aspects of it .
Mr President , the draft directive on displaced persons represents a new step towards European asylum policy .
But we are a long way off the ultimate goal , not least because the Council has hitherto appeared unable to reach decisions on Commission proposals .
As far as I am aware , there is still no agreement on the directive on family reunification within the Council ' s working party .
The Council will perhaps be able to deal with this temporary protection directive more promptly , as it is not being ' hindered ' by a codecision procedure in this case .
It is , however , questionable how much further problems have to escalate before the Council can rise above the mutual differences and can adopt a truly European approach .
Despite this , I should like to identify two positive aspects today .
First of all , the drive with which the Commission acquits itself of its task as legislator in the European Union and the care it applies to keeping the balance between the national interests and the ultimate goal of Tampere are quite remarkable .
Commissioner Vitorino deserves every support for his excellent helmsmanship in this matter .
Secondly , the content of the directive itself is balanced and therefore by and large acceptable .
First and foremost , it is stated that the rights and duties of displaced persons should as far as possible approximate to those of people with a different residence status .
In addition , further to its debate , the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs has called for more light to be shed on the relationship between the displaced persons status and the regular asylum procedure .
They should not be mutually exclusive .
At the end of the day , the use of the temporary protection instrument is merely a contingency measure which should not undermine the individual right to asylum .
Furthermore , I am delighted that it has been clearly laid down that all Member States have to contribute their proportionate share to the actual reception of displaced persons .
I thank Mr Wiebenga for amending the directive to that effect .
However , I also share Mrs Terrón ' s and Mrs Buitenweg ' s severe criticism of the compromise , which is very disappointing indeed and should not really call itself a compromise , as far as the definition of " the family " is concerned .
We have not heard the last of this .
Mr President , the Italians have an expression which I have always loved tutto il mondo e i paesi and today we are talking about a variety of legislation relating to what is clearly one of the most passionately debated and in many cases inadequately legislated for issue in our Community .
The tragedy of people cut up in civil wars , which is the main focus obviously of Mr ­ ­ ­ Wiebenga 's report , is only one of the issues we are facing .
Many colleagues today have spoken on the basis of experience in their own countries of how these issues are handled .
For far too long the Commission or the Council , holding its meetings in secret and expressing solidarity very often between themselves about these issues , have covered up what we really need to know about future policy on immigration , asylum , refugees , etc . , within the Community .
Coming as I do from a small country on the periphery where very often the difficulties of getting there have prevented us from being a focal point for those seeking asylum or refugee status , I sometimes feel uncomfortable when having to debate these issues with colleagues who have much greater experience and whose countries are called upon very often to share a huge amount of the responsibility for people tragically displaced by civil war , as has recently happened .
Of course we share our responsibility .
We have to .
It is our duty as one human being to another , but what we must absolutely insist on in all our immigration policies , not just in the context of mass displacements of people in the event of civil war , is that we must have a much better thought-out , much more humane and generous , and , above all , merciful policy towards those who come to us for help in these tragic situations .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Wiebenga , on the work he has carried out and on his clear desire to improve the text which we have been presented with .
I also believe it is fair to congratulate Commissioner Vitorino , because it is evident that the proposal for a directive , the draft presented to us today , greatly improves on the proposals which have previously been presented to this House .
Although other Members have highlighted important aspects of the issues we are dealing with , I do not wish to ignore certain aspects which I consider to be fundamental .
I believe that it is important to stress the guarantee of the right of these displaced persons to family reunification on the same basis as holders of residency documents and , although this may be a personal view , I believe that the issue of unmarried couples has not been sufficiently dealt with .
We understand the difficulties which have arisen in studying this problem and we will support any steps which may lead to a solution .
Another issue which I feel to be important is clarity on the distribution of responsibilities between the Member States in the event of a massive influx of displaced persons .
The Member States must deal with this type of situation in a homogenous and cooperative way .
It is also important to make it clear that people who have benefited from the temporary protection system also have the right to make a request for asylum and that the Geneva Convention must be respected to the full , including its principle of not returning asylum seekers to their country of origin .
The role of the European Parliament must be strengthened and , in cases of temporary protection , it is essential that it be consulted .
We must all prevent visa restrictions , which were imposed in the case of Kosovo , for example , which brought shame on every one of us .
I believe that on this occasion Parliament has done its job .
The Commission has also demonstrated its will and done its job .
We just have to hope now that the Council does its duty .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in our view the Commission 's proposal for a directive on temporary protection in the event of a mass influx of displaced persons forms part of a global vision of how to establish a European asylum system .
The European Union needs an exceptional mechanism at its disposal so that it can react rapidly to mass influxes and respond immediately to the need to protect displaced persons , a situation we have seen in Bosnia and Kosovo .
The object of this mechanism is to ensure that the asylum system can work over the long term , while also ensuring that it is consistent with access to the normal asylum procedure and with the Geneva Convention .
We based our proposal on the idea that Member States must grant temporary protection on the basis of a Council decision , adopted by a qualified majority , that confirms the existence of a mass influx .
That protection is granted for not more than two years , but the Council may also at any time , if the conditions are right , terminate it by joint decision .
I believe that while the directive gives the Member States a degree of flexibility in managing their asylum system for the duration of the temporary protection , it also guarantees the beneficiaries absolute access to the asylum procedure , and at all events does so at the moment when the protection period expires .
We have finally established not only equal rights for those enjoying temporary protection but also principles governing returnees .
In Tampere , the Heads of State and Government emphasised the need to ensure solidarity between the Member States on the question of temporary protection .
And we know that the European Parliament is extremely concerned with this principle .
I believe I discussed it with Mr Nassauer more than seven years ago .
That is why the Commission has endeavoured to give a clear form to the concept of Community solidarity and greater depth to the content of Article 63 ( 2 ) ( b ) , on the balance of effort and responsibility between the Member States .
This solidarity is reflected first of all in the financial aspect , thanks to the links created with the European Refugee Fund .
I know that the financing of that fund is not very ambitious , but perhaps this is an area where it would be more rational to ask how the fund can help to strengthen financial solidarity .
At the same time , let me emphasise , in this proposal we have adhered to the principle of sharing the burden with regard to the physical reception of the refugees .
This solidarity between Member States with regard to reception is reflected in the principle of voluntary action by both sides .
I understand Mr von Boetticher 's problem and even agree with his comment about the difficulties .
The idea of ensuring voluntary action by both sides first came up during the German Presidency and has gained ground .
Of course , it presupposes both that the Member States are willing to take in refugees and that the beneficiaries in their turn are willing to go to the territory of the Member State in question .
That is why , from the outset , the decision to grant temporary protection specifies either the capacity of Member States to absorb refugees or the exceptional reasons that prevent them from taking in any more displaced persons .
But I do want to emphasise that these really must be exceptional reasons .
Basically , refusal to accept new refugees where a decision has been taken to grant temporary protection must be quite exceptional .
Moreover , the concept of voluntary action by both sides introduces a transparent system .
And that transparent decision-making system is essential , for peer-group pressure has a role to play here : it must persuade everyone to agree to cooperate in the matter of reception , including the physical reception of beneficiaries of temporary protection .
I cannot guarantee that the system will work .
But at least we have tried to design an instrument that will guarantee the principle of solidarity in the matter of physical reception , and the principle of financial solidarity .
I warmly thank the Members who have taken part in this debate .
Let me draw particular attention to the contribution made by the rapporteur , Mr Wiebenga , with his excellent report .
If I am a little nervous today it is because he taught me a great deal about the subject and I feel rather like a student facing his professor .
I am a teacher by profession .
So you know what I am talking about .
But in any case I want to say that we have taken careful note of all the amendments that were tabled .
I regard these amendments , even those on solidarity , as a source of inspiration for the several weeks of negotiations that lie before us in the Council , which should produce a final result in May .
At least I hope we will reach a conclusion by the May Council .
Some of your amendments modify the level of beneficiaries ' rights and the Commission remains very keen to see a fair level that cannot be revised downwards .
As for solidarity , we note that some provisions have been strengthened , especially those concerning reception between Member States .
Despite the delicate nature of this question , we are doing our best to find a realistic , fair and , in particular , viable solution .
Once the principle of voluntary action by both sides is respected , some amendments , in spirit if not literally , could , as I said earlier , help bring the negotiations to a final conclusion .
Thank you Commissioner Vitorino .
With regard to your comment on teachers and pupils , there was a brilliant Neapolitan man of the theatre - he was Neapolitan but also Italian and European - who used to say that you can never say you have taken your last exam .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
Visas / Mutual recognition of decisions on expulsion
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the main object of the initiative of the Republic of Finland which we have before us today is to reserve to the Council implementing powers with regard to certain detailed provisions and practical procedures for examining visa applications .
The initiative of the Portuguese Republic in effect pursues the same object , namely to reserve implementing powers to the Council , but this time with regard to border checks and surveillance .
As regards the basic issue , I would call on Parliament to reject both initiatives because in my view they contain four serious political errors .
The first is a political error against the Community spirit and against the spirit of the Treaty of Amsterdam .
When it was decided that under the Treaty of Amsterdam the Schengen acquis would be transferred from the third to the first pillar , this was done in order to remove this matter from the intergovernmental framework and integrate it into the normal legal and institutional framework .
By reserving itself implementing powers , the Council would , in effect , be rejecting the spirit of the Treaty of Amsterdam and , in practice , perpetuating the intergovernmental methods that used to apply .
The second mistake is , I believe , an institutional one .
Let me remind Members that Article 202 of the EC Treaty is not just any old article .
It forms part of the institutional provisions in the strict sense , which the Court of Justice considers should take precedence over other provisions .
In reserving itself implementing powers , in considering that this constitutes a specific case - which , however , it has not supported by a detailed statement of grounds - the Council is in my view taking liberties with a fundamental provision of the Treaty establishing the European Community . That is something I find unacceptable .
The Council committed a third mistake , this time vis-à-vis the Commission .
To justify reserving itself implementing powers , the Council maintains that visas and border control policy are a sensitive area .
That argument does not stand up to analysis , especially when we remember that the regulation laying down a uniform format for visas expressly allows the Commission to take implementing measures , which are in fact secret , in what is clearly a particularly sensitive area .
I would also be interested to know how much longer the Commission of the European Communities will stand by and watch the Council in effect dismantling its powers .
Not only is the Council exercising the power of initiative that belongs to the Commission ; on top of that it now wants to deprive the Commission of the implementing powers conferred on it by the Treaties .
The fourth error concerns Parliament directly .
By reserving itself implementing powers - and I want every Member to realise this - the Council is completely depriving the European Parliament of the information to which it would have been entitled under the usual comitology arrangements .
This refusal to provide information is all the more serious because some decisions already are and will continue to be taken in the framework of procedures classified as confidential .
For example , by virtue of what is known as the prior consultation procedure , certain third-country nationals who wanted to enter an EU country , a Schengen country , would not be able to do so because a country , whose identity we would never know and which would not necessarily be the country of destination , had vetoed that person , for reasons we would never know and that would never have to be justified .
I certainly do not want to create confusion by suggesting that we must have a right to scrutinise individual decisions on each visa application , but I cannot accept the fact that on such fundamental matters , which affect the citizens ' basic freedoms , the Council will never be accountable to anyone either for its priorities or for its selection criteria .
That is not just a democratic deficit , it is a real denial of democracy .
That is why I call on Parliament to follow the unanimous example of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs and quite simply to reject outright the initiatives of the Republic of Finland and the Republic of Portugal .
Mr President , this is probably one of the thinnest reports which this House has dealt with for a long time , but it is hopefully also the last time I am given such an assignment .
If the Socialist Group and the PPE-DE Group so wish , then perhaps even small groups may also be permitted to draw up reports on matters of interest .
This report concerns a Portuguese initiative which tackles one of several problem areas in connection with visa policy .
Unfortunately , however , this proposal - the Portuguese initiative - will create a number of problems because it does not really tie in with the other Schengen rules . Since , moreover , the situation is such that , in a very short time - in April , if I have understood correctly - the Commission is to come up with an initiative tackling all the problems surrounding the freedom to travel within the territory of the Member States , and since the Commission also shares my concern about the problems which the report will create , I very warmly recommend a vote in favour of my report and , thus , the rejection of the Portuguese initiative in favour of the later initiative to be produced by the Commission .
When we deal with these subjects , however , I think it might be a good idea if , once in a while , we were to take stock of what we are actually doing when we take these initiatives , which are , of course , all offshoots of the Schengen Convention and ideas about the ' area of democracy , freedom and justice ' we talk so much about .
The proposals with which we are dealing today and those with which we dealt previously are largely about closing this area of freedom , democracy and justice , which might be said already to be in the process of becoming isolated .
We are , of course , well aware that our part of the world will require a labour force in not very many years ' time .
We are well aware that several Member States are already facing the fact that we need a significant level of immigration if we wish to maintain a standard of living anything like that which we have at present and if , in addition , we aspire to a secure old age in which others work while we , hopefully , have time to ourselves .
That is why it is so incomprehensible that we should continue to keep people out of our area , that we should accept that people will die en route to the EU , that we should be prepared to see the corpses of refugees or of people seeking a better life washed up on the coasts of the EU and that we should prefer to see these people as corpses than as citizens or as useful individuals in our part of the world .
This is amazingly difficult to understand .
My own country , Denmark , is among the worst .
Ministers in positions of responsibility talk about putting refugees on desert islands , and when they talk like that , then the level of debate is as might be expected and anything is suddenly permitted .
In my country , the term cultural struggle has acquired a resonance to the effect that all cultures must be combated if they are not Christian .
The liberals in my country think that all refugees should be assembled in camps in the world 's poorest countries .
In the light of this , I am glad that my country is not involved in the common policy on refugees and , as a result , does not have any influence on those policies the EU is drawing up at the moment for , in spite of everything , the situation is a bit better than if Denmark had had any influence .
When the Wall came down in 1989 , we all believed in a Europe without walls , but we are well on the way to putting walls up .
We are not building them between us , we are building them around us .
We should be asking how it is possible that we , the richest part of the world , so consistently choose repressive solutions .
How can it be believed that an area of democracy , security and justice can be developed when repressive solutions directed against refugees are consistently chosen ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this morning Commissioner Vitorino complained that he had to comment on an initiative that was by no means of his own making .
He is going to be faced with the same problem again , because we are now talking about a French initiative .
It is concerned with mutual recognition of decisions on the expulsion of third-country nationals and it is another case demonstrating that there are good reasons for reserving the power of initiative solely to the Commission .
It is evident that the Commission is in a better position than the individual Member States to promote the Community interest , whereas individual Member States tend to concentrate on their own interests .
So this is another piece of evidence that suggests we should press for the Commission to have a monopoly on legislative initiatives .
This initiative dates back to the end of the French Presidency , at a time when the Presidency 's achievements were threatening to look very slim indeed .
So they rapidly came up with a whole string of initiatives just before the final whistle , in order to improve things somewhat , and they were all pretty rushed .
I would recommend those of you who take an interest in legal matters to compare the first and second drafts .
The first draft is all good will and politics , whereas the lawyers have crawled over the second draft and turned the whole thing into something that could reasonably be called a legislative initiative . In other words , there is a very considerable difference in the legislative quality of the first and second drafts of the initiative .
Furthermore , the legal objective of the initiative is now quite clear .
It quite simply means that an expulsion decision made , say , in Paris , would be binding throughout the Community .
That makes sense - after all it would be complete nonsense if a decision made in Paris could be appealed against in Helsinki or in Berlin or in any other Member State within the area of freedom , security and justice .
But the Community needs a legal basis for such action .
A legal objective is no replacement for a legal basis .
That is a lesson we have just learnt from the European Court of Justice 's ruling on the tobacco advertising directive .
In that case too there was a legal objective which very much deserved to be debated , but the ECJ made it clear that there has to be a legal basis in the European treaties .
The Committee on Citizen ' s Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs twice unanimously rejected the French initiative on the grounds that there was no such legal basis .
The French Government based its initiative on Article 63 of the EC Treaty , where you will find a legal basis for a European expulsion law .
That is not quite the same thing as mutual recognition of decisions at national level concerning expulsions .
A Community expulsion law would be a directive in which the Community lays down a proper legislative procedure stipulating the circumstances in which an illegal immigrant can be expelled and possibly even deported . However , in this case we are talking about all the Member States mutually recognising expulsion decisions and other similar decisions reached in accordance with their respective national legal frameworks .
That is quite a different kettle of fish .
As we have been rather more careful recently about whether the European Union and in particular the Community aspect of it can do everything it would like to do , we in the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs were firmly of the opinion that while we support the legal objective pursued by the initiative , we can see no legal basis for it .
We therefore propose that this initiative be rejected .
At the same time we have immediately presented a suggestion for solving this problem .
It is perfectly clear that this difficult situation could be resolved if there were a European expulsion law .
So the inevitable consequence of this process is that we call on the Commission to bring forward a proposal for a directive creating a European , a Community expulsion law , which is also binding within the Community .
That would solve all the problems associated with this initiative .
Mr President , given the way this morning ' s debate is going , I wonder whether we are in a seminar , in a big lecture , or in a Parliament whose obligation is to legislate and to provide solutions to European society ' s current problems .
Ladies and gentlemen , I think it is very worrying that this Parliament has rejected en bloc Council initiatives such as the ones we are considering here and that this demonstrates great disarray in the legislative process which the Treaty obliges us to follow .
Free movement , for example , is a fundamental aspect , which requires legislation that is crystal-clear to both the citizens of the European Union and to those from third countries .
I agree with the reasoning that Mrs Frahm expresses in her report for rejecting the initiative and for expecting the Commission to fulfil the objectives proposed on the scoreboard , because we do need to consider all the scenarios in which nationals of third countries who are authorised to circulate within the territory of the Member States may find themselves in .
It is also necessary , for the sake of this legal coherence , that the solutions proposed do not contradict the Treaties .
The same can be said of Mr Nassauer ' s report , in which he has expressed himself well and in which he rightly criticises the lack of legal rigour of the French Government ' s initiatives on the mutual recognition of decisions regarding expulsion .
We should truly be considering whether the European institutions are providing a rigorous response to European society ' s current demand that we create a policy on immigration which respects the principles of freedom , equality and justice that go hand in hand with European culture .
Immigration and everything relating to it requires a tripartite pact between the Council , the Commission and Parliament , which will impose some order on this debate .
The majority groups in this House , as happens in our own countries , must reach a consensus on the great principles enshrined in Chapter IV of the Treaty and its legislative implementation .
We must achieve joint consensus and consideration .
Ladies and gentlemen , it seems to me that the path of confrontation which we are taking will not help to reach a solution to the problem , but rather make it worse , which would have dangerous consequences for all of us .
Mr President , I could at this point make an exceedingly short contribution - so short that it would consist of the single word ' no ' .
No to these three initiatives .
And yet here we are , going through the motions of a debate all over again .
The authors of the proposal are absent so we are having a pleasant chat with the Commissioner on the subject , as he pointed out just now . Consequently , I think I will take advantage of the time allotted to me under the Rules of Procedure to make a few remarks .
They will appear in the Minutes and should then reach the Council .
Firstly , I should like to thank the rapporteurs for the work they have put into carrying out a thorough legal analysis of the proposals .
Their authors often seem to neglect to do so .
I shall deal separately with Mr Nassauer ' s report because I think the other two reports concern different issues .
With regard to Mr Nassauer ' s report , I should like to reiterate what I said earlier this morning .
All too often we are presented with apparently simple proposals concerning very real and complex problems .
Obviously , if you tell someone who is not that familiar with our literature that a person who has been expelled from one Member State should be expelled from all Member States , that first person is bound to agree . It seems sensible and logical .
However , things are not that straightforward .
An individual ' s human rights have to be respected . So for this to come about a clear legal framework is needed , an effective common immigration policy , and an awareness of how and why a decision on expulsion should be dealt with in all Member States .
I must congratulate Mr Nassauer on not having been taken in by the apparent simple-mindedness , if not simplicity , enshrined in the Council ' s proposal .
Turning to the reports by Mr Deprez and Mrs Frahm , I have to say that I think we really are in a very worrying position .
These two Members have already explained far better than I could the technical and legal reasons why they advocate rejection of this proposal . I should , however , like to refer to a matter which seems to me to be of the highest political importance .
The proposal considered by Mr Deprez contains the following sentence , " Because Member States have an enhanced role in respect of the development of visa policy " .
This reflects the political sensitivity of the matter , in particular where relations with third countries are involved . It is used to support the argument that the Council should have the right to exercise implementing powers in this area .
I find this very worrying . I believe it is a matter of great concern as we discuss a common visa list and are already implementing the free movement of persons .
Will both Parliament and the Commission be called on again to come to the defence of the principle of freedom of movement and the Community bases for the implementation of this principle ? Will we have to re-enact debates held prior to 1992 ?
I trust the Council will take due note so that we can avoid doing so .
Mr President , Commissioner , Europe has always been , and remains today , a paradoxical part of the world .
At the same time as walls are being torn down within Europe , new walls are being built to prevent people from making their way to Europe at all .
As the EU ' s external walls rise higher , more and more people are falling into the hands of unscrupulous people - middlemen who profiteer from refugees ' anxiety , fear and desire to survive and give their families a better future .
We know that , in the last year alone , hundreds of people , including children clinging to the undersides of buses and lorries , have lost their lives - some of them off the Turkish coast , in Spanish waters and at Dover - in the hope of finding a better future in our part of the world .
A few days ago , a young Kurdish man was shot by the police in a medium-sized town in Sweden .
Exactly what happened , we do not know .
What we do , however , know is that he had no valid identity papers and was to be deported .
Asylum policy is a common concern for the EU , but the disparate , and in some cases desperate , proposals received by the European Parliament threaten basic humanitarian values .
It must go without saying that every refugee who wishes to stay within the EU must have his case carefully examined .
European leaders must reflect upon why the smuggling of human beings into Europe is so dramatically on the increase .
The UN ' s Secretary-General has been very clear in his criticism of the EU and of the EU ' s obligation to protect asylum seekers ' rights .
To impose visa requirements upon the citizens of approximately 130 countries in unworthy of European democracy .
The basic rule must be that people have the right to travel freely into the EU .
Mr Vitorino , the Commission should devote itself to shortening the list of countries upon which visa requirements are imposed . This is what Schengen cooperation should be about .
We in the ELDR Group regret that no overall asylum strategy has been presented and linked to labour market and immigration strategies .
As matters now stand , there is no overview or comprehensive vision .
Tighter measures , visa requirements and the threat of expulsion do not basically solve these problems .
I am a keen supporter of the EU and have wanted for a long time to see common rules within refugee and asylum policy , but we Liberals are not prepared to accept some kind of fenced-in Europe .
The Iron Curtain must not be replaced by a more modern electronic variety .
Mr President , as I rise to speak in this debate I cannot , of course , help thinking about the situation which the Spanish public is currently facing as regards the serious issue of immigration .
Spain 's national government , supported by its majority in parliament and despite opposition from the remaining political parties , has forced through a law on immigrants , which denies ' illegal ' immigrants basic human rights including those of freedom of association and freedom to join unions .
Meanwhile , dead bodies are appearing on the beaches of the south of the Iberian Peninsula , many of them women and children who have perished in an attempt to reach land in search of work and opportunities for earning a living lacking in their home countries .
The sight of these corpses is a dramatic reminder that we are faced with a humanitarian problem that cannot be dealt with by adopting a faint-hearted or xenophobic approach . It needs to be approached in a rational , generous and forward-looking way , as the rapporteurs have done .
I share the views of the Committee on Petitions on the Nassauer report on the initiative of the French Republic , namely that this vital issue needs to be resolved by making the European Union , when faced with the realities of immigration , an area of freedom , security and justice and not a society based on exclusion and expulsion , as so tragically personified by the young people found dead on the beaches that separate us from Africa .
Parliament and the Commission need to prioritise work on an overall approach to immigration taking account of its humanitarian , economic , cultural and political aspects .
We should not , on the other hand , forget that the eastward enlargement of the Union will inevitably lead to extraordinary internal migration flows creating a new social framework which we will not be able to address properly unless we solve the serious problem of immigration from third countries .
Mr President , what is the best way to keep out all the undesirables ?
What further barriers can we add to fortress Schengen to protect ourselves from outside threats ?
That is the impression made on me by some aspects of the reports we will be voting on today ; at the same time I approve the three rejections .
Less than a month after the tragedy of the East Sea that ran aground on the French coast , with 908 people crammed into the holds of an old tub , including three babies born during the crossing , we run the risk of perpetuating the image of a Europe that is suspicious of foreigners and wants , above all , to strengthen its borders , while alleging that the intention is to combat the trafficking in human beings .
The European Union cannot pursue an immigration policy based purely on policing , as the President of the French Human Rights League said a few days ago .
The news shows us more horrors by the day and we hear expressions of indignation and emotion from all sides .
We are bound to be shocked by the pictures of Kurdish families , dreaming of peace and freedom , who came to seek a future without persecution .
They follow on from the pictures of the 58 Chinese immigrants who reached Dover only to be found dead among crates of tomatoes , of the fugitives from Bangladesh , Pakistan , Albania , Iraq , Africa or any other region stricken by poverty and war .
Article 14 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights states that everyone has the right to seek and to enjoy in other countries asylum from persecution .
So the time has now come to strengthen the right of asylum as set out in the Geneva Convention ; the idea of temporary protection , which does not prejudge recognition of refugee status , goes in that direction .
We know that trafficking in human beings exists and that there are criminal networks .
We are all aware that fabulous sums can be made out of exploiting human misery .
So if we are to combat this trafficking effectively we will have to attack the roots of the evil .
Repression alone is not enough .
We must impose severe penalties on those who organise and are responsible for this trafficking but we must also look into the reasons why individuals , exploited in a cowardly way , find themselves shunted from country to country , from continent to continent , in their search for El Dorado - all in the name of liberal globalisation .
We must not confuse the traffickers with their victims .
We must seek out and penalise those who exploit illegal labour .
In fact , immigration and economics go hand in hand .
Yet the proposal to harmonise the penalties imposed on carriers could prove to be the wrong track to follow and could even be turned against certain people who are simply trying to help men and women under threat .
Let us not make solidarity and humanity into an offence .
While the European Union is rightly seeking to pursue a humane development policy , let us make it clear that development depends on the free movement of people , their knowledge , their culture , as well as their suffering and their hopes .
We must guarantee that freedom of movement .
A society that decides to be tight-fisted and selective in granting residence permits , visas , places in holding centres , is a closed and sectarian society .
Do we want a Europe that shuts itself off from the world ; do we want a Europe that sorts people out and divides them up into good and bad refugees , acceptable immigrants and permanent exiles ?
When will we see Council initiatives and proposals for directives drawn up in a spirit of openness to the world , a spirit of welcome and humanity , rather than one concerned primarily with policing and security ?
Frantz Fanon wrote , " We always want to walk in the company of man , of all men . "
I hope with all my heart that Europe can finally offer us that freedom .
Mr President , I am speaking on behalf of the Bonino List .
Something which very rarely happens in this Parliament occurred during the last voting session , and it occurred at the vote on the Ceyhun report , when Parliament rejected a Member State 's proposal almost unanimously .
The debate on these three reports , but also on the Kirkhope report , highlights an extremely clear-cut problem : we are not concerned with the merit of the proposal but its method .
I therefore hope that , during this voting session , Parliament will once again heed the advice of the rapporteurs and the vote of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , which calls for the Council 's and Member States ' proposals to be rejected .
I hope , in particular , for a political solution , for Parliament to regain the dignity which a democratically elected institution which represents the citizens ought to have in matters of justice and home affairs , if only in terms of Parliament 's institutional role .
What I mean is , ultimately , Parliament has basically the same powers in this area as a non-governmental organisation .
We Members often forget or prefer to forget this fact , but , as we know , under the Treaty , we have no decision-making power or influence over the outcome of the legislative process .
We feel that this is outrageous , particularly in an area which concerns the individual freedoms and rights of the European citizens .
It is an outrage that democratic control is exercised by Council officials in these matters .
It is an outrage that the work of Parliament and the work of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs are , in fact , sidelined in favour of proposals which we are forced to discuss , proposals put forward by individual Member States , by groups of Member States , by the Council or by the States holding the Presidency , proposals which do not have a proper legal basis .
Frequently , almost without exception , these proposals are the political manifestos of Member States which are perfectly aware that their proposals will never be adopted by the Council .
Thus we find ourselves discussing matters which will never see the light of day or which will have to be re-examined , for the Council will never manage to reach a definitive conclusion .
Therefore , I would like to thank the rapporteurs for assuming a radical position rejecting the Council 's proposals - a position which we consider to be appropriate to their role as Parliamentary rapporteurs .
I confirm that we will vote for the motion . We trust that , in the future , Parliament will do more than just protest , that Commissioner Vitorino will do more than just record the existence of a situation , and that tangible measures will be taken to change this state of affairs .
Mr President , I wish to speak about the French Republic 's initiative on the mutual recognition of decisions on the expulsion of third-country nationals , which aims to prevent the free and unchecked movement within the Union of foreigners who are the subject of an expulsion decision .
So we regard it as most opportune at a time when the pressure of illegal immigration is rising and we regret the fact that the European Parliament intends , rather arbitrarily it seems , to reject it .
The French initiative seeks to introduce a kind of mutual application of certain judicial decisions , i.e. a new form of cooperation , which in principle deserves more attention .
Under this proposal , if a Member State decides to expel a third-country national who presents a threat to public order or is an illegal resident , another Member State on whose territory that foreigner found himself could automatically enforce the expulsion measure , subject , of course , to any legal appeals .
Despite the advantages of this proposal , the European Parliament 's responsible committee is rejecting it for two reasons that I do not find convincing .
Firstly , Article 63 ( 3 ) ( b ) of the Treaty establishing the European Community would not constitute a relevant legal basis .
This is not true because that article is concerned precisely with cooperation measures for the repatriation of illegally resident foreigners .
That is very much the case here , since mutual recognition is indeed a measure that comes under that category .
Secondly , we are told yet again that the French initiative is too repressive and that first we need to establish a global European immigration policy .
That is obviously a delaying tactic , for its proponents were very careful not to use the same argument a while ago when we were discussing the temporary protection of third-country nationals .
The French Republic 's initiative on the mutual recognition of decisions on expulsion therefore certainly deserves to be approved .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by expressing my total support for Mr Deprez 's views , that is his rejection of both the Portuguese initiative and the Finnish initiative .
These two proposals undermine Article 202 , which establishes the general principle that the Commission alone has powers to implement the rules which the Council lays down , although the Council may also reserve the right , in specific well-founded cases , to exercise directly implementing powers itself .
The justification put forward is that the Council wishes to reserve for itself the right to exercise implementing powers for a five-year transitional period because the Member States have an enhanced role in respect of the development of visa policy , reflecting the political sensitivity of this area . This is not in itself , however , a sufficient reason for breaching a general principle of Community law .
And it is not a valid argument , because it is contrary to the principle of the Protocol integrating the Schengen acquis into the legal framework of the European Union , which specifically applies in this area .
With regard to the Frahm report , I believe that we should also support the rapporteur 's position , which is to reject the Portuguese initiative .
One of the reasons for this is that this initiative would lead to a lack of consistency in the rules governing the movement of third-country nationals within the territory of the Schengen Member States ; the Schengen Convention covers three categories of third-country nationals who have a right to travel within the Member States : those required to have a visa , those exempt from any visa requirement and those who have a residence permit .
This initiative only covers the second of these categories , thus fragmenting the right to travel of third-country nationals without indicating to what extent these rules revoke , replace or modify the Schengen acquis .
The Nassauer report also - and quite rightly - proposes that the French initiative should be rejected .
Given that there are three proposals that we intend to reject , I would like to make an appeal to the Commissioner , António Vitorino , and to the Commission , that they should take the initiative in this area , thus ensuring the overall consistency of the Community framework of which it is the institutional guardian .
Mr President , unfortunately , because we have no consistent , integrated policy on asylum and immigration , we are being bombarded by initiatives by Member States trying to intervene , in a totally fragmented manner , in various areas , and either ignoring or circumventing the institutional and legal framework of the European Union , as in the case of the present initiatives by France , Finland and Portugal , which the European Parliament would do well to reject , precisely as our rapporteurs , whom I congratulate , have proposed .
This Chamber must stress once again that the Council can only exercise implementing powers which would otherwise be awarded to the Commission in specific cases and once a detailed statement of grounds has been given .
Today the Council wants us to believe that visas and border checks are a specific case and to reserve for itself the implementing powers which belong to the Commission .
At the same time , of course , it is ignoring the European Parliament and the required consultation procedure by amending decisions without consulting the European Parliament .
In resorting to these tactics , the Council is doing nothing to speed up the process of shaping a common European immigration policy ; on the contrary , it is being obstructive , it is failing to take decisions and the Tampere process is making no headway whatsoever , thereby sustaining a climate in Europe which fosters racism and xenophobia and results in the sort of accident which we saw in Dover .
There can be no doubt whatsoever that , if we want to create a common European area of security and justice , we need to oppose unilateral initiatives by Member States and make standard arrangements .
Everyone crossing a border into Europe should be subject to the same rules and requirements , thereby ensuring smooth entry and residency procedures .
Individual Member States and individual legal systems cannot be given the discretion to examine visa applications .
Of course , we hardly need stress yet again that fortifying the borders and policing measures will do nothing to reduce migratory pressures and illegal border crossings as long as there is a huge prosperity differential between our countries and our neighbours .
So what the Council should do is to authorise the Commission , on the basis of the Tampere procedure , to take the necessary initiatives so that we can use assent procedures to introduce , as quickly as possible , a common immigration policy which regulates all outstanding issues fairly and is based on our common humanitarian European values and democratic tradition .
Mr President , the three reports being debated today have a common subject : the application of European Union policy to immigrants .
They respond to demands by the Member States of the European Union either for greater flexibility as regards the period of residency of immigrants and a more lenient Community institutional framework , as in the case of Portugal , or for faster action on the decisions taken at Tampere on mutual recognition by all the Member States of decisions on the expulsion of third-country nationals , as in the case of France .
All three reports have been rejected by the competent committee on formal grounds .
The MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece will be abstaining from the vote on the Deprez and Frahm reports and voting in favour of the Nassauer report , which rejects France ' s initiative , because we , of course , disagree with the content , not the form of the initiative .
The question which arises is why this constant preoccupation with immigrants ?
Perhaps there is no institutional framework ?
On the contrary .
Both Union and national legislation have transformed the European Union into a well-guarded fortress in which there is no place for humanitarian values or solidarity , let alone the European Convention on Human Rights .
My country , Greece , is currently discussing a bill along these lines on so-called immigration policy which , to put it bluntly , treats immigration as a crime and anyone who fails to denounce or who assists an immigrant as an accessory to the crime .
The causes of immigration stem , in our view , from the very policies of developed capitalist countries and the European Union , which plunder the wealth and rob the people of the fruits of their labour in the immigrants ' countries of origin , condemning them to a life of under-development and poverty .
This is what causes mass immigration .
Another cause of immigration is imperialist intervention , which foments national and local wars , causing huge waves of refugees .
These current waves of immigrants , this modern slave trade suits big business in the countries in which the immigrants end up just fine .
Can there by any doubt that what we have here is an inhumane interplay of the interests of slave traders , immigrants , war-mongering imperialists and those who exploit immigrants in the so-called host countries who , basically , as modern-day slave-masters , encourage unemployment and illegal immigration in order to attack the interests and rights of local workers in the coarsest manner ?
That is why protecting the rights of immigrants , both legal and illegal , must be one of the first and most urgent duties of the popular movement ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today we are holding a joint debate on four Member State initiatives : on mutual recognition of expulsion decisions , on implementing powers with regard to the procedures for examining visa applications and for carrying out checks outside the Schengen borders and , lastly , on freedom to travel within the Schengen area .
I will begin with the aspects relating to the provisions that come within the Schengen framework .
First of all , I want to congratulate Mr Deprez on his precise and detailed examination of institutional relations in regard to the power to implement the rules established by the Council , powers relating to comitology as laid down in Article 202 of the Treaty establishing the Communities .
The Commission does , in fact , believe that it should be possible to amend , adapt or update some of the provisions in the joint consular instruction , in the joint handbook and in the specifications of the Schengen consultation network , by a simplified method based on comitology .
We can also subscribe to the initiatives of the Republics of Finland and Portugal , but we cannot subscribe to the majority of the proposed measures , which reserve implementing powers to the Council without , however , providing any circumstantial evidence that this really is a specific case that is an exception to the general rule laid down in the Treaty .
The Commission agrees with the analysis and the arguments put forward by Mr Deprez in his explanatory statement .
Joint consular instruction , the joint handbook and the specifications of the Schengen consultation network have been integrated as the legal basis for Articles 62 and 67 of the Treaty of the European Communities , under Title IV .
However , Title IV contains no institutional derogation from Article 202 of the Treaty .
Moreover , most of the implementing measures linked to these instruments are purely technical in nature .
They constitute no more than the practical formulation of political decisions taken by the Council in primary legislative acts , which are themselves governed by the appropriate provisions of Title IV .
Consequently , I wish to express the Commission 's total satisfaction with Parliament 's position , a position entirely in line with that of the European Commission .
And for the time being , the Commission not only emphasises its agreement but also hopes that the Council will listen to and accept the rapporteur 's arguments , which I hope Parliament endorses , and the arguments along the same lines put forward by the Commission .
In the event that it adopts a different interpretation , we will no doubt consider reacting by taking other measures ...
... measures which the Commission and Parliament can , in fact , take jointly .
The Commission can endorse the aim of the Portuguese proposal for a regulation concerning the period during which third-country nationals who are exempt from the visa requirement can travel freely within the territory of the Member States .
Indeed , Article 62 of the Treaty invites the Council to adopt , within five years following the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam , measures laying down the conditions under which third-country nationals can move freely within the territory of the Member States for a period of not more than three months .
However , and here it manifestly contradicts the Portuguese proposal , while the Treaty lays down a period of not more than three months , this is certainly not restricted to third-country nationals exempt from the visa requirement .
That is why I agree with the comment by your rapporteur , Mrs Frahm , that it is not a good idea to regulate the situation of a single category , just as it seems obvious to me that we cannot extend the period of residence on the territory of the Member States beyond three months , up to a total of six months , solely on the basis of reciprocity agreements .
The Commission realises that the main object of the Portuguese initiative - for underlying reasons that are easy to understand - is to safeguard a number of existing bilateral agreements between the Member States and , for example , third countries such as the United States of America , Canada , Japan and Australia .
Nevertheless , as I think I have made it clear , the method applied in this Portuguese initiative does not appear consistent with the Treaty , nor does it seem advisable to confine it to just one category of persons .
For our part , we can confirm that the Commission intends in the near future to present a global proposal on the right to travel within the Schengen area , so as to avoid taking the kind of fragmented approach that could be an obstacle to transparency , to legibility for the citizens , and to legal certainty .
Finally , I come to the proposal for a directive on the mutual recognition of expulsion decisions , which the French Presidency presented last July .
Taking the long-term view , it would seem desirable to allow an expulsion decision taken in one Member State to be executed in another Member State , without the latter having to take a new expulsion decision .
The French Republic 's initiative should be regarded as no more than a very first step towards achieving this objective , which we must recognise as an ambitious one .
So far , no common policy on repatriating asylum-seekers has been formulated in the framework of asylum and immigration policy .
That is why I think it would be a much better idea , for the time being , to lay down common standards and principles , so that later on we could establish a binding legal framework governing the mutual recognition of measures to terminate a period of residence , in particular expulsion decisions .
With a view to defining such a policy , and as stated in its programme of work for the year 2001 , the Commission will draw up a communication on a common policy on repatriation .
This policy will include common principles , together with common standards and measures .
The most important common principle is to give primacy to voluntary return over forced return .
The European Refugee Fund supports Member State efforts in this field .
The discussions that will follow this communication and that will cover every aspect of the policy on repatriation promise to be very difficult , in view of the tensions between the Member States ' need to implement the decisions and , on the other hand , the obvious human dimension .
In my view , persons who do not or who no longer satisfy the conditions laid down for enjoying the status of permanent or temporary legal resident should normally be asked to leave the territory of the European Union unless the Member States concerned have a legal obligation of whatever kind to allow them to remain .
If we wish to formulate a common immigration policy that is as complete as possible , we cannot leave aside the question of repatriation , which , if I may put it that way , is the other side of the coin .
Thank you Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
European crime prevention network
The next item is the report ( A5-0070 / 2001 ) by Mrs Angelilli , on behalf of the Committee on Citizen 's Rights and Freedoms , Justice and Home Affairs , on the initiative of the French Republic and the Kingdom of Sweden with a view to the adoption of a Council decision setting up a European crime prevention network [ 13464 / 2000 - C5-0717 / 2000 - 2000 / 0824 ( CNS ) ] .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , all the studies and statistics on major social emergencies stress that the right to security is one of the greatest demands of the European citizens .
Crime , in its most varied forms , is rightly perceived by our citizens to be not just a threat to physical safety but a genuine , ever-increasing , intolerable threat to the freedom of movement , the freedom to work and the freedom to live a normal everyday life .
This psychological concern has led to an increasing lack of confidence in the institutions and increasing mistrust of other people .
This sense of insecurity affects absolutely everybody : companies , families and individual people , particularly women , the elderly and children .
In this context , it is often very difficult to separate large-scale organised crime , large-scale criminal phenomena , and what is known as small-scale crime ; this is particularly true of urban areas , one example being drug distribution and drug pushing .
Mr President , there was a time when the first thing people asked for was timely crime prevention and sure penalties for criminals .
Now the situation has changed : people demand safety above all else and , therefore , crime prevention in particular , maybe because the number of particularly abhorrent crimes , such as all crimes related to paedophilia and the sexual exploitation of women and children , is increasing at a worrying rate .
Crime prevention must therefore be interpreted - and is being interpreted - as a certainty enabling people to exercise their freedoms , and the citizens are demanding precisely an undertaking that we will implement all possible measures to contain the spread of crime .
I believe that the importance of crime prevention has been stressed by Parliament on repeated occasions , and Parliament has produced a large number of instruments in this field .
It was also appropriately and explicitly recognised by the Treaty of Amsterdam and then acknowledged on a number of other occasions up to and including the Tampere Council , which explicitly proposed to reinforce international cooperation on crime prevention by establishing a crime prevention network between national authorities .
This proposal was then accepted by the French Presidency and the Swedish Presidency , which intend to establish this network of information and exchange of experiences and best practices to prevent crime through a proposal for a legislative initiative .
The undertaking would include the exchange of information and news in as short a time as possible precisely in order to be able to study the origins of criminal phenomena .
It would operate in a similar way to the way in which the Lisbon Drug Monitoring Centre operates , albeit in a different sector , which monitors changes in drug distribution from their origin .
The objective is therefore to be able to study criminal phenomena right from their origins , monitoring the enormous capacity for evolution and veritable metamorphosis of crime to adapt to new forms of prevention , apart from anything else , and thus find new channels for expression .
To sum up , the network is a network for the exchange of information and best practices . It is certainly not an attempt to take away from Member States the power to make fundamental decisions on security policies , which are obviously the prerogative of the individual States and therefore the individual national parliaments and governments .
In my opinion , we are simply showing the citizens that Europe is in the process of creating a genuine area of freedom and justice .
I would like to thank all the Members for their cooperation and Mrs Terrón , in particular , for the amendment she tabled , which has enhanced and complemented our work .
Welcome
The President of the Assembly of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , Mr Stojan Andov , is in the official gallery .
On behalf of this House , I would like to welcome President Andov and I hope that his visit to the European Parliament will run completely smoothly and be very fruitful .
European crime prevention network ( continuation )
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the initiative we have before us to create a European crime prevention network is intended as a response to the growing need to fight crime . The necessity for greater and more effective international cooperation in this area , especially at EU level , has been recognised .
However , we know that such cooperation is weakened by differences in definitions , procedures , structures , and so forth .
There is therefore a need for comparable data in terms of studies carried out , statistics , penal policy , structural factors and so on , and on crime , victims of crime and criminal justice in the European Union .
The main objective is to evaluate the various activities , and to endeavour to identify the key measures that are both desirable and practicable in priority areas , thus improving the European Union 's capacity for response and the effectiveness of crime prevention policies both at national and international level .
These were the policy guidelines that emerged from the Tampere European Council , which led to the High Level Conference held in the Algarve in Portugal in May 2000 agreeing on the need for a multidisciplinary joint approach to crime prevention .
It is vital to guarantee the safety of Europe 's citizens , who wish to live in peace , and this increasingly means not only effectively fighting crime but also adopting intelligent crime prevention policies which also involve the capacity to understand and react to psychological and sociological phenomena which make people feel unsafe , or increase such feelings .
Prevention of this kind , which is necessary to reduce crime and the causes of crime both quantitatively and qualitatively , should cover all forms of crime , including organised crime and not forgetting to pay special attention to the areas of urban , juvenile and drug-related crime .
This is an important and ambitious project , because crime knows no borders .
So this network is intended to promote cooperation and the exchange of information between Member States , and the collection and analysis of information on actions undertaken and best practice in the field of prevention , with the aim of assisting future decision-making in this area .
It could be said that there were two different camps in the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs . One camp was of the view that this network should be limited to intervention in areas with a direct European and international dimension , and the other focused exclusively on small-scale crime .
I believe that the compromise amendment approved was a good solution , as it did not exclude any aspect of crime prevention .
We are well aware that organised crime and small-scale crime are two distinct phenomena requiring different answers .
Organised crime is a priority area for the Union and its Member States , whereas small-scale crime is primarily a matter for local , regional and national institutions .
The role of the EU in preventing small-scale crime should be limited to promoting exchanges of information between national authorities so as to encourage an exchange of best practice and research while respecting the principle of subsidiarity .
The citizens of the European Union are justified in calling on the Union to efficiently tackle the problem of the growing threat to their freedom and rights caused by crime .
Mr President , on behalf of my group , I would firstly like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Angelilli , for her report , and I would also like to express my thanks for the work done in our committee , which approved this particular report unanimously .
I believe that it is only by acting in unison that we can make progress in the battle against crime .
This report provides us with a basis for establishing an efficient network which will allow us to fight crime across Europe in a coordinated way , but without limiting our scope for action .
This is not an attempt by the European Union to arrogate powers to itself , but rather to optimise the exchange of information between the relevant authorities in the Member States .
Over and above this objective , the report also deals with the involvement of civil society organisations , universities and European institutions such as Europol and Eurojust in the crime prevention network .
This is something we would like to see because it saves reinventing the wheel in terms of crime prevention in each individual Member State , so that available resources are used better .
We welcome this .
This crime prevention network is also important in other respects .
The network will provide the Council and the Commission with the information they need to draw up appropriate crime prevention strategies .
This is to be welcomed , because it will give the various national authorities a greater interest in exchanging information with the network , not least because they will be able to air their concerns at European level .
This will also significantly speed up the process of coordinating national strategies .
When it comes to organised crime and modern forms of crime , this is particularly welcome , as the national authorities often complain that criminals have the upper hand , because these authorities cannot react quickly enough to evolving trends and types of criminality .
This will enable us to create a network providing universal information , greatly improving reaction times in crime prevention .
The network is also very important as regards the candidate countries , as it can help to get a better handle on the problems that can result from transition periods .
We will therefore be voting for the report with our own amendments , and we are very pleased that those responsible for implementation are finally getting the support they need from Parliament and the Council .
Mr President , I should like to join my colleagues in congratulating the rapporteur on her work on this report and in endorsing the majority of the proposals within it .
Within the European Union a new institutional framework to fight against organised crime has been put in place following the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam .
It provides for the development of common actions in the field of police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters while preserving Member State responsibility for maintaining law and order and safeguarding internal securities .
Parallel to this endorsement , the European Council launched two action plans for combating organised crime , aimed at overcoming disparities with national procedures in establishing more efficient judicial cooperation .
Most of these recommendations have been fully implemented .
The enhanced role of Europol certainly represents a major step forward in this context .
The conclusions of the Tampere Council meeting present a strong political message , reaffirming the Union 's wish to overcome difficulties in prosecuting all forms of cross-border crime while protecting the freedoms and legal rights of individuals and economic operators .
It is important that all EU institutions work together to ensure a coherent strategy against organised crime .
The primary motive of much organised crime is financial crime .
The EU policy in the fight against financial fraud is pursued simultaneously under the first and third pillars of the Treaties .
I support the extension of the mandate of Europol to investigate money laundering matters .
There must be a European-wide political agreement concerning the framework decision on the identification , seizure and confiscation of products of crime .
Certainly from an Irish perspective , the establishment of the Criminal Assets Bureau in 1996 has proved to be very successful in tackling this area of crime .
Establishing safety and confidence when we are faced with cyber-crime is another area which calls for a collective response on a global scale , given the world-wide dimension of the Internet .
Computer-related crimes do not stop at conventional State borders .
It is clear that activities that are unlawful off-line will not cease to be unlawful by going on-line .
A considerable number of actions to fight cyber-crime are already under way in international fora .
The Council of Europe is putting the finishing touches to the world 's first international convention on cyber-crime .
The European Commission has also presented a legislative proposal on child pornography on the Internet , in line with the provisions of the Council 's European cyber-crime convention .
I support the framework programme being brought forward by the European Commission to combat the traffic in human beings by developing effective cooperation across the European Union in judicial procedures in this regard , and also by establishing closer links with the accession countries .
Mr President , it would almost appear that we have to vote on a issue which is a foregone conclusion , that is on whether Parliament is for or against crime .
Our concern is completely different from anything discussed thus far : our concern is whether or not to stage another bureaucratic monstrosity .
We are against this .
We are against it even though we know that there is no Member of this or any other parliament , or rather , there is no sensible person on earth , I feel , who would not be against crime and in favour of its prevention .
However , whether we want a bureaucratic monstrosity is another matter .
As we know , when the European Union is unable to find solutions at institutional level , it resorts to monitoring centres , networks and bodies : monitoring centres , networks and bodies which , in actual fact , infringe the democratic rights of the citizens , entrusting them to institutions which are not democratically controlled .
The Lisbon Monitoring Centre has been mentioned .
I do not want to go into the issue of a European Union which widely funds a United Nations crime-fighting body .
The United Nations decided to carry out an internal inquiry into how these funds are spent : of course , the European Union does not feel the need to do this .
It was said of bureaucratic monstrosities such as Europol , Eurodac and Eurojust that it is precisely they which now prevent us from regulating criminal policies .
There is another reason why we are going to vote against the motion .
Without wanting to detract from the rapporteur 's work , it is the very proposal of the French Republic and Sweden which fails to apply the principle of subsidiarity in this area .
As yet , we fail to understand what the concept of crime prevention is , for it is not defined anywhere in the proposal or the report .
This is why we are going to vote against the motion : primarily because it supports this European network .
Mr President , the French and Swedish initiative on cooperation between national bodies in the fields of juvenile delinquency , crime and drugs is a follow-up to the Tampere Summit .
This European strategy is based on the principle that EU intervention is bound to give added value to Member State policy .
But today we are facing a tangled web of programmes and a mountain of incoherent measures .
In the field of justice and home affairs alone , we are now being proposed a sixth programme , Hippocrates .
We can rightly ask whether having more of these programmes is the way to fight crime more effectively , especially since the budgets for the programmes are so derisory .
What will be done with the millions of euros allocated to this programme every year ?
Furthermore , Hippocrates is not easy to understand .
On the question of financing , for example , the share financed from the Community is not to exceed 70 % of the total cost .
Given that the Commission 's partners could be universities , administrations or NGOs , how is the remaining 30 % to be financed ?
Nothing very precise is said about the definition of the proposed forms of prevention or of organised crime either .
Some of the measures are , in fact , rather anecdotal , such as the provision in Article 3 concerning the annual European Crime Prevention Awards .
Measures are therefore being created and introduced with no regard to their relevance or effectiveness .
It is time to stand back and think , rather than rushing ahead , and to take the necessary steps to establish effective cooperation between the national prevention policies .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to congratulate the rapporteur on her report and to say very simply , given the late hour , that the Commission supports the Franco-Swedish initiative to create a European crime prevention network .
This is an initiative which represents a good example of Member States ' use of their right of initiative , because it was worked out in close cooperation with the Commission itself .
We believe that this network should focus as a matter of priority on the prevention of small-scale crime , that is urban crime , juvenile crime and drug-related crime , and the proposed Commission communication on crime prevention suggests the creation of a European crime prevention forum which would give priority to the prevention of organised crime .
We believe that there is a great deal to be done to establish the relationship between organised crime and small-scale urban crime , and for these reasons we are pleased that Parliament is supporting this initiative by the French Republic and the Kingdom of Sweden .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Vitorino , for your speech . It was very concise but extremely informative .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
We shall now proceed to the votes .
VOTE
President .
Mr Watson has the floor to raise a question relating to a point of order .
Watson ( ELDR ) .
Mr President , it would appear to me from the vote and from the report that , in fact , we have rejected the Council 's proposal .
We are certainly keeping the precedent set by the Ceyhun report in mind , Mr Watson .
Before proceeding to the vote on the draft legislative resolution , I give the floor to Mrs Terrón i Cusí for a point of order .
Mr President , we are about to conduct a strange vote , as we did last month , on this strange new method of a legislative initiative by Member States .
The amended initiative has been rejected .
We are now called upon to vote , firstly on an amendment tabled by our group requesting that the Council be informed of the rejection of this initiative and that the Commission be asked to prepare a new proposal within the framework of its right to take the initiative .
We shall then have to vote on the draft legislative resolution and a favourable vote is needed to inform the Council that we have rejected its initiative .
It is complicated , but it is the same as the situation which arose at the previous plenary sitting and was explained by Mr Watson .
That is to say , the next amendment does not fall .
Rather , we still have to vote in favour of rejection for the sake of consistency .
Mr President , I am the rapporteur who was in the same position last month .
But what I cannot understand right here and now is this : we have nailed our colours to the mast and made a decision .
What are the representatives of the Council in this Chamber here for , anyway ?
They should at least tell us now how they stand in relation to this , before we carry on voting .
Mr President , on this , as indeed on the two subsequent reports we are going to vote , we should now vote in favour of the legislative resolution which rejects the Council 's proposal .
Mr President , I would like to withdraw everything but the first 29 words of Amendment No 33 , so that we are only voting on the first 29 words .
The rapporteur was made aware of this beforehand .
The rapporteur has asked for the floor .
Mr President , I would like to point out that competition is an important area of policy , but that it is not part of the Built-In Agenda .
I therefore still urge Members not to vote for this amendment .
The honourable Member who tabled the amendment has requested that only the first part of it be put to the vote .
The author has every right to withdraw part of the amendment so I shall read through the text to avoid any misunderstanding , " Calls for a system of international competition within the framework of the WTO and requests the Council and the Commission to negotiate a binding framework of multilateral regulations on competition , on the occasion of the WTO negotiations . "
The rapporteur is opposed to this .
( Parliament rejected Amendment No 33 )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr van den Bos has the floor for a point of order .
Mr President , I was unable to make it on time for the votes today due to the extremely bad flight connection between Amsterdam and Strasbourg .
It is unfortunate that Air France is unable to provide this connection without any serious delays .
This means that we cannot carry out our duties here on time and effectively , for which I once again lodge a protest .
Mr President , I would ask you to hear me out , right to the end of the 60 seconds available to me for this explanation of vote before you form an opinion .
This morning , I took part in an important meeting organised by Mr Pronk on pensions in France .
The French director of the French Caisse des retraites explained to us how the Caisse des retraites works - or rather , does not work .
Pensioners in France , and in Europe as well , will have to tighten their belts .
They will have to work for 45 years and , throughout Europe , will have to wait until they are 70 before they can retire .
There will probably be a law saying that they can only eat once a day .
This is why I voted for the document on sugar : because it is very useful for sweetening the pill for the pensioners who , throughout Europe , are going to need a lot of sugar for energy .
Thank you , Mr Fatuzzo .
However , I am under the impression that many pensioners prefer to use saccharine .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Daul report calls for an extension of the common organisation of the markets in the sugar sector , and that is why I have rejected it .
The system has got nothing to do with the market , it is more like something from a planned economy , a combination of production quotas , minimum prices , import tariffs and export subsidies .
All in all , this is not something we should commend , it is something we should criticise , especially as it is downright expensive for the European taxpayer .
The Member States allocate specific regions and quotas to the sugar manufacturers and this sugar is then sold within a protected national market .
You have to bear in mind that 100 kg of white sugar cost EUR 28 on the world market and that the intervention price , the European Union 's guaranteed price , is EUR 65 .
This is too expensive and it is bad for EU consumers and sugar processors .
This is not a sustainable solution .
. ( PT ) We broadly agree with the rapporteur 's view that the Commission 's basic proposal to reduce sugar quotas by 115 000 tonnes should be rejected .
Nevertheless , we regret that our amendment , which aimed to correct the injustice committed by the Commission in allocating Portugal 's quota , has been rejected . Our current quota is just 70 000 tonnes , and the total production rights allocated to growers represent just 20 % of the country 's consumption .
This means that the economic viability of the only sugar beet processing plant in mainland Portugal , in Coruche , could be jeopardised if it does not reach an output close to 100 000 tonnes .
An increase of 30 000 tonnes has therefore been proposed .
This adjustment would create a level playing field for Portuguese growers and would guarantee the sustainability of sugar beet production , which in any case can and should be increased when the Alqueva dam comes into operation .
Similarly , with regard to the Azores , we believe that it is vital to guarantee the viability of the only existing plant , on the island of São Miguel , whose operation is essential for that ultraperipheral region .
The reason why I voted against the modified proposal was that the report proposed to maintain a system that has not been reviewed for 32 years .
The CMO for sugar is unsustainable in the long-term given the constraints in Category 1 ( Agriculture budget ) .
Furthermore , it has major implications for the European taxpayer , for jobs in the food and drink manufacturers and for consumers .
More importantly , this report rejects improvement in management of the sugar regime of which one small measure was the Commission proposal for the abolition of the storage levy .

My opposition to reinstating the storage levy scheme is based on three factors .
First , the storage levy is passed on to consumers .
Abolishing the system , therefore , will mean that sugar manufacturers will bear the storage costs .
Second , the abolition of the storage levy scheme will inject an element of competition into the highly distorted market .
This will benefit the sugar-using industry and consumers as well as enabling observers to evaluate the effects of limited competition on the EU sugar sector .
Finally , the budgetary resources allocated to the system ( EUR 300 million per annum ) could be redirected towards other agricultural expenditure .
The second principal concern about this report is that Daul 's amendments extended the current regime until 2005-6 contrary to the Commission 's proposal of an interim regime lasting 2 years .
I am opposed to another five year roll-over .
The momentum for reform is mounting .
EU sugar prices are 2.5-3 times the world level .
Such a system threatens to jeopardise the EU 's credibility in relation to impending enlargement and WTO obligations .
This report also ignores the conclusions of a recent Court of Auditor 's report denouncing the regime as wasteful and mismanaged and stating that the current system leads to substantial costs for the EU budget and consumer .
I have a lot of empathy and support for the farming industry , and I know that many of them recognise that serious and considered reform is necessary to ensure that the sugar sector is prepared for the demands of the future .
By contrast , the consequences of another roll-over would be deeper and deeper quota cuts , which would shrink the base of EU industry and lead to unemployment .
Similarly , artificially high prices cannot be sustained .
They are detrimental to the sugar-using industry and the consumer , and a degree of competition must be incrementally introduced in this sector .
One of the further areas of concern was that comprehensive studies were undertaken to evaluate viable alternatives to the current regime which take into consideration the impact on producers and consumers in order to enable the Commission to draw up more detailed proposals for further reform of the sugar regime on the basis of these reports .
. ( NL ) We should naturally like to congratulate the rapporteur on the result obtained .
In particular , the amendments tabled by Mr Mulder ( ELDR Group ) might well mean that the European agricultural policy is finally looked at .
Although we cannot agree on the content of the current sugar policy , we have voted in favour of the amended report because , more than anything , policy is about keeping prior arrangements , as in the case of Agenda 2000 .
We should , however , like to underline that the evaluation , with the possible reviews in 2003 , should very much take place .
In our opinion , it is wrong just to talk about reviews and subsequently delay the decision-making process , which will ultimately lead to a decline in social support for agriculture .
The present European agricultural policy is no longer appropriate to our times .
The era of firm product subsidisation will , in the short term , need to be replaced by another system .
The landscape , for which the agricultural sector is largely responsible , will need to be maintained , and we can imagine that a compensatory income will be provided for this .
The European citizens will understand this .
We should also like to make a general remark on rapporteurs and their possible vested interests in the topics of their reports .
We would ask you to include in the Rules of Procedure a clause to the effect that any interests must be notified beforehand so as to avoid even the semblance of a conflict of interests .
Farming is an economic activity in the fullest sense and needs long-term prospects .
At a time when farmers are having to face up to new challenges , such as the need to provide good quality products , and to ensure that agriculture pays more respect to the environment , we must give them the means to look ahead to the future .
The world market in sugar is highly unstable . This sector should therefore be given the instruments of stability that our producers badly need , while ensuring that these instruments are flexible enough to allow farmers to take real advantage of more favourable economic situations .
The ACP countries and India have told us how important the price guarantee that the Cotonou Agreement offers them is to the development of their sugar industry , allowing them to prepare themselves for a global economy .
The European Union must emphasise the commitments it entered into towards them .
We endorse the call on the Commission to present impact studies of the various aspects of the COM in sugar , of the possible alternatives to this production .
In the light of the findings , it will then be possible to envisage , if necessary , a review of the COM , but not before 2006 , the date set for the general review .
- ( SV ) As a Swedish Christian Democrat , I have voted against this report .
All initiatives aimed at reforming the common agricultural policy ought to be supported , including this modest proposal from the Commission for a moderate reduction in sugar quotas .
We believe that the EU must open its agricultural sector to the developing world .
The position of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development is therefore misleading in as much as it defends a continuation of the present EU policy based upon subsidies and tariff barriers against surrounding countries .
I , like other members of the Conservative British Delegation , voted today for a limited extension of the current EU sugar regime in the Daul report .
We all wish for and are committed to a comprehensive overhaul of the common agricultural policy , but this is more likely to happen in a thorough and systematic way if reforms of other sectors are considered as part of a general package in 2006 , and besides , there is no absolute guarantee that an earlier ending of the sugar regime would necessarily deliver immediate cheaper sugar prices to the consumer .
Moreover , the current crisis facing our farmers in Britain requires as a priority that this reform be postponed for the time being in order to prevent further deterioration of their economic circumstances and preserve stability of our rural communities .
I strongly oppose Mr Daul 's report on the sugar market which aims to extend the existing system , unchanged , until 2006 .
I find the Commission 's dose of sugar market reforms much sweeter to swallow .
Reform of the sugar market is crucial to tackle over production and high prices on the EU market .
Moreover , it is necessary to comply with WTO rules .
It is important for European consumers and for the European taxpayer .
I want to see the production quota cut by 115 000 tonnes each year and to abolish the reimbursement of storage cuts .
Drastic changes are needed in 2003 when the Commission will review the cereal , oilseeds and dairy sector .
We need to make cuts in the agricultural budget which is in dire need of reform .
The bottom line is that the common agricultural policy must be radically overhauled and reformed .
We waste far too much of the taxpayer 's money on this budget and we must look carefully at restructuring and reforming our agricultural policy across the EU .
I do not support this report which far from being sweet , leaves a rather bitter taste .
Kirkhope Report ( A5-0069 / 2001 )
Mr President , along with the majority of Parliament , I voted against this document which seeks to harmonise the Community penalties for those who smuggle illegal immigrants onto Union territory .
I feel that it is much more important - and so do all the pensioners who sent me to the European Parliament - and would be much more useful to combat illegal immigration into Europe by stepping up controls at Europe 's borders .
Rather than punishing and fining those who are caught in the act of entering European territory illegally , it would be more appropriate to channel more resources and funds into improving controls at Europe 's borders .
I supported the proposal for a Council directive on the harmonisation of penalties imposed on carriers transporting illegal immigrants into the territory of the Member States .
Contrary to what some speakers alleged during the debate , it is not aimed at turning the carriers into border police , since they obviously do not have the means of checking the authenticity of the residence and travel permits of the people they transport .
In fact , this proposal provides for penalties only in the case of illegal immigrants who have no documents whatsoever , and that is clearly something a carrier would have to take note of .
Following its usual strategy , the European Parliament began by voting for amendments that completely destroy the balance of the proposal .
In particular , it has exempted carriers from any penalties if an illegal passenger seeks asylum immediately after arriving on the territory of the country of destination .
That derogation is unacceptable , for it is common knowledge that the majority of applications for asylum are unfounded and just made to gain time .
At a pinch , one could consider refunding a fine already levied on a carrier if a passenger does , in fact , obtain asylum .
But it is difficult to go further than that without inflating the number of applications for asylum made for reasons of convenience .
After upsetting the balance of the text in this way , the European Parliament then rejected it , expressing its annoyance that Member States were presenting such ' repressive ' texts , on the basis of the right of initiative they still have , for the time being , in this area .
We , on the contrary , thought the proposal for a Council directive deserves to be followed up , since the European Parliament , fortunately , only has a consultative role here .
A first text was presented to the European Parliament in September 2000 , on the initiative of the French Presidency .
This proposal was designed to prevent the tragedies that result from the actions of unscrupulous carriers who are prepared to exploit human distress and misery . I welcome it .
Indeed , I think it is high time we tackled this problem head-on , to avoid any repetition of the tragedies of Dover and Saint Raphaël .
The aim of this directive is to supplement Article 26 of the Schengen Convention and to define its implementing conditions .
This French initiative defines the obligations of carriers who bring foreigners whose application for asylum has been rejected into the Union .
It proposes harmonising the penalties , which currently differ widely from one country to another , imposed on carriers who have not respected their obligation to carry out checks .
I must admit that I am disappointed by the Swedish Presidency ' s text , which steps back from the original text drawn up at the initiative of France .
It is confined to improving the situation in only a very limited way within the actual scope of Article 26 of the Schengen Agreement , although , pursuant to the Protocol integrating the Schengen acquis into the framework of the European Union , a far more significant step forward could have been taken .
This lack of ambition is apparent when we consider the scope of the text . It does not apply to international rail traffic and it does not precisely define the obligations and financial penalties , which consist of a deterrent penalty of not less than EUR 2 000 per person .
Furthermore , the exemptions from the penalties are not acceptable .
For instance , the text provides that the carrier is not liable for any penalty if the third-country national seeks asylum immediately after arriving in the territory of the State of destination , even if the application is subsequently turned down .
It should surely be up to the State and not the carrier to check the asylum seeker 's eligibility .
In the same context , the carrier is exempted from the penalties if the person carried is granted refugee status or leave to remain under a subsidiary form of protection .
While I entirely endorse the initiative and the approach of the French Presidency , I found some of the amendments made to the proposed text unacceptable .
I therefore rejected them .
My colleagues and I , the British Labour members of the PSE have voted in favour of some aspects of the Kirkhope report .
In doing so , we recognised that the proposals were far from perfect but that they did at least attempt to address part , albeit just one part , of the present unsatisfactory situation .
The European Union and individual countries must do more to address the problems and circumstances in the countries of origin that cause people to seek refuge in the European Union .
Progress in this area cannot be made overnight and in the meantime the interests of desperate people , understandably fleeing from conflict , persecution or other hardship , are not well served by pushing them into the hands of the unscrupulous and the criminals ; those who seek to make a living out of trafficking people .
It is the responsibility of everyone to ensure that traffickers do not profit .
Several of my colleagues and I have been to Calais and seen what goes on there .
I have witnessed first hand the very casual attitude of many of the lorry drivers and their companies .
These carriers must do more - they must properly check all vehicles and all modes of transport to try to avoid another Dover-type tragedy .
All the companies who own the lorries and other vehicles and all carriers of all types must take responsibility for their actions - corporate responsibility from the top downwards .
Equally , there is rationale behind trying to approximate the fines across the different States to ensure that we have a combined front against these traffickers .
This in turn means that all Member States , Britain , France , Belgium and the others alike , must ensure that there are proper systems in place and that the laws are enforced .
In supporting some parts of the Kirkhope report we recognised the complexities of the issue and will continue to work for a full and comprehensive common asylum system for the European Union , one that has humanity and the interests of the most vulnerable at its core .
. ( DE ) With regard to the harmonisation of penalties imposed on carriers transporting third ­ country nationals lacking the documents necessary for admission into the territory of the Member States , I wish to say , on behalf of those Members of this House who belong to the Austrian Freedom Party , that although we are in favour of effective measures to prevent illegal entry , these should be taken within the framework of and taking account of the national systems of sanctions which have developed organically .
We have accordingly voted against the minimum penalties proposed , but we do not question the fundamental objective of efficient measures to prevent illegal entry .
- ( SV ) We have voted against Mr Kirkhope ' s report on carriers ' liability and call upon the French Republic to withdraw its initiative regarding penalties for carriers transporting passengers with inadequate travel documentation .
The Council ' s initiative is another in the series of fragmented proposals aimed only at excluding people from entering the European Union .
For us , it is unthinkable that the Member States ' responsibility for checking passports should be transferred to private transport companies .
It is unfair that check-in staff at airports and at harbours , air stewardesses or ticket collectors should instead be given the right to decide who should be granted entry to the European Union .
That is precisely what the result will be if the rules of the Schengen Convention and Mr Kirkhope ' s proposal regarding penalties are put into practice .
The right to asylum under the Geneva Convention must be a cornerstone both of Schengen cooperation and of the EU ' s common refugee and immigration policy .
The severe sanctions proposed by the Council constitute a significant threat to the right of asylum .
The many people who at present succeed in fleeing from war and oppression and arriving at the EU ' s external borders would never succeed in entering the EU if new or increased penalties were to be imposed upon transporters .
Free movement within the European Union must not be implemented at the cost of the EU ' s erecting barriers against the surrounding world .
Continued cooperation within the Schengen framework and the common immigration and asylum policy must be characterised by the European tradition of a generous refugee policy in which the right to asylum is guaranteed .
. ( NL ) It is true that we cannot possibly give shelter to the entire world and that we cannot solve the problems of the world by sending everyone this way .
But it is also a misconception to think that we can keep Fort Europe closed to people who have to , or want to , leave the world outside Europe .
It appears that those people are willing to part with a great deal of money and take huge risks to enter Europe .
We will only change this if we help improve the world outside of Europe , for example by not dragging cheap raw materials and semi-finished products from those regions and by not doing business with oppressive regimes .
Imposing minimum fines undermines the autonomy of the Member States in terms of their criminal law , and the prescribed increase from EUR 3 000 to 5 000 only makes matters worse .
The Kirkhope proposal will only lead to more illegal migration and to higher profits for the mafia .
That is what you get when you punish idealistic helpers and cut off legal access options .
As I already said on 15 February in the context of the Ceyhun report on illegal entry , it is crazy to penalise the solidarity of action groups and churches with political refugees and war victims .
- ( SV ) We Swedish Christian Democrats appreciate the set of problems that has given rise to the proposal but nonetheless choose to refer this back to the Council and the Commission whom we call upon to develop a proposal taking a more holistic view of the EU ' s asylum policy .
The present proposal is problematic because there is a risk of transferring responsibility for making prior checks on asylum seekers to carriers who do not have the required knowledge or authority .
As a result , the right to seek asylum may be undermined , especially since refugees often have difficulty obtaining passports and visas .
I congratulate the last French Presidency on its plans for tough penalties across the EU on carriers illegally transporting third-country nationals into Member States .
Illegal immigration and human trafficking is a key issue for the European Union , and we must work together to tackle this challenge .
Whilst there is , of course , a strong case for genuine asylum seekers applying through the usual routes , the influx of illegal immigrants being smuggled into British ports , often by people-trafficking gangs , is alarming .
We need to send a strong signal to the traffickers that no matter where they operate in Europe , the penalties they face will be harsh .
The response to the UK-Italian proposal for EU teams of police and immigration officers to work in the western Balkans has therefore been encouraging .
Truck drivers must be part of this operation and carry out thorough checks on their vehicles to ensure there is nobody on board .
More disturbing , however , are the atrocious conditions that these immigrants suffer on their journey on trucks and lorries .
Of course , the victims , arguably , are prepared to take drastic risks to enter the countries of the European Union .
We should therefore be also looking at the root causes of this displacement , whether it is persecution in their home countries , poverty or other reasons .
All of us are extremely fortunate to be living in prosperous , democratic countries , and I for one , certainly hope we can open our doors to those who do not live in such fortunate circumstances .
These are simply common-sense measures that will help prevent people being smuggled into countries across Europe .
The British Labour government is carrying out measures to speed up applications for asylum-seekers and is making the system fairer and faster , so that people will be encouraged to make official applications rather than risk their lives on lorries , ships and trains .
Wiebenga Report ( A5-007 / 2001 )
Mr President , this morning , I talked to Mr Fitto on the telephone .
He was a Member of the European Parliament , an Italian like me , who left us to become the Chairman of the regional council of Apulia in Italy .
Naturally , he is very interested in matters concerning the crowds of immigrants which flood into his region , Apulia , which is opposite Albania and into which huge numbers of Albanian immigrants have come .
He shouted at me down the telephone , saying , " But is it only now that you are doing something to help the States and regions which are flooded with crowds of immigrants ?
Why didn 't you take action a year , two years ago , at the time of the crisis ?
You are late , very late ! "
In my opinion , he was right to tell me off , rather than the European Parliament , because , in effect , I would like - and I am calling for this now - the European Parliament to have the power to take swift action in these situations , not to wait two years to do anything .
I voted against the Commission 's proposal on temporary protection in the event of a mass influx of persons fleeing upheavals of various kinds in third countries .
I had already set out serious objections during the debate and now the European Parliament 's amendments have only made matters worse , as , incidentally , have the explanations given by the Commission .
In particular , the proposal for a directive seemed to recognise the fact that a Member State cannot have a quota of refugees imposed on it against its will .
However , Commissioner Vitorino has just presented the situation quite differently .
According to him , Article 25 does indeed provide that a Member State can declare itself unable to take in these persons , but it will have to justify that declaration and the justification must be genuinely exceptional .
Moreover , he pointed out that the decision to introduce the temporary protection system was taken by a qualified majority , implying that a Member State that declared itself unable to take in refugees could not have a right of veto .
The European Parliament went even further by adopting amendments that make it totally impossible for a Member State to dissociate itself from a majority decision on the physical allocation of these refugees .
Moreover , the European Parliament endorsed the Commission 's proposals on organising the situation of temporary refugees as though they were to remain in the host country for good , in particular by accepting the right of families to be reunited .
We believe that every Member State must remain master of its own territory , that it cannot have the presence of unwanted foreigners imposed on it , and that while there may be cases where it is necessary to give temporary protection , it must be given mainly with an eye to the repatriation of the persons concerned .
In a world of increasingly open borders , the flood of refugees is not about to dry up .
Those who welcome the progress of globalisation but wish to add a social dimension to its economic component must not forget that the movement of goods also means the movement of people .
The arrival on the French coast on 19 January of a group of 910 Kurdish refugees clearly illustrates the growing involvement of networks of organised crime in illegal immigration .
Above all , however , this massive influx of refugees quite plainly raises the question of the right to seek asylum on European soil today .
It highlights the existence right inside our borders of real trafficking in human beings , which , according to some experts , is approaching the scale of the traffic in drugs . This can be discouraged only by the establishment of genuine channels of legal access to immigration .
The organisation of legal immigration channels in Europe would tangibly reduce the pressure put on the right of asylum by the fact that it is really the only one that exists , together with the right of persons persecuted in their country of origin to be reunited with their family .
Under the 1951 Geneva Convention , the right to seek asylum is indeed a fundamental and inalienable individual right that needs to be strengthened and protected from any political considerations .
It needs to be strengthened because refugees face more than just state persecution and because very often it is not just individuals who are targeted but whole families .
The proposal before us today seems to tend broadly in that direction , yet the measures it advocates are very limited in terms of achieving the objectives involved in implementing a genuine common European asylum system .
It is time Europe considered establishing a legal status of temporary protection for people who flee their country because of war or other crises .
It must be a status that does not bar them from access to an asylum procedure and a status that maintains due regard for the principle of non-refoulement enshrined in the Geneva Convention , under which refugees may not be sent back to their country of origin .
It is time for the European Union to genuinely overhaul the right of asylum without further delay , for the situations in which the displaced people find themselves are too urgent and serious to allow time for institutional discussions .
- ( SV ) A common policy on temporary protection for displaced persons is to be welcomed , especially so as to ensure that all Member States are involved in taking care of people forced to flee from regions affected by war .
However , it is important that such temporary protection , which applies for two years at the most , should not constitute a threat to the right to seek asylum .
The right to asylum under the Geneva Convention and to a permanent residence permit must always be safeguarded .
Temporary protection in the EU ' s Member States must not prevent people from seeking asylum as soon as they arrive in the Member State responsible or during the period that the temporary protection applies .
Deprez report ( A5-0066 / 2001 )
Mr President , I too voted against the Republic of Finland ' s and the Republic of Portugal 's request for a directive regulating visa applications and border controls because , in effect , it is not within the remit of these States to table such documents in this way .
However , it pained me to do so , Mr President , for the issue raised by these States is right and proper , and I wonder why we are waiting to regulate the border control procedures at Europe 's frontiers with a directive which would be immediately applicable throughout the European territory .
The document stresses the importance of a European regulation too , since Europe is a single entity within its borders .
Frahm Report ( A5-0075 / 2001 )
Mr President , the Frahm report - I am saying this for the benefit of those who are listening to me now and did not take part in the vote - concerns the requirement to obtain a visa for those who come to Europe and who move around within our territory but are not citizens of our Member States .
I voted against this initiative of the Portuguese Republic as well , because , in effect , it was not acceptable .
However , I do wonder why the relevant committee did not amend the proposal to make it acceptable to Parliament .
It is , in fact , important to regulate well and uniformly the movements within the European territory of citizens who enter Europe on temporary visas .
Nassauer Report ( A5-0065 / 2001 )
Mr President , this is my third vote against the request of a European Union State for a directive : this time , the subject is the mutual recognition of decisions to expel third-country citizens .
I have to say that the French Republic did well to present this initiative , even though it was rejected .
Why is this ?
Because clearly , Mr President - as I am sure you agree - it is vital to have uniform standards in all 15 States on who is to be expelled from European Union territory and who is to be accepted .
Once again , therefore , I am taking the opportunity afforded by this proposal for a directive to call strongly for a European regulation on the procedures , conditions and rules for expelling undesirable immigrants from Europe .
The initiative before us today concerns the enforcement of national , administrative expulsion measures against foreigners , even where they have since moved to another Member State .
The purpose of this proposal is , quite patently , to make it easier to take measures to expel third-country nationals .
To that end , it introduces an instrument for the mutual recognition of these decisions .
Accordingly , an expulsion decision taken in one Member State can be enforced in another .
At first sight it may seem quite laudable to try to regulate and control the movement of foreigners whom our Member States have decided to expel .
This would be in line with the conclusions of the Tampere European Council of October 1999 , aimed at better migration management .
Careful examination , however , soon shows up the total ambiguity and imprecise nature of this initiative and the legal loopholes it contains .
Now that it is high time the European Union countries adopted a genuine immigration policy , what are we to think of a document that not only does not regulate expulsion issues at all , but which also seems to show complete disregard for the real situations faced by people ?
To address the immigration problem also means this : to dare to look at these non-Community citizens threatened with expulsion or being expelled who , having entered the closely-guarded Schengen area , find themselves battling against recalcitrant administrations .
If the European Union wishes to be and remain an area of freedom , justice and security , it will have to adopt legal instruments that are not only effective but also take the human factor into account .
Not measures which , like this initiative , are basically aimed only at establishing a security policy under which foreigners , perceived as a threat , can no longer enjoy their rights and freedoms and the word justice has become meaningless .
Moreover , it is difficult to accept the legal basis chosen for this proposal , namely Article 63 ( 3 ) of the EC Treaty .
That article is concerned only with immigration measures taken in specific circumstances , and in particular the conditions under which a third-country national can be sent back or expelled , against his will , to his country of origin .
The present proposal for a directive does not address these matters .
It is confined simply to the mutual recognition of decisions already taken .
The proposal does not , therefore , set out to lay down Community rules on expulsion .
It would therefore be dangerous to adopt an initiative of this kind to tackle an issue as sensitive as immigration .
Any rules adopted in this regard must respect the humanitarian and universalist values that underpin Europe .
Otherwise , our Community policies would become meaningless .
Hatzidakis Report ( A5-0040 / 2001 )
Mr President , a policeman stops an articulated lorry in Germany because it is going too fast .
The official checks the cargo : it is radioactive material , all in order with all the necessary permits .
When the official , who works in the centre of Düsseldorf , a densely populated German city , realises the risk posed by the consignment of radioactive material , he asks the driver , " But why did you go right through Düsseldorf , where there are so many people ?
Couldn 't you have taken a longer , more isolated route ? These goods are highly dangerous " .
" Well Sir , " replies the driver , " do you not know that , this very day , the European Parliament has adopted the report tabled by Mr Hatzidakis - who is a very great , extremely important , very good MEP - Paragraph 2 ( page 8 ) of which calls upon the Member States to apply the shortest possible distance principle to shipments of nuclear material .
Therefore , I took the shortest route for my consignment of radioactive material . "
And this leads me to state that something needs changing : it is better to take a long , safer route than a short , dangerous one .
The recent very alarming incident in which a train carrying radioactive nuclear fuels flasks , owned by BNFL , derailed at Torness power station near Dunbar , East Lothian , UK , shows the constant risk that transporting nuclear material involves .
Radioactivity poses grave dangers to health and the environment .
Ionising radiation transfers energy at levels that can induce changes in any matter it penetrates and even cause irreversible damage to human cells .
The danger is linked to duration of exposure and intensity and type of radiation with a dose equal to or exceeding 10 000mSv ( millisieverts ) death occurs almost instantaneously ( such high doses have only been reached in nuclear weapons explosions or serious accidents in nuclear power stations ) .
Radiation can also have delayed effects , as determined in particular after the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki , in the form of cancers or hereditary damage .
Persons exposed to radiation levels of 200mSv or more are subject to an increased risk of cancer .
This means that inhaling a few micrograms of plutonium can cause lung or tongue cancer .
Similarly , dispersal of 1200g of powdered plutonium would deliver lethal doses of radiation by inhalation with a radius of more than 2 km .
The risk of nuclear proliferation is greater during transportation than at any other stage in the fuel cycle .
Convoys are not immune to terrorist attack aimed at stealing the packages containing highly radioactive substances .
Only a few kilograms of separated plutonium are needed to build a crude nuclear explosive device .
As we know , any debate even remotely connected with nuclear matters tends to become emotional and to turn into a debate of principle .
That was not what the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism intended .
The debate on the pros and cons of nuclear energy takes place first and foremost in each of the Member States , where it follows its own course .
This report concentrates on the question of transport as such , and its different aspects : rationalisation , compliance with legislative provisions concerning transport , information on the transport of radioactive material , etc .
Radioactive material is regularly transported over long distances , not only within the European Union but also to and from the European Union and other continents .
Although a number of European Union Member States have decided to stop reprocessing or gradually to ' go non-nuclear ' , it will still be necessary to send consignments to those countries which have signed reprocessing contracts , in order to return to them their nuclear waste currently stored at reprocessing facilities .
The increase in consignments generally and the frequency of the use of road , rail , waterway and air transport increase both the likelihood of accidents and the need for safety standards in the transportation of radioactive material .
Safety must have absolute priority over profitability and supply , which is why the nuclear industry must strictly abide by international transport regulations .
In view of these observations , I support the committee 's call on the Commission to draw up a detailed list of consignments of radioactive material within the European Union and at its borders and to assess their economic and social justification , particularly in terms of public health . This should be done in order to propose means of rationalising such consignments and curtailing their number and volume , in the light of the risks identified , in compliance with the principle of prevention , if the risks are proven to outweigh the benefits .
Moreover , the Member States concerned must apply the shortest possible distance principle to all shipments of nuclear material and , as far as possible , avoid transit through densely populated areas .
Let me conclude by emphasising the importance of transparency in this field .
Full information on the risks involved needs to be very widely disseminated on a continuous basis .
I am opposed to nuclear reprocessing and I believe that all reprocessing plants in the UK and elsewhere should be closed .
I have voted for this report although I have reservations about some aspects of it .
In particular , I believe that safety has to override all other considerations .
Nuclear waste should never be transported through densely populated areas .
The ' shortest route principal ' should be secondary to the ' safest route principle ' .
Irish People , along with all Europeans live with the constant concern that an accident in the UK or France or a collision in the Irish Sea , could have devastating and immediate effects on us all .
It is not so very unusual for a report to be changed so much through amendments that the rapporteur finds it is no longer true to his basic intentions and accordingly stands down .
However , what is hard to grasp politically in this case is the way this has happened .
If groups abandon jointly negotiated compromise proposals literally overnight and suddenly put in writing the opposite of their original statements , then that casts some doubt on the very seriousness of this procedure .
My group is , of course , aware that a report on the transportation of radioactive materials is not a report on nuclear power as such , but the best way to maximise safety would be if there were nothing to transport .
So in this context we are bound to mention keeping output and the reprocessing of nuclear fuel rods to a minimum .
The fact that only 5 % or around 75 000 consignments are involved in the nuclear fuel cycle says something not only about the scale of the potential risk , but also about the nature of it .
We regard it as incomprehensible that a proposal for a legislative initiative on uniform standards for transporting radioactive materials within the European Union and at its borders , whilst observing the principle of subsidiarity , should be rejected .
Nor can we understand why stricter checks on compliance with legislation on the transportation of dangerous goods should be unacceptable .
Likewise , we believe that too little attention has been devoted to the issue of exposure thresholds .
The Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left rejects the report in the form we have before us .
I can remember the 1950s , when most people believed that nuclear fission would yield unlimited resources of clean and safe energy in future .
A number of countries subsequently built nuclear power stations as if there were no tomorrow , and the electricity supply was made largely dependent on nuclear fission .
The 1960s saw the beginning of mounting criticism , especially when it transpired that nuclear power stations can explode and that the waste product continues to threaten the environment for a very long period of time .
The disasters in Harrisburg and Chernobyl had a decelerating effect on the further development of nuclear energy , and some countries have either abandoned it completely by now or are in the process of doing so .
But even after that , we will be facing dangerous radioactive waste for many thousands of years .
Given the risks involved in transporting this kind of waste , the best solution is to bury it in the nuclear power stations which are condemned for closure and not to transport it to another location .
There are many campaigns to stop these transports , and rightly so .
The rapporteur is showing some degree of understanding for those campaigns and wants to curb the risks , but continues to allow and justify further transport of this kind .
I do not subscribe to this point of view .
Schwaiger Report ( A5-0076 / 2001 )
Mr President , the European Parliament had to make a statement on this issue , especially given the sense of uncertainty that prevails on the eve of another WTO round .
The European Parliament is sending out a clear message , which offers a coherent vision of the future of the WTO .
I therefore voted for Mr Schwaiger 's report , which calls for greater transparency within the WTO and in the way its meetings are conducted .
I am satisfied with the clear and precise mandate given to the European Commission on the use of the precautionary principle in the WTO with regard to agriculture .
I deplore the fact , however , that the European Parliament did not call on the WTO to take account of the multifunctional role of agriculture ; this must not give way to intensive and mass farming , which in any case , European consumers plainly no longer want .
Mr President , this explanation of vote has fallen at exactly the right moment , lunch time .
I voted for the motion . And why is that ?
Because I like gorgonzola , Mr President : gorgonzola cheese , taleggio cheese from the valleys around Bergamo .
I know you will be wondering what that has to do with the Schwaiger report , but there is a connection , Mr President .
The connection is that , on page 9 of the report , Paragraph 31 , which we have adopted , states that it would be desirable " to extend protection of geographical indications from wine and spirits to other agricultural products " produced in our territory as well .
Now then , I like gorgonzola and I am glad that gorgonzola is going to be included in this protection , and so I voted for the Schwaiger report .
Bon appétit !
. ( EL ) The World Trade Organization talks in Seattle were marked by huge popular uprisings , demonstrating that the very principles of the WTO are anathema .
The demonstrations , which were attended by demonstrators from all over the world , were a decisive factor in bringing down the talks .
At the same time , the opposing positions and antagonisms within this world imperialist system cause difficulties and delays which the popular movement can turn to its advantage .
The WTO , which was set up in order to speed up the full liberalisation of trade , is one of the mainstays of the new world order .
Not only does it support globalisation , it endeavours to give it the form and substance of law , which is why we do not believe that the governments of the European Union will defend the interests of their people during the new round of talks .
On the contrary , they will endeavour to claim an even bigger stake for the European monopolies , in competition with the two other imperialist centres , the USA and Japan .
The much-aired European agriculture model defended in the Schwaiger report is born of a compromise which prejudices small and medium-sized European farms and Mediterranean farm produce .
Its direct outcome will be lower farmers ' incomes , less farming and higher unemployment .
Agricultural production in Greece and other countries is being sacrificed in order to protect industrial produce from central and northern Europe and ensure that it gains a stronger foothold on the international markets .
The rules which govern international economic relations and trade should serve the interests of the workers , leave fundamental social rights be , help less-developed countries to develop , respect the environment and serve the right of every nation to exercise its own controls and decide on its own future .


Contrary to what is maintained in the Schwaiger report , the WTO will not be democratised by having elected national delegates attend .
Democratisation presupposes respect for and the protection of the rights of the workers .
The WTO , by its very nature , cannot operate in this way because it is an imperialist structure and it is concerned solely with maximum profits for big business and the safest and most flexible ways of moving money around , especially money from trade and the stock exchange , without hindrance .
The MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece voted against the Schwaiger report because most of it goes along with the plans of big business on unbridled neo-liberalisation , with its attack on the achievements of workers and the rights of nations throughout the world .
The movement against ' globalisation ' and the WTO , its disparate and multi-faceted nature notwithstanding , is an initial counterattack on the dictatorship of the monopolies and their financial interests .
It sends out a message of resistance and counterattack to the millions of workers , unemployed and small and medium-sized farms and to all the victims of the capitalist world order which the WTO wishes to impose .
With the European agriculture model , we have a common agricultural policy in mind .
That does not , however , mean that we accept the shape of current agricultural policy , which is producer-driven , large-scale and based upon heavy subsidies .
Nor can we support duties affording protection against the developing world .
On the other hand , we should like to see a common agricultural policy . However , we think there would be risks in each nation ' s devising its own agricultural subsidies .
A new common agricultural policy must be small-scale and be based upon rural development and environmentally-minded agriculture .
It is an area which must be characterised and permeated by long-term sustainable development , for example when it comes to the environment and the economy .
In the end I voted against the Schwaiger report despite its good qualities , because the debate we held yesterday , and in particular Commissioner Lamy 's replies to my three questions , left me very dissatisfied .
In reply to my first question - and is it not dangerous to negotiate the Built-In Agenda separately ? - Commissioner Lamy said that the ongoing negotiations in Geneva on agricultural trade and trade in services are not really negotiations but just preparatory talks .
Perhaps that distinction is valid from an abstract point of view , but in practice I do not think it holds water .
The Commission 's reply to my second question - should we not redefine the negotiating mandate in the light of the trend of events and public opinion ? - was negative : it stated that the Commission would stick to the mandate defined at the time of Agenda 2000 .
In any case , the European Parliament has just underpinned that position by explicitly rejecting two amendments calling for the Blair House Agreement to be renegotiated .
In his reply to my third question - before opening new negotiations , should we not first define more clearly how the negotiators are to be monitored ? - Commissioner Lamy referred mainly to the framework agreement between the European Parliament and the Commission .
That is certainly a matter of some significance , but basically my question concerned scrutiny by the Council , which sets the Commission 's negotiating objectives , and by the national parliaments , which in my view have the final say .
Confusion continues to prevail with regard to these aspects .
I very much regret that the Protocol , which was still part of the preliminary draft for Nice in November , was not incorporated , at least the part concerning scrutiny of the way negotiations are conducted at the WTO .
It stated that the Presidency and the Member States may accompany the Commission to WTO meetings , that the Commission must forward all the documents at its disposal without delay , that it has a binding obligation to respond to the wishes of a Member State to open a consultation procedure , that the common position upheld by the Commission is established by the Council , and that the Council may at all times address negotiating directives to the Commission .
I believe it is essential to observe these rules , in one form or another , in order to ensure proper scrutiny of the WTO negotiations .
. ( NL ) Free trade is about more than removing borders or doing away with old-style protectionism .
More than anything , it implies that the price of a product outweighs all other considerations .
Whoever can deliver at the cheapest price , gains that segment of the market and drives away the more expensive producers .
With ever lower transport costs , it is possible to haul any cheap raw material and any cheap end product from anywhere .
The competition is forced to choose between cheaper deliveries or going under .
Those in favour of this mechanism claim that it makes producers more ingenious and effective and that the consumer benefits .
That is why there should be unlimited competition , ultimately at world level , if possible .
Despite this , there are sound reasons for raising production costs and for protecting production from cheaper competitors .
The reasons are : safety at work , proper pay for employees , ruling out child labour , effective distribution of employment across the region , care for the environment , preventing animal suffering , discouraging unnecessary traffic , and providing facilities and services which may not be money-spinners logistically speaking , but are useful and desirable nevertheless .
That is a task for the democratically elected government , but WTO agreements render this task secondary to blind market forces .
Although the rapporteur ' s proposal is inadequate in my view , I will not vote against something which can help curb this trend .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.40 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Final agreement on the reform of the system for international transfers of footballers
Ladies and gentlemen , please be seated .
There are not many of you in the Chamber yet , in fact only just enough to make up a football team , which brings me to the subject of this debate .
The next item is the communication from the Commission on the final agreement on the reform of the system for international transfers of footballers .
Madam President , you will recall that on 7 September 2000 I informed Parliament of the Commission ' s position concerning the reform of FIFA rules governing international transfers .
On that occasion , I announced the Commission ' s intention to enter into discussions with FIFA and other interested parties , led by my fellow Commissioner , Mario Monti , and with the collaboration of Anna Diamantopoulou , in order to bring FIFA regulations into line with Community law with due regard for , firstly , the specific characteristics of sport and , secondly , the autonomy of sporting organisations .
Indeed , the Declaration on the specific characteristics of sport , adopted by the European Council in Nice in December 2000 , fully supported this approach .
Today , following intense discussions between the Commission departments , FIFA and the other interested parties , I am pleased to be able to announce the result we have obtained .
This outcome , Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , respects the principles which I have just outlined and to which we are all committed .
In this entire business , the Commission has frequently been accused of failing to understand sport or , worse still , of wishing to destabilise football .
Yet the outcome of the discussions proves that such accusations are unfounded . Indeed , I believe that these discussions have provided a further opportunity to demonstrate that Community law and the specific characteristics of sport are perfectly compatible .
I therefore see no need to amend Community law .
In this instance , the Commission has shown itself to be sufficiently flexible to incorporate the specific characteristics of sport within existing texts .
The discussions have led to clear progress in at least three key areas .
Firstly , a goal which the European Parliament has always sought , protecting young players moving within the European Union , guaranteeing them an appropriate general and sporting education .
These principles will be included in a code of conduct drawn up by the football federations , and I attach special importance to this point since in my opinion it is far more effective to support the work of these young players rather than to impose restrictions on their movement , which would , in any case , not be compatible with the principle of freedom of movement .
Let us not forget that , in football , many are called but few are chosen , and not every player is destined to be a football star .
We must therefore ensure that they are given vocational training as well as sports training .
With these provisions the Commission hopes to send a clear message to all those young players who put a lot of effort into football : although they will not all make it at the professional level , they will all be treated with due consideration in human terms and in terms of their individual development .
The second component involves encouraging and compensating the effort made by clubs to train young people , thereby giving their sports activities a social dimension , which , moreover , is a characteristic of the European dimension of sport .
In order to achieve this , FIFA has undertaken to introduce rules dealing with : firstly , compensation for training costs incurred up to the age of 23 , on the basis of real costs , in line with the Court ' s judgment in the Bosman case , and secondly , the creation of a solidarity fund which will be sustained by a 5 % levy on each compensation payment for transfer .
This fund is intended for the training clubs , who will thereby receive a share of the player ' s added value .
It is now up to FIFA to apply these principles in detail . The Commission will , within its sphere of responsibility , ensure that the incorporation of these principles into FIFA ' s rules is effectively achieved , and I am sure , Madam President , that the Commission will not be alone , but will be supported in this monitoring work by both the Sports Ministers and the Members of Parliaments who have made commitments at national level .
We are convinced , then , that it is possible to find a balance between a player ' s mobility and the necessary compensation of the training club within the limits laid down by the Court in the Bosman case .
The third point is the introduction of elements of stability into sporting competitions in order to ensure their equity and regularity .
These are the mechanisms intended to achieve this .
Firstly , unilateral termination of a contract will be authorised only at the end of a season .
This means that a club ' s fans have some guarantee of seeing the same team play throughout the season , because this is the team that they have bought their season tickets to see , not another team , which may perhaps have lost its best players .
Secondly , the imposition of disciplinary measures on players and clubs who terminate their contracts during its first two seasons without just cause or valid reasons .
These principles are supported by other important points , such as fixed periods for transfers or the duration of contracts of between one and five years .
Ladies and gentlemen , in the course of our discussions , we met with FIFPRO , which represent the players .
Some of their requests were met .
For instance , FIFA rules will no longer prohibit players from going to court , but also a special Court of Arbitration will be set up , based on equal representation , which will be able to settle disputes concerning training fees , transfers and disciplinary measures .
I attach particular importance to arbitration being independent and based on equal representation .
The creation of an arbitration body of this kind to which matters can be referred by both players and clubs should resolve disputes fairly , quickly and efficiently . I should like to point out , too , that throughout this affair , the Commission has emphasised that the discussions between it , FIFA and the other interested parties in no way affect the compatibility of FIFA ' s revised rules with national laws in force , and in particular with employment law .
It is FIFA ' s responsibility to ensure that the rules are applied in accordance with national legislation from which they cannot , of course , depart .
FIFA has announced that the principles thus agreed will be implemented by a revision of FIFA rules at its world congress in Buenos Aires in July .
The Commission has urged FIFA to seek close dialogue with the other interested parties with a view to such implementation , most particularly , of course , the players .
In the Commission ' s opinion , the discussions on transfers have clearly shown that dialogue at all levels is becoming a necessity and that all possible avenues for organising dialogue should be explored , including collective agreements at the European level .
Indeed , Mrs Diamantopoulou offered her assistance in supporting ongoing dialogue at European level .
To conclude this statement I would remind you that , after the first two years , FIFA will draw up a report on the application of this system .
We will then have quantitative and qualitative information from which we can learn .
In the meantime , I believe we must be very pleased with the outcome of these discussions , not , Madam President , that it was always very easy to arrive at an outcome .
On more than one occasion , concluding a discussion was delayed due to the pressure brought to bear by some Heads of State and Government , which was considerable pressure , but pointless and , above all , harmful .
Be that as it may , the Commission held its ground and was ultimately able to demonstrate that it is not necessary to amend the terms of the Treaty in order to respect the specific characteristics of sport ; it therefore stood firm while keeping strictly to its own sphere of responsibility .
As a result of this outcome , my fellow Commissioner , Mario Monti , will not need to propose that the Commission adopt a negative decision concerning FIFA transfer rules .
Madam President , I would like to thank the Commissioner , Mrs Reding , for being here today .
We are , of course , all pleased that a compromise has finally been reached , and I have , in fact , always agreed with you that the Commission clearly does not want to destroy football .
I got a few bloody noses at home for supporting you to such an extent , but by now I think that even the rather rude Mr Beckenbauer will have recognised that you are not trying to destroy his beloved football . That is why I am pleased about the compromise , but I would like to ask you one thing now .
Putting to one side for the time being those who for a wide variety of reasons will gain from this compromise - young sportsmen and women , small sports clubs , large sports clubs - are you not worried that this compromise , which treats sportsmen and women up to the age of 28 differently from those older than that , could lead to a violation of the principle of equality ? Are you not worried that in the end there will be even more Bosman judgments , by which I mean that courts exercising civil and criminal jurisdiction may take a different view to that represented by this compromise ?
Are you not concerned that this could lead to us being buried in a veritable avalanche of court cases ?
Mrs Pack , we cannot prevent any citizen taking a case to the Court of Justice .
If any citizen , whether or not they are a footballer , whether or not they are a club member , decides to take a case to the Court , then he is perfectly free so to do .
We even insisted that this freedom be explicitly stated in the compromise because the Court of Arbitration , which is to be specific to the world of football , will , of course , be used to settle any disputes that arise , but we would like to see these disputes settled within the footballing family , and not necessarily in the public arena .
Nonetheless , citizens ' freedoms require that if a person does not find any solution within the footballing family , he can then refer the case to either national or European Court .
Madam President , I feel much happier after Mrs Reding ' s speech , because it seems the Commission has made an effort to bring together those three principles , namely the principle of recognition of Community law , the principle of the autonomy of professional organisations and the principle of the specificity of sport .
I was also relieved to hear the last statement to the effect that access to national jurisdiction - or , if appropriate , to Community jurisdiction - remains open .
I should just like to ask the Commissioner for further clarification . Is there not a risk that transferring the competence for applying the rules to FIFA and to other professional organisations might lead to the possible transfer of legislative powers from the European institutions to non-governmental organisations such as FIFA , FIFPRO or UEFA ?
A Declaration was added to the Treaty of Amsterdam , stipulating that sports federations have a certain autonomy .
The Commission ' s action was fully compliant with this Declaration .
On the basis of the Treaty provisions and also taking into consideration the views of the Heads of State and Government as expressed in Nice in the Declaration on the specific characteristics of sport , the Commission has established a framework together with FIFA , while acknowledging an element of autonomy for sporting bodies and the procedure they are now going to use to settle details .
In that context , the agreement proposed by FIFA has not been signed by the Commission , yet the Commission in the letter which Mr Monti , as lead Commissioner in this matter , sent to Mr Blatter stated that if the fine principles contained in the FIFA proposal are put into practice then the Commission may not have to issue a ban .
Madam President , Commissioner , from an Irish point of view I welcome the compensation clause and the solidarity fund because Irish football clubs are the cradle for many young footballers who go on to play in the English premiership and beyond .
I would like to ask the Commissioner a couple of questions about that .
First of all , I assume the solidarity fund is a general fund .
Is there any chance that a portion of the transfer fee for under-23s might go directly to the amateur club which nurtured their skills ?
You also need to look at the footballing academies in England to which young footballers are taken from Ireland at a very young age .
Will there be some compensation for them ?
The scandalous exploitation of young African footballers is a problem which I would ask you to look at again , because it does not seem to me to be addressed by the ban on inter-club transfers .
Agents will still find a way of getting round that .
I recognise that this was a difficult compromise which does address the problem - the potentially disastrous consequences of absolute freedom of movement - while at the same time recognising the need to respect the new law .
Madam President , let me thank Mr Cushnahan for his support .
We have indeed succeeded in providing more than a solution to the problem of Community law pure and simple ; we have also guaranteed stability for young people and also solidarity and protection .
Regarding the solidarity fund , there are two solidarity systems in place to compensate the training clubs .
Firstly , at the time of a transfer , training costs are reimbursed for the club responsible for training the young player , and that is applicable up to the age of 12 .
There are two reasons , however , why these allocations cannot be too high .
Firstly we must adhere to the Bosman judgment .
Secondly if training fees were too high , then it would be too difficult for young footballers to be transferred from one club to another , all but the very best players .
However , we have to also protect footballers and young teenagers , so training fees must not be too high .
The second component is the solidarity fund .
This solidarity fund will be sustained by a 5 % levy on each compensation payment for transfer .
In this respect it is the player ' s value and not the money invested in training him which will count .
There will therefore be a duplicate transfer system for clubs offering training .
My hope - and this has been my objective in negotiating - is that the money will get back to the clubs at grass roots level which are so necessary in giving European sport a social dimension .
Such clubs play a prime social role in our villages and small towns and they must be given the opportunity to continue this work .
We preferred not to prevent the free movement of young African players or , as you said , youths from third countries so as not to hinder the free movement of European youth , but we did seek to impose some conditions on the way that third-country nationals were treated by clubs offering training .
The problem arises not in their travelling but in the way they are treated in the host country .
The code of conduct is intended to ensure that the clubs offering training actually take proper charge of these young people and do not train them simply as sportsmen but offer them an all-round education and preparation for life , for of course not everyone who has received sports training will become football stars or even have a professional career in the game .
Of course , the young people that are accepted into the European Union , even if they come from third countries , will benefit from equal treatment .
According to this code of conduct , not only will no distinction be made between young people from European countries and those from candidate countries , but young third-country nationals that have entered the European Union legally will also have the opportunity to be treated on the same terms .
You may rest assured that the Commission will carefully monitor the framing and implementation of this code of conduct .
I am sure , ladies and gentlemen , that you too , as Members of the European Parliament , in your work at grassroots level , will note the way in which the code of conduct has been implemented .
On the subject of the free movement of young people from third countries , FIFA has stated that this was not within our remit since we had power to regulate only within the European Union .
Outside the European Union and associated countries they intended to purely and simply ban the transfer of youths of less than 18 years of age .
This is a unilateral decision by FIFA which must therefore apply to citizens from third countries .
Thank you , Madam President , and congratulations to Commissioner Reding on the result of this protracted football match .
This is something we can certainly all be satisfied with .
I can think of just one moot point which I should like to ask the Commission to explain .
Do the new rules result in the same legal status for players under 23 years of age , as was applicable before the Bosman verdict , should a dispute arise between clubs about an amount by way of compensation ?
Might players be in danger of not being able to change clubs , even if the contract has expired ?
What legal protection do players have in such a situation ?
Are they in danger of being tied for a period during such a legal dispute ?
. ( FR ) Ladies and gentlemen , the age limit of 23 years only applies to training , because we had to set age limits and FIFA suggested these to us .
Players undergo training between 12 and 23 years of age and training costs are paid in the event of a player under the age of 23 transferring clubs .
It is considered that training is completed by the age of 23 .
With regard to the length of contracts and the possibility of terminating a contract , from the outset we always said that pacta sunt servanda ; in other words , if an adult signs a contract , the contract is binding .
A contract is not there to be terminated , it is there to be observed , not forgetting that the rules of the sport also apply .
If , during a championship , clubs start to buy players left , right and centre , they are upsetting the balance of the championship .
Furthermore , if , during a championship , players rightly or wrongly leave their team , this is not simply a personal matter for them - it also destabilises the team .
All these considerations , which are specific to the sport , led us to put in place measures to ensure the stability of contracts .
So , whatever a player ' s age , a contract cannot be terminated during the championship , nor can it be terminated outside of the championship if the contract extends beyond it , except for very specific reasons , such as a player being injured or a change in the team ' s system .
It will be a matter for the court , the Court of Arbitration , to judge who is right .
If a player terminates his contract in the first two years and does not have a specific reason , disciplinary measures will be imposed .
As far as possible , we have tried to limit these disciplinary measures , because , at the beginning , sports authorities were considering measures lasting one or even two years , which would have totally destroyed the career of a professional player .
That is why we agreed to have disciplinary measures lasting four months , which could be extended to six months for repeat offenders or for someone who has already tried this trick several times before .
In order to ensure the stability of teams and the championship , therefore , we agreed on these measures , which are to be put in place not by the Commission , but by the national , European and international federations .
I must inform you that we did not want disciplinary measures to be taken solely against players , because clubs often sell their players for purely commercial reasons rather than reasons related to sport .
So disciplinary measures will also be taken against clubs and against agents who encourage players to leave their clubs , thereby affecting the stability of their contracts .
Thank you , Mrs Reding .
I would like to quickly reiterate that the rules of the game are to keep the questions and answers as short as possible .
Madam President , I was a huge fan of the Commission ' s attempt to put a check on the present transfer system which has , in my view , resulted in absurd situations .
That is also why , unlike my fellow MEPs , I am disappointed about the outcome of the negotiations which is now before us .
Of course , the proposal contains some sound points , such as compensation for training costs .
I am still left wondering about this , because the Commissioner ' s response to my previous question was , in my opinion , not satisfactory .
If the cost of training is paid , even at the end of a contract , even at the time when a club wants to be rid of its player , this will be at odds with the Bosman judgment .
After all , either the compensation will be too low , in which case it is not a true reflection of the actual cost of training , or it will be very high and will clash with the Bosman judgment which stipulates that , at the end of a contract , no remuneration of any kind may be paid to the club .
However , Commissioner , my biggest disappointment concerns the very essence of the present transfer system , namely the existence of transfer fees .
You have to admit that the Commission has not been able to change this aspect .
It will be possible , in future too , for the club and player to agree in their joint contracts on transfer fees which are unlimited and which can rise to the same absurd heights as they do at the moment .
I think that you should be generous enough to admit that the Commission has suffered a huge defeat in this respect , and that the essence of the present system remains intact .
In my opinion , FIFA ' s proposal is nothing but a cosmetic change to , and , in some respects , an improvement on , the current system , but the essence of that system , the existence of transfer fees , remains in place .
Madam President , Mr Lagendijk is correct .
We did not change the transfer fee levels , because this matter was not referred to us .
We did not receive any complaints about this , only complaints regarding the international transfer system , which is why we intervened .
The current situation is that no compensation is paid at the end of a contract - the Bosman judgment stipulates that training compensation should be paid on the condition that the compensation is in line with real costs .
These are the terms of the Bosman judgment and this is what the agreement with FIFA seeks to put into practice .
Madam President , can I welcome the forbearance and patience shown by the Commissioner 's staff during the last seven months .
Many of us do not understand why this could not have been done in seven minutes , because it is clear that we have principles .
Like many of my colleagues I am interested in the impact on clubs in the north-west of England , which is , after all , the home of football .
We still have no answer on the issue of training compensation .
Clubs in my region are concerned that the money they invest in buying players will not give them a return on their investment and , as Mr Cushnahan said , they will not be interested in running football academies and in investing in the local community if they cannot see a return on their investment .
So far I cannot see how training compensation is going to deliver that .
In today 's Times newspaper UEFA and FIFA are clearly indicating that this will lead to lower transfer fees , which has a knock-on impact , particularly for smaller clubs in my area .
Commissioner , you have a review clause , which will be tried for two seasons - do you then intend to act to ensure that there is a free and good flow of transfer of money between clubs or will it be left to governing bodies to act in this area ?
Now that we have closed this chapter , Commissioner , can I also extend an invitation to you to visit the north-west to see one of the premier teams play football .
They would be very happy for you to visit us in the north-west .
. ( FR ) I shall gladly accept your invitation , as , believe me , before I made any decisions with regard to this matter , I visited some small clubs and training centres .
What is one thing in theory is completely different in reality .
I saw this on Monday , just after the agreement had been reached .
On Tuesday , I met the English Football League and representatives from clubs in the second division .
They were concerned and asked me to explain the terms of the agreement .
In response , they told me that they felt completely reassured .
Of course , we must see how things turn out in practice in the clubs .
Rest assured , we shall be monitoring this very closely .
I must also inform you that the criticism made by the Football League was not directed at the Commission , but rather at the UEFA management and those running European football in general , who said that they had never been consulted .
The Football League never discussed the matter with UEFA and yet I believe that , in a democracy , which is also called upon to play a role within our sporting federations , discussions between the main parties should be the order of the day .
On this point , I must also inform you that my colleague , Anna Diamantopoulou , who is responsible for the free movement of workers , has been taken aback by the lack of talks between clubs and players , for example .
She suggested that she might assist , so that discussions on collective European negotiations may be held in the future .
Transparency must also play a part in the world of sport .
Commissioner , you mentioned the ongoing evaluation that you will be making over the next two years .
I wonder whether it would not have been wiser to have carried out an assessment of the economic impact on small clubs before you travelled down this road .
Many of the smaller clubs in my region , who cradle players for the obvious talents of the north-west clubs in the UK , are particularly worried about this .
There has been a lot of talk about football here today , but you mentioned sport and this is specifically a sports remit .
Other sports have transfer fees and I wonder which other sports you have discussed this with .
I find it very interesting that players now have different rights depending on their age - 23 being the case in point here .
I was wondering for Commissioner Diamantopoulou whether this sets a precedent for other European employment legislation .
Finally , Commissioner , you mentioned the changes to FIFA rules and regulations .
The calculation behind the effective training costs was recently posted on the FIFA website .
FIFA state it would be impossible to do this for individual players so they want to do this by league and type of club .
This recommendation means that the smaller the club , the smaller the amount of money the club will receive in compensation for training costs .
The categories are a category-one club of a top level , with a high quality training centre ; category two : still professional but on a lower level - second division clubs in the UK ; category three : all types of third-division clubs , as in the UK ; category four : amateur players - Vauxhall Conference and other amateur footballers .
Are we not building another type of discrimination into football , which we really did not need in the first place ?
. ( FR ) Mr Heaton-Harris , I do not wish to interfere in the affairs of the UK .
I think that because the UK football authorities are autonomous and because this autonomy has been fully acknowledged , they should deal with this matter .
The Commission ' s opinion is that this should be dealt with in a transparent fashion and that all parties such as rich clubs , less wealthy clubs , prominent , young and average players , should all be involved in the discussions .
I certainly hope that transparency and democracy come into play .
To come to the issue of training costs , we consider this issue to be quite straightforward .
These costs cannot be excessive otherwise they would constitute a barrier to free movement and they would clearly be in total contradiction of the Bosman judgment .
That is why a ceiling will be imposed on the costs .
My second point , which reiterates what I said in my introductory speech , is we believe that solidarity is an extremely important factor .
Training costs and the solidarity funds , therefore , must be cascaded downwards , precisely in order to protect the smaller clubs .
I made this point very clear and it is also part of the Nice Declaration .
With sport , we have a social responsibility , particularly towards the majority at the bottom of the hierarchy .
Madam President , I believe that this agreement has enabled us to do two things .
We have been able to support the majority at the bottom of the hierarchy , as well as those at the top .
We took a gamble , which was not easy , but we hope that this great achievement will work out just as well in practice , which will be the next test .
Commissioner , you concluded your first speech by commenting that this agreement demonstrates that it will not be necessary to change the Treaty to take account of the special features of sport and of football . In order words , you said that the Commission too recognises the special character of sport .
Now , my question is this : that being so , why was it that before Nice the Commission did not press for the special character of sport to be included in the Treaty alongside culture , and in fact seemed to be opposed to including this in the Treaty ? The fact is that they are not the same , because there may still be some uncertainty here .
The ruling by the Court of Justice on some of the points that were settled and on others that still have to be resolved is still vulnerable and , in fact , the specific character of sport in general and of football in particular will not be safeguarded until they are clearly and specifically recognised in the Treaties .
So I would like to ask you if the Commission still maintains that it is neither necessary nor helpful to have a clear reference in the Treaty to the special character of sport .
. ( FR ) I first worked on this matter in the summer of 1999 , when I was European Commissioner for Sport .
Since that time , the Commission ' s entire policy has taken the specific characteristics of sport into consideration .
Furthermore , only in December 1999 , a Commission statement on the social dimension of sport was submitted to the Heads of State and Government at the Helsinki Summit .
And nothing has changed since then .
We have done more about the specific characteristics of sport than merely make a statement we have put words into practice .
We should , nonetheless , be well aware that any future Treaty will include an article on the specific characteristics of sport .
However , ladies and gentlemen , this will not mean an end of the right to competition , free movement , or any of the fundamental rights enshrined in the Treaty , because people in the sporting world are not above the Treaty .
So , I hope this is perfectly clear .
It would be very useful for me , as Commissioner for Sport , to have the specific characteristics of sport included , because I could at last ! create a programme specific to sport , which I alone am currently unable to do .
I always have to consider aspects such as education , health and culture as well ; in other words , all the other components that are included in the Treaty .
We have , then , always respected the specific characteristics of sport .
To make an exception for sport , which is what some people would like to see , and which would mean that the rules of the Treaty do not apply to sport , is something to which I am firmly opposed .
Madam President , I too am pleased that the negotiations have culminated in an agreement , and I believe that it is indeed positive that another evaluation is planned in two years ' time to check whether we have actually promoted what we set out to promote .
I am particularly pleased with the compensation for training , the code of conduct for young players and the solidarity fund .
I have a question regarding the latter .
The Commissioner says in that connection that she hopes that this will benefit the smaller clubs .
I would like to find out what guarantees are being built in so that the solidarity fund will actually benefit the smaller clubs and the training clubs , and can actually contribute to the social function of the sport .
I am thinking of the composition and criteria for allocating funding , for example .
Is anything known about this yet ?
. ( FR ) We have FIFA ' s clear and distinct commitment that this will happen .
We have their assurance that the money will be cascaded down , right down to the club who nurtured the player from the age of 12 , and we have their assurance that 5 % of the transfer fees will be put back into the fund .
Naturally , we shall be checking that , in practice , everything is carried out in accordance with these assurances , and if there is a problem , we shall certainly make our views known .
Madam President , I would like , if I may , to extend this line of thinking a little further because there are two very important decisions to mention . The first is solidarity between the richest clubs and the less wealthy clubs and the second is the protection of young people through a code of conduct .
In my view - and , furthermore , I intend , during the Belgian Presidency , to present a proposal on this issue to the Ministers for Sport - these measures could be extended to cover other sports , because the protection of young people concerns all other sports as well as football , and the same goes for solidarity between the clubs in the premier division and the small clubs who put in the initial work .
We can use these arguments to lobby other sporting authorities and disciplines so that they take steps in the same direction .
Madam President , I wish to begin by congratulating Commissioners Reding , Monti and Diamantopoulou .
We have all come a very long way since last August .
The partnership has been invaluable in proving that we can come to some agreement on this issue .
The principles that have been established , especially around the specificity of sport , are extremely important .
However , my worry remains with the players ' associations .
I know that the Commissioner may say that this is a matter for the sporting families , but ultimately we will have to sort it out , because if the players ' associations either refuse to come on board or the players take action , then ultimately the agreement may be in tatters .
First , what will Mrs Reding be doing to bring the players ' associations on board and , secondly , are there any particular problems that she thinks we could resolve as far as the players are concerned ?
. ( FR ) As I have already explained , we would prefer clubs and players , which are the two sides involved in this matter , to sit around the table and begin negotiations .
Mrs Dimantopoulou has also recently written to the clubs and the players to ensure that , finally , this social dialogue can get off the ground .
Secondly , the Commissioners responsible for this issue met the players ' associations on a regular basis because we thought that it made sense for the great footballing family to come together .
Unfortunately , this has not always been how it works in practice .
That is why we talked with both parties throughout the developments in this matter .
I would also like to inform you that our constant concern was to protect the rights conferred on employees by the Treaties , even if sport does have specific characteristics . Furthermore , in order to ensure that sport operates properly , a professional football player cannot be treated in the same way as a steelworker .
Everyone understands this .
Furthermore , some aspects of the agreement are obvious ; for example , the protection of young people refers specifically to young players .
The disciplinary measures were toned down considerably compared to what had been asked and was expected at the beginning .
That is a benefit for sportsmen and women .
Who then benefits from the stability of the championships and teams ?
Sport is the prime beneficiary , then the fans and spectators , but professional players benefit as well .
Indeed , would they still benefit from playing if sport were destroyed ?
With regard to the Court of Arbitration , we insisted that the court be made up of equal numbers of players and club representatives .
I believe that this is a major step forward for players , and I hope that the offer made by my colleague , Mrs Diamantopoulou , will be accepted so that , in this area as well , we see the beginnings of a genuine social dialogue .
Madam President , I would also like to thank the Commissioner for all the effort she has put into these negotiations .
I have two short questions .
The first is , over what period is the training compensation system going to be worked out and the code of conduct developed ?
I ask because I believe it is very important to have a set schedule and a set time frame here .
My other question is about the transfer fee level , which is still unlimited .
So the question arises of how the solidarity fund will work , if it is really going to benefit the very smallest clubs .
You mentioned 5 % of the transfer fee , which would then be shared out .
However , the key question is how this amount will be distributed and if it will then really benefit the clubs on the bottom rung of the ladder .
. ( FR ) You are asking when all this will be put into practice .
The FIFA world congress takes place in Buenos Aires at the beginning of July , and FIFA will then be aiming to incorporate into its rules all the broad principles that were collectively agreed .
These broad principles must be put into practice when applying the new rules of world football .
To deal specifically with the question of transfer fees , I have already answered a question on this subject .
We did not receive any complaints about the levels of transfer fees .
I have my own view on this , and , no doubt , you do as well .
The autonomy of federations should , however , enable this to be settled fairly easily , for example , by setting minimum and maximum levels .
There could be rules , for example , to specify that only clubs that do not have a huge deficit would be allowed to make transfers against payment , but it is not up to the Commission to regulate everything , everywhere .
There are very distinct responsibilities and national and European federations have a fair share of responsibilities to shoulder in the system .
Furthermore , I would like to reiterate that what we have just decided is not a substitute for national law .
The rules in national law , and particularly the rules in employment law , could be changed in Member States to take account of the specific characteristics of sport .
We noticed that some Heads of State and Governments were extremely committed to football !
Therefore , if this commitment is put into practice on the ground , in the Member States , this will apply to football and to sport as a whole .
Madam President , Commissioners , I welcomed the conclusion of the agreement on the transfer of footballers with great satisfaction .
The terms of the agreement appear to be positive .
It was certainly a matter that needed regulating .
In particular , I welcome the fact that the Commission has succeeded in emphasising the aspects related to solidarity towards small sports clubs as well in an agreement which is economic and legislative in nature , valuing their enormous dedication to training young people .
I would also like to thank Commissioner Reding and Commissioner Monti , who , this very morning , together with the Italian sports writers ' association and the supporters ' association , allowed me to put forward the idea of establishing a European sports committee and maybe subsequently a European sports agency , which would have the task of promoting healthy sporting activity and dealing at European level with different issues related to culture , education , the free movement of persons , non-discrimination and the fight against violence , racism and doping .
To sum up , we have set off along the right road but we must tread the path resolutely , as , I am sure , Commissioner Reding will do .
So what will the next the stage be ?
.
( FR ) Yes , Madam President , Mr Mantovani is perfectly correct in saying that we must not only solve the problems posed by Community law but we must also consider the bigger picture and understand that sport is an extremely important social activity , and symbolises the cultural activity of a whole society .
With this in mind , then , I propose we take advantage of the opportunity provided by the Olympic Games to be held in Athens , because these games will revisit the original Olympic ideals of fair competition and fair play .
In a statement on sport that I will be sending firstly to the Commission and then to Parliament , I will therefore propose that 2004 be declared the European Year of Sport and that , in this way , school children be introduced to this other aspect of sport , which is distinct from the business side of things , in other words , the sport of fair play , the true values of our society .
As part of the Youth Programme for example , young voluntary workers could also be asked to become involved in the Olympic Games .
I can inform you now that I had a meeting with the Chairman of the Athens 2004 Organising Committee , to ask if the torch , which is symbolic of the Olympics and their values , could travel through Europe before finishing its journey in Athens so that the torch could become a catalyst in every European country for discussions on the true values of sport , which might enable these values to be put into practice almost everywhere .
Madam President , I am pleased that there has been an agreement .
Obviously everybody is looking into the detail now and although we were very excited when we first got the agreement , I think a lot of people would agree that it is going to be quite difficult to find out whether it is going to benefit some of the smaller clubs - in particular , academy clubs - as much as we hoped .
I know this has been touched on , but Stoke City in my constituency has an academy club as good as Manchester United and my fear is that it will get less money because it is not in the premier league .
I would like the Commissioner to say whether she is going to look again at whether all clubs could be treated on the same level .
I know FIFA has recommended it .
I understand that a Hungarian player who has had his transfer put on hold is probably going to mount a legal challenge .
What would happen if that legal challenge is successful ?
Would we then have to go back to the drawing-board ?
. ( FR ) Madam President , the agreement that has been reached does not , to any extent , prejudge legal challenges before the Court of Justice .
It is , of course , obvious that neither the Commission nor this House would ever allow themselves to interfere in the judges ' work .
It is fortunate that democracy is founded on the division of powers .
It is therefore up to the judges in the Court in Luxembourg to decide on their course of action .
I would however like to mention that , last year , the judges issued a ruling in two cases that had important implications for sport .
The rulings that were issued show that the Court in Luxembourg takes into account the independence of federations as well as the social dimension of sport .
I am referring to the Lehtonen and the Liège rulings .
With regard to the Balog ruling , we have to respect the judgment of the Court .
With regard to the omnipresent fear that the system of the richest clubs transferring money to less wealthy clubs will not work properly , I , unfortunately , can say no more about this .
There was a demand for this system .
It has been decided how the system will work and we will only know if it works when it is implemented .
Madam President , I also expect the Members of Parliament who are involved in this issue to inform the Commission when , in their constituency , they notice that the system is not working as it should under the terms of the agreement between the Commission and FIFA .
I believe that we should work together more closely on this , because what we all want is to protect the social dimension of sport , to protect smaller clubs and to protect young players .
So let us all keep an eye on how this works out in practice .
Madam President , this has been a very hard and long process , and it is not over yet .
This can now be regarded as a precedent , and this obviously leads to the question as to how then all the other ball games and individual sports will be treated in the future , and how the rules that apply to them might possibly change , as each sport is obviously different and limits on age and training vary greatly between them .
Can this now be regarded as setting a precedent for all of them ?
Similarly , I would like to ask how training is evaluated and its cash value determined ; what is the definition of voluntary work , and what sort of cash value could be worked out for it ?
And thirdly , can we in future also apply our own rules to sports events that are purely national and are not played or enjoyed anywhere else except in just the one Member State , or are we to await this precedent ?
. ( FR ) Mrs Matikainen knows a great deal about sport , since she competed at a very high level and she is quite right in saying that this could be regarded as a precedent .
I certainly hope that this is the case .
That is why I will , of course , be asking for other sporting disciplines to participate in the tenth European Sports Forum , which will be given as much impetus as required , and to which Members of Parliament will also be invited , and where all sporting disciplines will be represented .
It is true that we have not discussed voluntary work as much as we should .
We have discussed huge transfer sums , but not the hundreds of thousands of people who give their private lives and free time to work with young people and their sports clubs .
That is what constitutes the social dimension of sport .
How could sport in Europe exist without these people ?
You are quite right , Mrs Matikainen .
I think that when we discuss information for young people in schools and clubs , we will also discuss the subject of voluntary work , because these activities are an integral part of the social dimension of sport in Europe .
Mrs Matikainen , with regard to the calculations , the sporting federations must agree on realistic sums .
We shall never be in a position to evaluate voluntary work , because it would have to be paid , then sport would be out of the reach of villages and small towns and only professional sport would remain .
That is not what we want .
On my own behalf , therefore , and , I believe , on behalf of everyone here , I would like to say a big thank you to all voluntary workers .
Thank you , Mrs Reding .
The debate is closed .
I would like to thank all the Members who spoke , as well as the Commissioner for her detailed and thorough answers .
Evidence in civil and commercial matters
The next item is the report ( A5-0073 / 2001 ) by Mr Marinho , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , on the initiative of the Federal Republic of Germany with a view to the adoption of a Council regulation on cooperation between the courts of the Member States in the taking of evidence in civil and commercial matters [ 11808 / 2000 - C5 ­ 0519 / 2000 - 2000 / 0823 ( CNS ) ] .
Madam President , it was not by chance that the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market approved - with only one vote against - this report on the initiative of the Federal Republic of Germany with a view to the adoption of a Council regulation on cooperation between the courts of the Member States in the taking of evidence in civil and commercial matters .
It approved it not because of any bias against the use of government or State initiatives when it comes to creating a European area of justice , as anyone not quite paying attention might imagine given what happened this morning .
Quite the contrary - I believe that apart from the areas of immigration and asylum , that is , ultimately , apart from the area of the free movement of persons , initiatives like this one are , of course , welcome .
What such initiatives cannot do , and this is what concerns Parliament , is to make up for the inconsistencies between the Member States which lead to such a legislative mire , with each Member State doing its own thing with initiatives to suit its own taste , without a genuine Community vision and ignoring their joint responsibility . They are also overlooking the need for a serious and coherent body of legislation , which the Commission is proving it is possible to achieve - and I am looking at Commissioner Vitorino now - in one of the most sensitive areas .
That area is a model for coexistence in Europe and the fundamental freedoms associated with it , in this case freedom of the individual .
Having said that , with particular reference to the area covered by this report , in which the proper functioning of the single market implies a strengthening of the European social area , anything new - even in the Member States - which helps to eliminate and reduce cross-border disputes and litigation is , of course , to be welcomed , and I believe that tomorrow 's vote will reflect that .
What is the ultimate aim of this German initiative ?
It involves giving a court in any Member State the ability , during any legal proceedings concerning certain civil and commercial matters that have taken place in another Member State , to use its best endeavours to obtain evidence essential for progressing the main proceedings in the court of the requesting country .
Up to now , international cooperation on the taking of evidence has been governed by the Hague Convention of 1970 , the scope of which is limited since it only applies to those Member States that have ratified the Convention . As far as I know , only eleven Member States have done so .
This means that without a legal instrument covering the Union 's 15 Member States and those that may join subsequently , not all members of the public taking legal action through the courts will have the same legal remedies ; it will depend on whether or not their country or the requested country has ratified the Convention .
Under this new regulation , all courts will be covered by the same law , and all EU citizens will benefit from the same protection given that this Community instrument will facilitate direct contact between courts in different countries .
Ultimately , this will remove obstacles to the creation of a European legal area , either by creating a standard European form to be used by the courts in the requesting States in the language of the requested courts , so as to facilitate communication between the two , or by creating a central authority in each country which will receive and forward requests originating from another State for the taking of evidence from a national court , or by establishing the principle that the entire request must be responded to , and obliging requested European courts to execute this request within six months , at the end of which , if they have not complied , they will have to provide an explanation to the requesting court .
The amendments that I have made to this initiative by the Federal Republic of Germany include imposing a duty on the central authorities to produce legal guidance on the official languages recognised by each court in each of the Member States and a duty to provide information on accredited legal translation agencies .
Lastly , in view of these innovative arrangements , which will greatly speed up the proceedings of courts in all the Member States , which seems to me to be one of the key aims of the German initiative , I have proposed that only in exceptional circumstances should the direct contact between courts envisaged in the regulation be superseded by traditional consular channels , which I believe are inevitably cumbersome , bureaucratic , somewhat remote from events and in many ways responsible for the delays in litigation in cross-border disputes or proceedings .
Some Members from other groups did not fully grasp this last point and therefore voted against this amendment . The objective , as I saw it , was merely to emphasise a certain concept of Europe which I espouse : a Community with its own law , but more than just a diplomatic Community or one based on international law .
I have therefore tabled this amendment again in the hope that the majority of Members will now understand this point of detail , which is , in fact , more than just a detail .

Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Marinho , I am very pleased that this report is before us today .
I would like to thank you very much for preparing a subject which at first seems very technical , but which , as you quite rightly stressed , has a very substantial part to play in creating a citizens ' Europe , because cross-border business is on the increase .
We have a European single market , we have a single European currency , and we will soon have the coins and notes of that currency in our pockets .
Because of e-commerce , we will see exponential growth in cross-border contracts , and it is a sad fact that problems sometimes arise with contracts , resulting in legal disputes .
The taking of evidence is generally at the heart of any legal dispute , as matters of law are often easy to settle , but there are often widely varying interpretations when it comes to the facts .
If it is necessary to determine the facts of a case which took place in another Member State , then the present situation as regards mutual legal assistance is simply anachronistic , and involves using the Hague Convention through diplomatic channels , making matters very complicated and time-consuming , and also unreliable .
A court case often comes to a standstill quite simply because the facts of the case cannot be established , and quite simply because the resources for mutual legal assistance are not available .
That is why it is so important that the Federal Republic of Germany has brought forward this proposal , and that is why my group is so firmly supporting this initiative , because it provides for greater certainty , swifter administration of the law and , last but not least , greater justice for the citizens of the European Union .
This legal instrument will also help to counter a trend which I view with increasing scepticism .
By that I mean the tendency to resort to extrajudicial dispute resolution , that is to say bringing in a neutral arbitrator instead of going to court , or letting some kind of board of arbitration make a ruling .
This is actually a trend that runs counter to the idea of the constitutional state .
This is a trend , and I am happy to say so in this Chamber , which also runs counter to parliamentary democracy , because our system is , in fact , designed on the assumption that parliaments make laws and an independent judiciary apply those laws .
Anything that represents a deviation from these procedures is at odds with the original concept of the constitutional state which all of us here have in our sight .
If we can make cross-border legal relations easier , then we also make it easier for companies and individual citizens to operate within systems guaranteed by the State .
The single market needs an efficient legal system , failing which all our efforts to create competition and increasing prosperity in the European Union will come to nothing .
By way of conclusion , I must confess that it makes me feel somewhat uneasy that we keep having to consider initiatives from Member States here .
I can be particularly forthright in saying that in this particular case , because this initiative emanates from my own country .
I find it embarrassing that we in the European Parliament are not in a position to present such initiatives , and this report should also make us think once again about whether the European Parliament should not have a right of initiative , particularly in this area , which is such a sensitive one in the public 's eyes .
Mr President , I too would like to thank the rapporteur for his work on this report .
The regulation with which we are dealing applies solely to civil and commercial matters where a court in one Member State can request evidence on the performance of judicial acts from another competent court in another Member State of the European Union .
The regulation provides for the establishment of central authorities which are not responsible for the actual transmission of documents but which will respond to requests for supplying information from requested agencies .
We must recall that the Treaties of the European Union incorporated judicial cooperation in civil matters in 1993 .
This is certainly a matter of common interest for Member States and it does indeed complement the workings of the internal market .
The establishment of an area of freedom , justice and security confers on members of the judiciary an essential role to play in the effective workings of the Union .
This matter may be highlighted to an even greater extent with the advent and introduction of the single currency next year .
While I certainly support judicial cooperation within the EU , I do not support the establishment of a European Public Prosecutor .
I do not support the establishment of such a body because I believe that the rights of our citizens should be fully protected .
In Britain and in Ireland we have a different legal system - the old common law system - to that which pertains in the majority of other Member States .
The problem for a European Public Prosecutor is simply what is the legal basis for such a prosecution .
Do you apply the rule that a person is innocent until proven guilty - which exists in the common law system - or do you apply another legal basis which exists in other Member States of the Union ?
I do not believe that this square can be circled .
Judicial cooperation is important because it complements the workings of the internal market and the single currency , as already stated .
Europol is effective and Europol must be supported in ensuring that crimes such as trafficking in human beings , cyber-crime and so on can be dealt with within the European territories .
However , I believe that the establishment of the Public Prosecutor 's Office is a step too far .
It is unworkable and it would be an unwelcome move which would not command support among the citizens of the European Union .
However , I support the regulation which is before us today .
I believe the implementation of this regulation concerning the service of judicial and extra-judicial documents in civil and commercial matters will certainly improve and accelerate cross-border proceedings .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , cooperation in the taking of evidence is a specific example of judicial cooperation in civil matters referred to in Article 65 of the Treaty establishing the European Community .
By virtue of this specific reference in the Treaty , this question was included by the Council in the Vienna Action Plan , in the conclusions of the Tampere European Council , and it was subsequently covered in the Commission 's scoreboard for the establishment of a common area of freedom , security and justice .
As mentioned by the rapporteur , whom I would like to congratulate on his excellent report , this question was addressed in the 1970 Hague Convention on the taking of evidence abroad in civil or commercial matters , which has to date only been ratified by 11 of the Member States of the European Union .
The increase in the mobility of persons within the common area of the European Union is one of the factors that has made an important contribution to the growth in the number of law cases with cross-border implications .
For example , when it comes to taking evidence , legal proceedings taking place under the jurisdiction of one Member State increasingly involve taking evidence from witnesses resident in another Member State .
This is why it has become necessary to adopt clear and effective rules on cooperation between courts in the Member States with a view to facilitating the taking of evidence in such situations .
These rules will no doubt represent a significant step forward in the work currently being done to improve access to justice , either on the part of individuals or of companies , and also in pursuing the wider objective of creating a European legal area in civil matters .
Accordingly , this regulation will enhance the value of European citizenship and of protecting and guaranteeing our citizens ' individual rights , and it is also of not insignificant economic importance , in that by facilitating the taking of evidence , it will make swifter and more effective administration of justice more economically viable , and in particular administration of justice more in line with the necessities of a new economic reality , of the single market , the single currency and electronic democracy .
In view of these considerations , the Commission welcomes the German initiative for a regulation in this field .
Furthermore , the Commission does not have any bias against initiatives by Member States , especially when such initiatives are in line with the priorities defined by the Tampere European Council .
The German initiative also gives us an opportunity to move forward and modernise the rules of the 1970 Hague Convention , with the added value of adopting a Community instrument that can be uniformly and directly applied to the legal system of each of the 15 Member States .
This is an initial phase , the central objective of which is to create the mechanisms needed to strengthen mutual confidence between the legal and judicial systems of the 15 Member States .
This initial phase should , once the effects of implementing the regulation have been assessed , open up the way for more ambitious objectives , and in particular those which would make it possible for the requesting court to ask for a special procedure to be employed by the requested court in performing a judicial act , together with the option of the requesting court being associated with the performing of the judicial act by the requested court .
We therefore welcome the support the rapporteur has given to this initiative .
Furthermore , the Commission is in sympathy with the general points he has raised , and with the general approach of the amendments he has proposed .
I can assure you that for our part we will closely monitor and assist the discussions on this initiative in the relevant Council committee , with a view to producing a text which precisely reflects the concerns expressed by Parliament in the Marinho report .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Fight against fraud
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0078 / 2001 ) by Mr Bösch , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the European Commission ' s 1999 Annual Report on protecting the Communities ' financial interests - the fight against fraud . [ COM ( 2000 ) 718 - C5-0066 / 2001 - 2001 / 2036 ( COS ) ] .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , 1999 was a year of great progress in fighting fraud .
After the old Commission resigned , it was only a few weeks before agreement was reached on the legal texts establishing the new European Anti-Fraud Office , OLAF .
Parliament , the Council and the Commission had to and were therefore able to demonstrate that the EU was capable of taking action in the fight against fraud , corruption and mismanagement .
Full implementation of what was agreed over two years ago has , however , proved to be somewhat more difficult than originally assumed .
The first annual report by the OLAF Supervisory Committee accordingly quite rightly sounded the alarm .
Although the new Director , Mr Brüner , has been in his post for over a year now , he has so far not been able to put together a new management team for OLAF , and this is chiefly because the Commission has involved him in an administrative trench war over the procedures for recruiting the new management .
Of course , one of the questions here is the independence of OLAF and its Director .
The Commission 's position on this is inconsistent .
When it comes to appointing new members of the management team , the Commission wants to precisely supervise and be involved in every single step .
But when it comes to taking back staff that do not meet the new job specification for OLAF , then the Commission behaves as if this were not its concern at all .
And yet it was the Commission that simply transferred the entire staff of the previous UCLAF task force to OLAF en bloc , thus creating the majority of the problems which the Director of OLAF is now having to tackle .
Mrs Schreyer , this transfer took place despite explicit warnings from this House .
Parliament then slammed on the emergency brakes and held back the additional posts earmarked for the current year .
It is now the responsibility of the Commission to eliminate the obstacles I have described .
It only makes sense to remove the present reserve if this condition is met .
Mrs Schreyer , you personally and the Commission as a whole have come to the conclusion that without a European Public Prosecutor the fight against fraud will remain a half measure .
The detection and clearing-up of fraud and other offences adversely affecting the Union 's interests must be followed by prosecution and punishment .
We will really have egg on our face if it turns out in one or two years ' time that what I hope will be a very efficiently operating Anti-Fraud Office has exposed significantly more cases of fraud and irregularities than in the past , but that there is a problem with punishing those responsible .
It is significant that the Commission 's annual report is full of statistics , but it does not contain any information on the number of people actually convicted following cases of fraud .
I am sure that if this statistic were available it would tell a sorry tale .
However , these people will not be punished unless there is a prosecutor representing the interests of Europe 's taxpayers , and that applies above all to the institutions of the European Union itself .
And they can only be credible if it is visibly demonstrated that the much-vaunted zero-tolerance policy is more than just empty words and is being put into practice .
This requires a public prosecutor , and , as Parliament has already demanded on various occasions , one that is exclusively responsible for the Union 's institutions .
This was proposed by the five independent experts in their second report on the reform of the Commission in September 1999 .
Furthermore , the OLAF Supervisory Committee has since then on several occasions , and in the clearest possible terms , called for what might be called for the appointment of an internal public prosecutor .
For the avoidance of all doubt , let me say that a public prosecutor of this kind could not , as the law currently stands , himself appear as a prosecutor in the national courts ; his role would be to support and advise the relevant national public prosecutor 's offices .
It would also be his job to supervise OLAF 's internal investigations within the institutions , and he would thus work in partnership with the Director of OLAF .
The Director of OLAF currently has to make contact with the Secretaries-General of the institutions if OLAF wishes to carry out internal investigations , and it is therefore easy to suggest that his investigations are not truly independent .
This problem would to a large extent be solved if there were a public prosecutor for internal matters .
There would be no automatic extension of such a public prosecutor 's powers beyond the Union 's institutions .
That would require an amendment to the Treaties .
Such an amendment failed in Nice because of opposition from several Member States .
However , the Commission cannot just sit back and do nothing , now of all times .
It must now demonstrate that it really is serious about fighting fraud and is doing everything possible , displaying originality and political courage , on the basis of the current Article 280 .
One thing must be made clear , however : discussion papers , green papers and white papers are not enough . There are plenty of those already .
What is needed now is a concrete proposal for a regulation to be adopted by the Council and Parliament under the codecision procedure .
In other words , the Commission must exercise its right of initiative .
We need another great leap forward .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , one and a half years after the Prodi Commission took office , we still remember its fine-sounding but pompous announcements about zero-tolerance towards fraud and corruption , together with the promises made by the retread Commissioner , Mr Kinnock , to make this Commission the best administration in the world .
Unfortunately , even one and a half years on , there is still an alarming gap between the rhetoric and the reality of the Prodi Commission .
In view of its failure to catch up on the backlog of old cases and to prevent new cases of fraud , I feel bound to ask the Commission why it is not seizing this opportunity to make a truly fresh start .
Unfortunately , there is no sign of a new wind blowing through the Commission , apart from the hot air emanating from the tonnes of papers on reform generated by Commissioner Kinnock . And those reforms are already in danger of failing because of internal resistance from officials .
Real problems in the fight against fraud and corruption , such as the overdue reform of the disciplinary procedure , are not being tackled .
The Commission has high-handedly ignored all Parliament 's suggestions in this field , and it is giving exactly the same treatment to Parliament 's requests for a European Public Prosecutor 's Office to be set up and for the independence of OLAF , the European Anti-Fraud Office , to be guaranteed .
Cover-ups , camouflage and deceit should not form the Commission 's strategy for the fight against fraud .
The Fléchard case , which dates back to the beginning of the 1990s , is an example of how not to do things .
The arbitrary and unlawful decision made by the Delors cabinet in January 1994 ultimately led to a situation in which this company was able to play an important role in a fresh fraud scandal concerning traffic in adulterated butter between 1995 and 2000 .
It has not been possible to clarify or predict the extent and consequences of this scandal either in financial terms or as regards the significant risk to public health .
In my view , the way it handles this case is the most important yardstick for the Commission 's attempts to improve matters .
I say that because this case in no longer just about the significant financial losses that the Community has suffered through fraud , but it is also about the health risk to the public both in Europe and beyond .
So swift and consistent action is needed more than ever .
The Commission cannot , as has so often happened , hide behind the need to protect companies ' commercial interests . Instead , it should strike a balance between those commercial interests and the protection of public health .
As in all democratic European States , budgetary control is one of the most important rights and duties of the Members of the European Parliament .
So the Commission should not resort to artifice to obstruct that control .
Those with nothing to hide have nothing to fear from such control .
If on its own authority the Commission withholds documents classified as confidential , or gives them to some Members but not to others , that amounts to a blatant infringement of fundamental constitutional principles such as equal treatment and non-discrimination .
The framework agreement of 5 July 2000 , which was worked out with excessive haste , and which is supposed to legitimise such actions on the part of the Commission , needs to be measured against these democratic principles and is bound to fail that test .
I would particularly like to thank Mr Bösch for his report and I look forward to continued fruitful cooperation across party lines in this highly important area .
Mr President , Commissioner , the main subject in the 1999 annual report on OLAF is , of course , the dismantling of the criminal organisation responsible for adulterating butter and fraudulently obtaining public funds , an organisation based in Naples but with influence at the heart of Europe .
In addition to congratulating the rapporteur on his excellent report , I think that a special compliment is certainly due not just to OLAF but also to the Italian and French judicial organisations whose joint work led to this organised crime network being broken up .
According to the latest information available , the scheme for adulterating butter set up by a number of Camorra families in Naples produced 130 000 tonnes of totally or partially artificial butter . I think that makes this the biggest fraud ever committed against the EU 's common agricultural policy .
The first question that comes to mind here is how it is possible that a policy that is supposed to help rural communities and farmers can end up systematically financing major agro-industrial complexes , and that those complexes frequently turn out to be no more scrupulous in respecting the Community budget than they are towards consumers and the farmers in whose name they are financed .
The second question that needs asking here is how it is possible for a fraud on this scale , which was meticulously planned and put into operation over three years , and involving astronomical Community subsidies , to go undetected , and for the Commission to have been incapable of detecting anything at all .
After the persistent revelations of fraud concerning the use of subsidised powdered milk for feeding calves , of bogus butter exports and revelations regarding adulterated dairy products , the Commission still seems unwilling , despite this huge scandal , to carry out a thorough review of its entire system of intervention in dairy products .
The pan-European nature of this fraud , which involved major dairy product companies in countries such as Belgium , France , Italy and Germany , means that it is unacceptable for the policies needed to combat food adulteration to be permanently left in the hands of the Member States . This also makes it more urgent for the Commission to adopt direct measures to combat the adulteration of products such as olive oil , wine and dairy produce .
The Commission has refused to divulge names , to arrange special surveillance or to take preventive measures against the innumerable dairy product companies involved , on the grounds of legal confidentiality and the presumption of innocence .
However , I am bound to say that the Commission 's discretion in this case is very much in contrast with the way it dealt with the widow of an adviser to an ex-Commissioner . It is demanding that she should now pay back 18 months of her late husband 's salary .
If there are dairy product companies that are incapable of distinguishing tens of thousands of tonnes of concoctions made from animal waste , oil and chemical products from real butter , how can consumers be expected to have any confidence in their ability to guarantee the quality of their own products ?
What is also at stake here is whether we are all equal in the eyes of the Commission , or whether when it comes to major companies and big interests , some are evidently more equal than others .
Mr President , I would like to start by congratulating Mr Bösch : my group believes that , with him , this report is in capable hands .
Despite this , we have still tabled a few amendments to his report .
We remain adamant about the fact that this Parliament is not a court of law and that it does not need to pass judgment on certain cases .
We must first wait and see what those reports bring and then judge whether the Commission has acquitted itself of its task expertly .
That is why the jury is still out on the butter fraud , a case which is indeed probably very extensive , on the flax fraud in Spain and possibly in other countries too , on New Zealand butter and on Stockholm .
We will wait for all the reports and will study the Commission ' s behaviour in those situations , before passing judgment .
We endorse Mr Bösch ' s observations with regard to OLAF ' s role .
The Director will need to avail himself of his rights and will , as far as we are concerned , be backed by Parliament .
Independence is a great good .
We also endorse the remarks about the European Public Prosecutor , although I must admit that a minority in my group feels differently about this .
We believe that it is necessary , with a view to protecting financial interests , that the Commission table proposals along these lines as soon as possible , and we have quoted , in an amendment , 1 June 2001 as the ultimate deadline in this connection .
Closer cooperation is obviously needed between the Commission , the Member States and the European and national courts of auditors .
It is probably wise - and we have tabled an amendment to this effect as well - if the Commission were first to define what exactly is considered to be fraud and what is an irregularity .
That discrepancy will need to be done away with .
We can support Mr Bösch ' s late amendment on Switzerland .
Switzerland is a key country in Europe when it comes to combating fraud , and we do well to bear this in mind .
It is unfortunate that the Swiss population feels so lukewarm about Europe , a fact which we will also need to take into consideration .
On a final note , we do not believe that Parliament should have unlimited access to all documents from OLAF .
The nature of OLAF ' s work is such that certain aspects must remain confidential and perhaps even secret .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , first of all , I would , of course , like to congratulate Mr Bösch on his sound and accurate report .
Allow me to comment on the sore points .
First of all , OLAF ' s necessary independence .
That means indeed that the OLAF Director will be given full autonomy and far-reaching powers to conduct investigations within all European institutions .
This also means that the Commission will refrain from intervening in appointments in any shape or form .
Can Commissioner Schreyer tell me how the Commission has reacted to Paragraphs 3 to 6 ?
Second sore point : the European Public Prosecutor .
We know that a change in the Treaty is needed for this .
An attempt which was made , partly on the Commission ' s initiative , failed in Nice .
We will therefore need to continue putting pressure on the Member States .
It is true that what we are asking now is not as far-reaching .
Pursuant to Article 82 , we want the OLAF regulation to be supplemented with a clause which provides for the appointment of a public prosecutor with powers limited to punishable offences committed by the members and staff of the European Union in respect of the budget .
What are your thoughts on the matter , Commissioner Schreyer ?
Third sore point : the cooperation between Member States .
The tobacco case in New York versus Reynolds and Philip Morris is indeed a good illustration of how the European Commission actually acts vis-à-vis tobacco giants .
I am delighted that quite a few Member States , including my own country , have offered their support .
In this way , we can finally extricate mafia practices from the world of the tobacco giants , practices which cost the Union many billions of euros every year .
Fourth sore point : the disclosure of information .
I was one of the people who rejected the framework agreement between the Commission and Parliament .
I refuse to go into any further detail and I completely concur with Mr Bösch ' s requirements .
Finally , I regret that this entire House is haunted by a nationalistic and jingoistic ghost which is quick to take offence .
We should be able to spell out in this report what went wrong in Spain in the flax case and in Italy , Belgium and Germany in the case surrounding butter which was tampered with .
Consequently , my group will not be supporting the amendments which play down these matters or disguise them .
Mr President , Commissioner , the Committee on Budgetary Control is presently debating the granting of a discharge to the Commission for 1999 .
It is a difficult matter .
The EC Court of Auditors has not seen fit to recommend it .
Parliament will be taking on a huge political responsibility if it grants discharge ; before it does so it must have guarantees that fraud will be prevented and its perpetrators discovered .
There is some unfinished business which speaks against granting a discharge .
The Commission knows what it is .
The Committee on Budgetary Control has expressed in detail what it sees as matters of confusion to the Commission .
The most important matter is the Fléchard case , whose political roots extend back to the early 1990s .
Any examination of the case must stretch all the way from the Delors cabinet up until Mr Prodi ' s Commission .
There are fake export documents , there is fake butter , minutes of meetings have been lost , payments were ordered but the debts were waived , and cooperation was continued with those who were guilty of fraud .
There are still some matters that are being hushed up .
This will not do .
Mr Bösch is right . This is the moment of truth for Mr Prodi ' s Commission .
Mr President , butter , flax , cigarettes and employment agencies are becoming synonymous with fraud in the European Union .
Millions in European money have been paid out erroneously or , as in the case of cigarette smuggling , have not been collected in revenue .
This is not a matter of fraud within the EU institutions but at Member State level .
Rapporteur Bösch is right in pointing out that the solving of these serious fraud cases forms OLAF ' s test case for efficiency .
I must add that these fraud cases cannot be solved completely without the cooperation of the relevant Member States .
In order to enforce this cooperation , the Commission must put sanctions in place .
I therefore find it completely justified that the Netherlands is not receiving any money from the European Social Fund for the time being , until such time as it can account for the unauthorised spending of those monies down to the last euro .
In fact , what sanctions are prompting Spain to clear up the flax fraud ?
Businesses involved in fraud should be blacklisted so that they do not qualify for European subsidy again .
They seem logical measures to take , but not to the Commission .
That is how the company Fléchard is starting to form part of a European soap : to be continued !
OLAF ' s efficiency is being threatened by a lack of staff .
If the fight against fraud is one of President Prodi ' s key goals , he , along with the Commission , has a duty to solve the delay in the recruitment of qualified staff promptly .
In this connection , the Commission should avoid any conflict of interest .
Commissioners who might be involved in the flax and butter fraud , should not have a say in the appointments of officials who are about to investigate their roles .
As elected representatives of the people , this Parliament has a supervisory task .
It is unfortunate that the Commission is forever putting spanners in the works .
To the Commission , transparency is an opaque word .
Clarity is what this Parliament wants and it should therefore be authorised to examine the OLAF reports .
Mr President , the increasing frequency of fraud offences within the Union and the Commission 's behaviour are a scandal .
The financial losses associated with adulterated butter alone could exceed EUR 45 million .
What is more , it is evident that we are dealing with people who are repeating the same offence .
On the Commission 's recommendation , one firm , which is now again under suspicion , was let off a EUR 17.6 million fine .
We must therefore , as a matter of urgency , give our full backing to the work of the European Anti-Fraud Office and ensure that it is properly set up as soon as possible .
However , it is also important for the authorities in the Member States to support the work of this new body , but if you look at the reports in detail , you cannot always be sure this is happening .
So sanctions should also be taken against those Member States which are not supporting OLAF 's work , in the form of fines imposed by the Commission , which would also provide some financial compensation for fraud offences allowed to occur .
Mr President , this report is all part of the changeover from UCLAF to OLAF . As other speakers have said , we would like the transition to proceed more quickly .
We need an independent OLAF able to operate efficiently .
I must congratulate Herbert Bösch on his excellent report .
He has certainly made the point , in the text presented to us , that the fight against fraud is not an element in partisan infighting or in the internal politics of Member States . Instead , he made it clear that we are all equally involved in uncovering fraud at its source and calling its instigators to account .
All the parliamentary groups are united in wishing to recover the money and improve administrative checks . We do feel we are making progress in the fight against fraud .
That is our message to the citizens and we must ensure it reaches them . True , the Nice Summit did not produce any response to our request for a European Public Prosecutor .
Such a prosecutor would have been most helpful to us in uncovering this year ' s major fraud , which involved the adulteration of butter . Incidentally , that not only concerns defrauding Community coffers .
It is also an indication of how much more we still have to do regarding food safety .
So , what we have before us today is a good report .
I should like to reiterate that we are all determined to combat fraud and recover the money .
I feel we should call on the Commission to let us know what it has in mind in the specific case of the European Prosecutor . Perhaps the opportunity missed at Nice could be retrieved through some specific proposals .
The cooperation of national prosecutors is not enough . Just as it has been shown in some cases that the national authorities know how to coordinate their work , so it is necessary to have someone within the Commission able to take the lead .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would firstly like to congratulate the rapporteur on the work that he has carried out .
I would , however , also like to stress the pitfalls that might have been encountered along the way , as Mr Bösch has had to deal with the vague desires harboured by various members of the Committee on Budgetary Control , who wanted to refocus the report on previous cases and Treaties , which are also dealt with in other documents .
In relation to this , I do not share the view of the speakers who say that the Fléchard case is the main case in the discharge .
It probably is if you consider the time and energy that the Commission and ourselves had to spend on it , but it is definitely not in terms of importance .
I shall , however , focus my attention on the problem of fraud and irregularities .
In a previous report , the Committee on Budgetary Control stated that the slightest fraud of the Community budget must no longer be tolerated .
Whilst this call for zero tolerance is extremely laudable , we cannot disregard the fact that putting this into practice requires very significant resources in terms of personnel which is going to be difficult to achieve , given the huge numbers of schemes currently underway , and given the great diversity of the territories in which we have a presence .
In this report , it was proposed to remove the distinction between fraud and irregularities , which would be justified by the fact that , when these are detected , we do not know whether the cases in question are likely to lead to criminal prosecution .
I would like to express my concern about this position , for which I have two reasons .
On the one hand , we must ensure that our fight against fraud does not anticipate the conclusions of inquiries that various bodies are undertaking .
On the other hand , we would be running the risk of discrediting the European Union ' s policies within the European Union itself if we announce levels of fraud in criminal cases that are much higher than reality shows them to be .
Quite the contrary , I think that we must make a concerted effort to present the fairest possible picture of these criminal acts , since it is impossible to treat problems related to small administrative mistakes and large scale organised fraud in the same way .
I support what Mr Mulder has just said regarding a classification of irregularities .
In the same spirit , we must focus our work on cases of fraud that require us to become immediately involved in following them up because of their scale and topical interest .
In relation to this , several speakers have mentioned the case of the adulterated butter .
The Commission must be in a position to help us to achieve our aim .
I would say , however , that I regret the attitude of the Commission , which sometimes takes too long to answer or provides unsatisfactory answers to the European Parliament ' s requests .
The European Commission and the European Parliament should work together more closely in combating fraud .
This does not mean , however , that the European Parliament has to give up its power to penalise the Commission when it does not fulfil its duties , particularly with regard to protecting the European Union ' s financial interests .
This cooperation is needed because it involves our credibility in the eyes of the citizens of Europe who have put their trust in us .
Mr President , the Commission ' s report under discussion illustrates how extensively EU resources are divided up .
At the same time , it shows how large a part the Member States play in administering the EU budget , as they use up 80 % of all expenditure .
Mr Bösch has drafted a creditable report and I would like to thank him for it . The report also shows clearly how important it was to establish OLAF in 1999 .
In my opinion , it would be important in the fight against fraud to bear in mind certain principles .
Firstly , let us speak of the principle of legality . It is vital to comply with the law when using funds and investigating irregularities , and the final outcome should not be anticipated before a legal decision comes into effect .
Administration has to be simplified ; there is an end to how much increased bureaucracy and supervision will improve the way funds are spent .
Personal responsibility has to be increased - in this respect , the Commission ' s reform has been vital - and cooperation between the European Union and the Member States must be improved : that , too , will be vital in the future .
Mr President , if we create new bodies , then those bodies should be able to function efficiently .
In the EU , the institutions are located in different places and they are also subject to relocation .
That is why it makes sense to locate new institutions in places where they are geographically close to other EU institutions which they will have to cooperate very intensively with in the future .
Now , it seems to me that the European Public Prosecutor 's Office will certainly have to cooperate with the European Court of Justice and that it should also have close contacts with the European Court of Auditors .
The same also applies to OLAF , which will have to work in very close cooperation with both the European Court of Justice and the European Court of Auditors .
I therefore believe that these bodies should be located either completely or at least in part in Luxembourg , so as to ensure geographical proximity and also efficiency for these bodies .
, Chair of the Committee on Budgetary Control .
( DE ) Mr President , I would first like to congratulate Mr Bösch on his report - he has done a really excellent job .
And his conclusion that there have not yet been any appreciable improvements in the fight against fraud also coincides with the OLAF Supervisory Committee 's view .
Furthermore , the Commission itself says several times in its own report that there were no significant changes in 1999 as compared with previous years , and that the total of unlawfully used funds in fact increased in some areas , for example in the Structural Funds .
Let me emphasise once again that we are talking about taxpayers ' money here .
We must do our best to protect it .
If we are to reach the zero-tolerance limit promised by the Commission , OLAF , the European Fraud Investigation Office established in 1999 , must first and foremost be given greater independence .
This involves recruiting its staff without interference from the Commission , for example .
I support Mr Bösch 's suggestion that the appointments committee should be chaired by an independent figure .
And the Director himself must set out in advance a clearly structured programme of work .
One thing that is clear is that we do not just want the old UCLAF to continue under the new name of OLAF .
Unfortunately , an opportunity was missed in Nice to strengthen OLAF by creating a European Financial Public Prosecutor 's Office and putting it under judicial control .
Despite all Parliament 's requests over the years and the commitment demonstrated by Commissioner Barnier and Commissioner Schreyer in particular , this subject was not even on the agenda at Nice .
I therefore have some questions for the Commission now , as to whether , in accordance with Paragraphs 9 to 12 of the Bösch report , it will submit proposals by 1 June 2001 for what we might call a European Public Prosecutor 's Office with restricted jurisdiction .
I would also like put this question to the Commission : not all the Member States have yet ratified the Convention on the protection of the European Communities ' financial interests and this is preventing it from entering into force .
Could you please tell us which countries have not yet ratified it and what the Commission can do to remedy this intolerable situation ?
Another point : what is the Commission doing to overcome varying national interpretations of Community law on the recovery of own resources , as described in Paragraph 7 ( 1 ) of its report ?
And lastly , there is the recovery of unduly paid funds , for which there are no figures in the Commission 's report for 1999 .
Can the Commission tell me how much the Commission has claimed back and received as compared with the losses calculated , especially in the case of own resources in the EAGGF and in the Structural Funds ?
Mr President , Commissioner , I feel the rapporteur deserves to be congratulated on the report . I believe he has incorporated very positive elements into it and endeavoured to steer a course avoiding both exaggeration and indifference .
In order not to look the other way , I shall focus on one of the matters covered in the report - that of flax - and put some figures to the House .
For instance , according to the figures , in my country , Spain , flax was grown on 3 376 hectares during the 1994-95 season . However , by the 1998-99 season it was already being cultivated on 100 000 hectares .
The initial subsidy in 1994-95 amounted to ESP 411 million , whereas by 1998-99 it had risen to ESP 10 000 million .
After the Spanish authorities reported the fraud , the area used for the cultivation of flax decreased as if by magic . Those 100 000 hectares were reduced to less than 1000 .
As a result , the subsidy fell to below ESP 100 million .
Despite all this data , the head of the Ministry of Agriculture at the time maintained it was all part of an opposition campaign . True , she recently changed her mind and stated that had not been the case , but that essentially the opposition was to blame .
I should like to focus on the type of liability the House might invoke .
In the first place , there is penal liability as it applies to individual owners of processing plants .
They were privy to special information - I am not referring to information about the regulations , which was in the public domain , but information on how they could be got round . These persons had at their disposal the capital required to set up the companies .
Most importantly , they were sitting pretty , holding high office in the Ministry of Agriculture .
It is therefore appropriate to invoke strictly penal liability for them and for the producers who also played the game .
Parliament and the relevant institutions should do precisely that .
There is another type of liability : specific political liability . This means establishing whether any of the players directly involved in the fraud had been appointed to public political office by an institution in Spain .
It has to be said that such was indeed the case . One of the highest-ranking officials within the Ministry of Agriculture , the Chair of the European Agricultural Guarantee Fund , was closely connected with flax processing companies .
Lastly , there is also administrative liability .
If this does apply , we should call the Commission and national and local authorities to account .
We should not , however , create confusion and adopt the course advocated by Mr Bösch , insisting that liabilities be itemised in detail .
Mr President , so many words have been spoken in praise of Mr Bösch that it is hard to know what to say .
I think he knows how highly I rate his work .
I would therefore like to comment on a few points that have been mentioned in the debate .
The first point is that we welcome the fact that the OLAF report on the Fléchard case was submitted last week , something that has not yet been mentioned .
This is a positive point that should be take into account in further discussions .
This report does not establish or seek to establish what the European Parliament 's view on this case is .
That is part of the budget discharge process , which will be on our agenda in a month 's time .
Nevertheless , I would like to take this opportunity to give the Commission some sound advice .
It would certainly be very helpful for the discussions on the budget discharge if the Commission could reconsider the views it has already expressed on this case , and take advantage , for example , of the opportunity presented to it next week by the meeting of the Committee on Budgetary Control .
That could certainly assist the subsequent deliberations in the context of the budget discharge process .
There are also two other points in some way connected with misunderstandings .

Mr Mulder mentioned one misunderstanding , and I think Mr Seppänen 's speech was a case in point : there is some confusion between irregularities and fraud .
We must make it clear in this report , on the basis of the amendment tabled by Mr Bösch himself and supplemented by Mr Mulder 's amendment , that we do not want to see these categories being muddled up .
I would like to clarify this in the light of one particular example : Mr Seppänen 's speech .
In it , he literally referred to the Fléchard case as an irregularity , and then connected it with the Court of Auditors ' failure to give a positive statement of assurance concerning the Commission 's budget management .
If we do this we are mixing things up and run the risk of giving our visitors in the public gallery the impression that even a bookkeeping error would be classified as fraud .
No one can have any political interest in doing that .
We must make sure that these two things are not confused .
The second possible misunderstanding is not a misunderstanding amongst ourselves , but rather a misunderstanding outside this Chamber , regarding the flax affair .
As I understand it , the decision-making process in one Member State was described by the Committee on Budgetary Control as if responsibility had been shifted from national to regional level .
On behalf of my group I would like to say that regardless of the internal organisation of the individual Member States , we want to ensure that responsibility towards the European Union at national level for the correct implementation of EU programmes is respected .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen . I would like to thank Mr Bösch for his report .
It takes as its starting point the Commission 's Annual Report on protecting the Communities ' financial interests and the fight against fraud , which the Commission presented on 13 November 2000 and which also contains statistics on cases of irregularities and fraud reported by the Member States , as they are obliged to do .
A few months earlier , the Commission had presented an extensive strategy report in which it set out an approach to fraud prevention at a wide variety of levels and which contained a wide variety of instruments ranging from checks on legislation , in order to make it less susceptible to fraud , to a proposal for a European Public Prosecutor which the Commission put forward in Nice and which was unfortunately not accepted by the Heads of State and Government at that stage .
In that report , the Commission also set out the overall and central role played by the European Anti-Fraud Office , OLAF , and I would first like to address the points made by honourable Members during the debate and also in Mr Bösch 's report as regards OLAF .
In 1999 the Council and Parliament created the legal basis for OLAF , and that is , of course , also the basis for action by the Commission on this .
In accordance with this legal basis , OLAF was set up as an office which administratively speaking is part of the Commission , that is to say OLAF 's staff are Commission officials and are subject to its statute .
This also means that if , for example , problems or irregularities arise regarding the behaviour of Commission officials within OLAF , the Commission would be held responsible .
In view of this , the Commission has said that , exactly as with the other institutions or other departments of the Commission , it wishes a transparent procedure to be in place for appointing those in senior management positions in OLAF .
This means that an Advisory Committee first scrutinises the applications and then makes recommendations to those making the final decision .
In the case of OLAF , the Director makes the final decision on the recruitment and appointment of staff .
The Advisory Committee is constituted so that members not directly linked to the Commission and those from OLAF itself are in a clear majority .
The Court of Auditors , the European Court of Justice and the Supervisory Committee are represented on the Advisory Committee , and I believe that the solution we have now found is a very good one .
I would like to remind you once again that this solution is in the interest of transparency in the appointment of senior management , but that the Director or Director-General of OLAF has the final say on appointments .
I hope that a solution will very soon be found as regards further recruitment at OLAF , as I can only repeat that it is certainly not only in my own interest but also in the interest of the Commission as a whole for OLAF to fill all the posts that have actually been agreed as quickly as possible .
I think it would also be in the interest of the various parties concerned if they could enter into a dialogue , as the Supervisory Committee has now set further conditions so that the rectifying budget can finally be brought in and this issue resolved .
I would like to briefly cover one point that you touched on in the report and which has also been raised here several times , namely access to OLAF 's reports .
The legal basis for the establishment of OLAF clearly provides that it is the Director or Director-General of OLAF who makes decisions about reports and not the Commission .
Furthermore , the legal basis also stipulates that OLAF must , of course , take account of data protection , professional secrecy and also the investigation procedures , and this is clearly a key point .
The Commission accordingly has some doubts as to whether the demands made in the report can be reconciled with the legal basis .
Of course , it is also a matter for debate within the European Parliament whether , for example , if OLAF carries out an investigation within Parliament , this report should be transmitted to the Committee on Budgetary Control , to the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , or to the President .
As I see it , this touches on questions affecting all the institutions and I think that this should really be debated and discussed in an appropriate interinstitutional forum such as the trialogue .
As regards OLAF 's fitness for purpose , or rather the work done and successes chalked up so far , I would say that uncovering the fraud that we now refer to as the butter case , that is the butter adulteration affair , is one of OLAF 's success stories .
This discovery was partly possible because OLAF was able to make its information available to the Member States carrying out investigations , and accordingly , at least as OLAF understands it , this helped to ensure that those involved were investigated in a relatively short time .
But the issue of when OLAF can report depends on when OLAF receives authorisation from the Member States , who have the prime responsibility for investigation , to make a report .
I say this because all OLAF 's work is dependent on close and successful cooperation with the Member States .
This is crucial for strengthening OLAF overall , and in particular as regards making it a platform for information exchange .
As regards the Fléchard case dating back to 1991 or 1994 , the Commission will also explain its position to the Committee on Budgetary Control and it will , of course , respond in reasonable time to the questionnaire that has been drawn up .
With reference to the butter case , I would like to say once again that it is the subject of legal investigations being carried out by the various Member States affected .
On the Stockholm affair , which you also mention in your report , I can tell you that this is also before the courts .
I very much hope , and , of course , this is in the Commission 's interest as well , that the Swedish courts will very soon come to a conclusion .
Concerning the issue of a European Public Prosecutor with limited jurisdiction , as opposed to the full concept , our investigations indicate - and this is also OLAF 's legal view - that there is no legal basis for this , and that a treaty amendment would be needed to achieve this also .
You also mentioned the subject of what I might call legal supervision of the work of OLAF itself .
This question is certainly still open .
The Director-General of OLAF has undertaken to make a manual available very shortly so as to make it transparent what rules OLAF follows when it makes a decision about carrying out or closing an investigation .
I would also like to point out that since the last debate here the Commission has brought an action against two tobacco companies regarding alleged involvement in international smuggling , an issue that has been mentioned here .
I am , of course , pleased that you support this in your report , Mr Bösch .
The Commission has also introduced a more effective early warning system within its bookkeeping procedures , so as to alert the various administrative offices as quickly as possible if , for instance , there are plans to enter into a contract with a party already known for irregularities .
With regard to Mrs Theato 's question about the signing of the Convention on the protection of the financial interests of the European Community , some Member States have still to sign it .
I can name three Member States that have not yet ratified the Convention , namely Belgium , Luxembourg and Ireland , for example .
However , not all the other Member States have ratified it either .
For that reason , and we have already had occasion to discuss this in this Chamber - the Commission will now be being bringing forward a proposal for a directive designed to transfer the provisions of this Convention into a directive , so as to put greater pressure on the Member States to incorporate in their national law a uniform definition of the offence of fraud against the interests of the European Communities .
I hope that will happen in April .
The Commission is working with OLAF on a Green Paper concerning the establishment of a European Public Prosecutor 's Office , because we do not intend to give that idea up and will now be seizing the opportunity for a more open and wide-ranging debate .
Our objective is quite clear , and that is that when the Treaties are revised again in 2004 , we hope to have such broad-based support that the Heads of State and Government will no longer be able simply to ignore this proposal .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The debate will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Public access to environmental information
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0074 / 2001 ) by Mrs Korhola , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on public access to environmental information [ COM ( 2000 ) 402 - C5-0352 / 2000 - 2000 / 0169 ( COD ) ] .
Mr President , it is the custom to start with thanks and I , as rapporteur , have every reason to do that now .
The directive on public access to environmental information was already an excellent and ambitious proposal when it left the hands of the Commission .
Along the way we have enjoyed excellent cooperation , and it has been easy for us to understand each other ' s objectives .
Furthermore , the representatives of the Council - I refer to both those of France and Sweden - have been encouraging and well-informed about the matter .
I am also grateful for the attitude adopted by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
I was delighted that all twenty-five of my amendments were adopted by the committee ; moreover , there were some important additions contributed by committee members .
This is a report which is significant , not just for the individual citizen , but also for the Community ' s environmental policy .
Access to information is an important horizontal instrument in EU environmental policy , and the revision of the directive has taken a long time .
The proposal for the directive has three principal aims : to benefit from the experience gained under the old directive dating from 1990 and to correct the shortcomings identified in it , to incorporate the relevant parts of the Aarhus Convention into the new directive , and to adapt the old directive to developments in information technology .
I think that one of the most important factors in my own report is first the obligation to establish registers .
It is a precondition of the viability of this directive .
A member of the public must be able to know what documents are available and what authorities are responsible for what .
I noted with satisfaction that Mr Cashman , in his own report on transparency , calls for exactly the same thing .
I also focused on some details relating to the refusal to disclose information .
If the request for information is denied on the grounds that it is incomplete the applicant must nevertheless be told when the information will be available and which authority is responsible .
Another clarification regarding the refusal to disclose information concerns the exceptions in Article 4 ( 2 ) .
An exception to these exceptions is emissions in connection with commercial and industrial confidentiality , which always have to be disclosed .
I tabled an amendment that recommended the disclosure of information on emissions even when there was some other kind of data protection involved .
The adverse effects of emissions do not depend on the nature of the work that produced them ; from the point of view of public health and safety , it makes no difference whether the source is a public or commercial one .
I deemed it necessary to introduce a whole new article on the quality of environmental information .
Quality is obviously a major factor when assessing the significance of the directive .
In my study of the directive it hit me that no comprehensive harmonisation of emission measurement procedures had been called for in this connection .
It does actually make a difference whether we measure emissions from a pipe or in a butterfly net a kilometre away .
In other words , there must be information given on the methods used in taking measurements .
One awkward question in this directive concerned the definition of an authority : do the rules apply to the authorities in the conventional sense or do they also include a body that has been delegated to carry out an official task , such as a company which maintains possession of information legally entrusted to it by virtue of an agreement it has made with an authority ?
We have now found a format that , hopefully , will be appropriate for most Member States .
There has been a good deal of consensus regarding this directive .
When I have rejected amendments , I have done so mainly because of considerations of style .
This is a framework directive , and its purpose is not to wish the world all that is fine and good about transparency .
As a legislative text is may also be more effective if it remains narrow in scope .
Some members of the committee wanted to tighten up the time limits set for the authorities to respond .
The Commission ' s proposal shortens the time limit to a month and , if the volume and complexity of the information required so demands , two months .
In all cases , however , a reply is required as soon as possible .
I still consider this to be a realistic objective , although , in some cases , shortening the time limit might even have a negative effect on the quality of the response .
I do not therefore support the committee ' s proposals for a more stringent attitude .
Viewed generally , we can imagine this directive will set a standard for Member States regarding the transparency of environmental information .
The amendment I tabled in Article 8 ( 2 ) is based on the notion that the same standard should also apply to the EU institutions .
In this way , this directive will positively promote transparency throughout the EU .
Mr President , one major contribution which the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights made to this report is the emphasis on access to environmental information as a right , not a concession .
We also contributed the clause which says that the standards for Member States should also apply to the EU institutions .
The contribution from my committee on practical arrangements incorporated in the final report includes a number of amendments which I am glad were taken up by the Environment Committee .
I am talking for instance about the inclusion of nuclear fuel and energy and of financial as well as economic analyses , the establishment of accessible registers or lists of available information , the idea that the applicant cannot be charged more than a reasonable cost , which is the actual cost price of collecting the information , and the insistence that there must be a harm test for exceptions , i.e. harm must outweigh the benefits of disclosure .
But as far as the scope of the proposal is concerned , I am rather disappointed , if not surprised , at the suggestion that the UK Government , British Labour and Conservative Members sought to exclude private companies whose activities affect the environment .
This is the kind of loophole that allowed the previous Conservative government to exempt the privatised water companies .
Those amendments failed but I am concerned that the amendment which did go through on Article 2 ( 2 ) ( c ) might limit the scope too much .
One of the purposes of the new proposal was to close up these previous loopholes which allowed privatised utilities to escape the obligation .
The Commission text clearly covered privatised utilities .
Does the Commissioner think the amendments on Article 2 ( 2 ) ( c ) that were adopted by the Environment Committee ensure that privatised companies which supply gas , electricity , water and so on will still be under the obligation to supply this information ?
Mr President , I have asked for the floor because I feel that not only does Mrs Korhola deserve to be congratulated on her excellent work , but we should also be promoting something more fundamental than the mere fact of environmental information .
I believe that what we are debating is a far-reaching study . This is because it affects citizens ' law and the development of European citizens ' rights , over and above States , regions and any other party with an interest in wielding power .
Exercising power by controlling information is as old as the hills . We must therefore ensure that control of information is not taken over by those in power and that the citizens have the right to be informed .
Secondly , I believe that where the environment is concerned , one of the main problems stems from the fact that as a consequence of the principle of subsidiarity environmental protection is solely in the hands of the citizens .
The citizens need to be informed and the Commission must make a particular point of doing so in areas where subsidiarity applies . That will enable the citizens to defend their own rights and insist that their governments take the necessary action .
The Commission must therefore make a great effort to obtain the relevant information for areas where subsidiarity applies . It must also strive to lay down the ground rules for information and insist that all countries be obliged to provide information at both State and regional level , regardless of how they conduct their policy .
Recent disasters are making it clear that the citizen increasingly has the right to manage the risks he is exposed to . He is also entitled to express his views , and request and demand commitments to safeguard his own interests in areas such as health .
Consequently , in the interests of proper application of the principle of subsidiarity and its implementation we should not place power out of the citizens ' reach . Information is every citizen ' s right .
He needs to fully understand the relevant system , including any weaknesses . He will then be in a position to support it , make decisions pertaining to its finance and many other things .
Mr President , Commissioner , information is a basic principle of democracy .
Free access to and the dissemination of transparent environmental information are the basic right of every citizen who cares about the quality of the environment in which he or she lives and works .
The accessibility of the environmental data held by the authorities is crucial to raising public awareness and securing the trust and democratic involvement of our citizens .
Numerous shortcomings were identified during the application of Directive 90 / 313 and it therefore needs to be revised .
In the light of the signature of the Aarhus Convention and progress in information technology , the Commission has submitted a new proposal for a directive which covers most of the aforementioned points .
However , amendments have been proposed which seek to extend the Commission proposal even further .
For example , the definition of public authorities must include agencies and legal persons acting on behalf of the public authorities .
The directive relates to environmental information and must include information in all accessible forms , such as written , visual , aural etc .
Any person or organisation may request environmental information without needing to prove a legitimate interest .
As regards the deadline by which the administration must respond to a request for environmental information , I think that a period of two weeks is long enough , so as to ensure that interested parties can use the information before it is out of date .
I think it is very important that there should be no commitment as regards the provision of information and no exceptions in relation to particularly important issues , such as gas emissions , discharges , dumping and other releases into the environment .
It is also essential , every time the public authorities refuse to disclose information , irrespective of whether or not this is based on an exception , that they give adequate reasons for their refusal .
The directive stipulates that the public authorities may make a charge for supplying information .
I think that this charge should be limited to the actual cost of reproducing the information , so as to facilitate the greatest possible public access to the information .
Finally , I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Korhola on her comprehensive report which will , I think , represent an important step towards active public involvement in dealing with environmental problems .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mrs Korhola has done a very good job .
The Commission produced a good proposal , and it has been improved since the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy went through it .
I hope that it will be improved still further following the vote in Parliament .
Clearly , our present and future environmental problems must be solved at all levels .
Some issues are European and some are national but , to be honest , the vast majority will be local .
It is only democratic that our citizens should be able to exercise influence , and it goes without saying that they should be entitled to all the information they need in order to perform their civic duties in society .
That is why we should like to see Amendments 6 , 16 and 30 adopted by Parliament tomorrow .
These amendments set a limit of two weeks , and in difficult cases of four weeks , within which authorities and companies are to answer questions .
This corresponds to Parliament ' s position in what is known as the Cashman report on public access to documents in the European Union .
It is also important that Amendments 19 and 20 should go through , stating that authorities are responsible for helping the individual citizen or organisation to obtain information .
Quite simply , they must be given help in asking the right questions in the right places , both orally and in writing , and in finding answers to these .
That is a service which authorities should obviously be required to provide in a democratic country .
Mr President , I wish to join with the others in thanking the rapporteur in connection with this debate .
I can say that we have here a model example of a committee really seeing its work through to the end and bringing to Parliament a virtually unanimous decision on a proposal in which differences of opinion , such as there are in this case , have been limited to a minimum .
I would like to point out that we are actually talking about a very important review of the subject , which the Aarhus Convention set in motion .
The rapporteur has now drafted a report that concerns the implementation of the first task of this Convention , which relates to the right of the public to have access to environmental information .
The following tasks are then the right of the public to participate in decision-making and the right of the public to acquire rights in situations in which they are being treated inappropriately .
It should be emphasised that this is not a matter of our wanting the authorities to show good will to our citizens , but that this is a question of an inalienable fundamental right , and our citizens must be able to exercise that right without being asked to justify why they want the information concerned .
I myself was closely involved in the preparation of Mr Cashman ' s report , and when I was familiarising myself with Mrs Korhola ' s report I was wondering whether Mr Cashman ' s report should not have a paragraph added to it stating that environmental and health-related information cannot be kept confidential even when it is classified as a trade secret .
It may be that a lot of environmental and health-related information will be withheld from the public if such a line is not drawn .
Mr President , I too must join in the chorus of congratulations and say , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , that we support the report and think that a good proposal has been made better .
To be entitled to access information on environmental issues is not only a right but also an issue of power .
Where many environmental issues are concerned , the public ' s interest in a good environment is often pitted against strong private financial interests .
The right to information is basic to the ability to shape opinion and influence policy .
That is why it is also a matter of democracy that people should be able to acquire insight into environmental issues in good time .
The proposal we are now discussing is largely based upon the Aarhus Convention , which we consider to be an unusually positive and far-sighted example of international cooperation in this area .
The legislation we are now discussing does not cover the institutions of the EU , but these will be referred to in a later proposal .
In view of the negotiations concerning public access to documents - in accordance with Article 255 - it unfortunately looks as though the result of these negotiations may be significantly worse than what was established in the Aarhus Convention where the environment is concerned , and such a result would in actual fact be quite unacceptable .
When it comes to future regulations , it is also important that other institutions , too , should be fully covered by the Aarhus Convention , for example the European Investment Bank whose activities have quite a big effect upon the environment in different ways .
Mr President , it is good that we have so many environmental reports here today .
Indeed , what I have to say on the Korhola report is linked to the Oomen-Ruijten and the Myller report and it is very timely indeed that this debate is taking place , especially when we are marking the tenth anniversary of the Earth Summit which was held in Rio in 1992 .
I use the words ' marking ' very carefully because I do not think we can celebrate the tenth anniversary of the first Earth Summit .
The fact that the United States and the European Union could not recently come to an agreement on the permitted level of future gas emissions is certainly an unwelcome development .
I hope that the US and the European Union can strike a proper agreement that will ensure a sustained reduction in the level of greenhouse gases .
The fact of the matter is that the greater the reduction of greenhouse gases , the greater the effect it has on climatic change which in turn will have a devastating effect on coastal communities and island communities , not only in Europe but world-wide .
I am fully aware of the preparation of the European Union for the world summit on sustainable development which is being held in South Africa in the year 2002 and I support the four lines of action which have been drawn up by the European Commission in preparation for this world summit .
The European Union will seek to protect natural resources that lie at the root of the economic development , to strive for the promotion of eco-efficiency , promote sustainable use of water , land and energy as well as try to ensure that the vicious cycle of poverty and environmental degradation is broken and this is best achieved under the framework of the United Nations .
Ten years after Rio , expectations have not been met .
The pressures on the environment have worsened and poverty continues to win ground in the world .
We ought to redouble all our efforts so as to be sure that next year 's world summit is up to the challenge of ensuring that development takes place in a sustained manner and also in a manner which protects existing communities .
The Community Fifth Environmental Action Programme protects people from the adverse effects of air pollution .
Since it is clear that the long-term goal set out by the Fifth Environmental Action Programme would not be attained easily , the Commission has rightly decided on a step-by-step approach setting out its so-called interim environmental targets for the year 2010 .
The Environmental Committee will continue to play an important coordinating role in this regard and I would congratulate the rapporteur on the report .
Mr President , recommending transparency and improving public access to environmental information are aims that have my full support .
The report by Mrs Korhola , however , contains several pitfalls for everyone to clearly see .
I particularly regret the fact that it is not more ambitious .
I equally regret that this text only addresses the public ' s access to documents and not the access of Members as well , who carry out work as part of their mandate .
As evidence of this , I would like to give an enlightening example , which I myself experienced .
In February 2000 , I had the impertinence to request the annual publication of the scientific , technical and financial balance sheet of the Life programme , which receives a package of EUR 613 million .
In August 2000 , when I still had not received anything , I contacted the Director-General for the Environment and the Secretary-General of the European Commission to find out some information on the Life programme - which saved Lake Grandlieu by the way - which appears to be stamped with the words ' official secret ' .
To my absolute astonishment , they sent me just a few trivial pieces of information , telling me that the project ' s detailed summary of expenditure contained personal details , which meant that I could not see it .
I would like to know how communicating the purchase price of plots of land bought exclusively with public money constitutes a violation of an individual ' s private life , rather than the legitimate monitoring of public funds that any self-respecting Member should be undertaking ?
It is also impossible to have access to the scientific studies carried out under the much-vaunted Life programme , for the simple reason that the Commission does not have them in its possession , which is the last straw .
The Commission suggests that I contact the author of the document directly , who is in no way obliged to help me , and who , moreover , has not done so , which is hardly surprising , since the programme revealed a genuine ecological disaster .
It is in order to avoid this kind of abuse that we shall vote in favour of this text which is a step in the right direction . However , how can we ever expect to achieve any sort of transparency in the use of Community funds ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by congratulating Mrs Korhola and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy for the improvements they have proposed to the text presented to us .
And I would also like to congratulate them on having accepted the majority of contributions that we approved in the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , whose draftsperson was Baroness Ludford .
Parliament has , quite rightly , been in the vanguard of the movement to create greater openness and transparency in the activities of public authorities , including access to documents .
Access to environmental information should be regarded as one of the essential pillars of an effective environmental policy , because it helps to make the public more aware of environmental issues , thus improving environmental protection and the quality of the environment . It does this by facilitating more effective checks on whether Community environmental legislation is being fully and properly implemented , and , lastly , because it allows the public to play a greater part in environmental decision-making likely to affect their own lives .
This proposal for a directive is intended to replace the 1990 directive . In doing so , the most important objective is to adapt the directive to developments in information technology , thus creating a second-generation directive that reflects changes in the way information is now generated in our society .
By way of conclusion , I would like to emphasise two aspects : the first is the issue of the deadlines within which public authorities are obliged to provide information requested .
This has to be done as quickly as possible and at the latest within one month .
The second issue is the fact that we have limited the scope for exceptions . Whilst it may be acceptable , in order to protect legitimate interests , for there to be arrangements exempting certain information from the disclosure requirements , it is nevertheless fundamentally important for these exceptions to be rigorously defined and strictly interpreted so as not to undermine the general principle of access so that the directive can indeed fulfil its objective .
Mr President , I agree with the views expressed by my colleague Jonas Sjöstedt .
However , I should like to speak in support of Mrs Korhola ' s report , which was adopted unanimously by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy . In particular , I shall speak from the point of view of the Committee on Petitions , and concerning the citizens ' role in the observance of Community law .
I sit on the Committee on Petitions , and I have to say that 40 % of the petitions originate from citizens and non-governmental organisations ensuring compliance with Community environmental law . They would be unable to operate if they did not receive the necessary information within the set time periods .
In our experience , the difficulties many petitioners encounter with regard to these petitions are twofold . Not only do they experience difficulty in understanding Community law - which is often complex and difficult to grasp - but they also have difficulty in obtaining from local , regional and national administrations sufficient information to enable them to submit their petitions to the Committee on Petitions in the approved manner .
The same applies to complaints to the European Commission , as the Commissioner is well aware .
It is therefore essential that this directive be adopted and transposed into the Member States ' own law as quickly as possible . One of the difficulties experienced by the earlier Directive 90 / 313 / CEE was precisely the delay in transposing it into the Member States ' own legal systems and the unsatisfactory manner in which it was implemented during all those years .
This latest revision of the directive is certainly intended to bring us into line with the Aarhus Convention , whilst also taking account of the study of the outcome of the unsatisfactory implementation of Directive 90 / 313 / CEE .
Mr President , the overall aim in amending Directive 90 / 313 / EEC on access to information on the environment is to enable the Community and Member States to comply with certain provisions of the Aarhus Convention on access to information , public participation and decision-making and access to justice in environmental matters .
In Ireland , we have already incorporated the general provisions including , of course , the original Directive 90 / 313 / EEC , in our national regulations and our freedom of information legislation .
I should like to raise a few points with which we might have difficulty .
In general I agree with the provisions of Amendment No 15 , relating to Article 2 ( 2 ) and the definition of ' public authority ' .
I have no substantive problems with that amendment , but I am concerned that some parties might attempt to revert to the original proposal from the Commission on 2 ( 2 ) ( c ) , which refers to " the operation of services of general economic interest which affect or are likely to affect ... " .
If this were to be agreed - if , in other words , we revert to the original Commission position - it would be very difficult , if not impossible , to transpose into national regulations .
It would probably result in bodies which are not public authorities being brought in to have a level playing field , competitively speaking .
In Ireland , for example , Telecom Éireann , which is now eircom , would be included as a former public authority .
We would then have to bring in private-sector telecoms and other telecom operations .
This does not fit in with the interpretation of Aarhus , so it could present problems .
The time limit proposed in Amendment No 16 on Article 3 ( 2 ) ( a ) is unreasonable .
As this directive applies to all documents in the environment area , in many cases the files might be in storage off-site and perhaps not computerised .
The Commission proposal to deliver " as soon as possible or , at the latest , within one month " is reasonable .
It is a 50 % reduction on the current position and is in line with existing Irish freedom of information provisions .
Finally , I have problems with Amendment No 24 .
There must be discretion on the provision for charges , subject , of course , to publication and including time for searches , particularly when there are repeated requests for information .
I would urge that we go down that road , leaving discretion on the publication of charges .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the best results within the environmental field are achieved when everyone involved is given the opportunity to participate in the process .
Improving the general public ' s access to information on the environment leads to increased environmental awareness .
The citizen must therefore be made central to environmental policy if we are successfully to be able to make the adjustments required in order to guarantee sustainable development .
The importance of public participation in shaping and implementing environmental policy was emphasised as early as at the time of the Rio Declaration .
Without access to information on the environment , it is difficult for people to participate and bring pressure to bear .
That is why this proposal for a greater right to information on the environment is so important .
In 1998 , the Member States signed the UN / ECE Convention on Access to Information , Public Participation in Decision-Making and Access to Justice in Environmental Matters - the Aarhus Convention .
This Convention is a major step forward in implementing Principle 10 of the Rio Declaration and in continuing the process of transparency that began with Directive 90 / 313 / EEC on the freedom of access to information on the environment .
Before the Community can ratify the Convention , the Community ' s current legislation must be adjusted .
That is also one of the main aims of this proposal .
Another main aim is to remedy the shortcomings identified in the practical application of Directive 90 / 313 / EEC , adopted in 1990 .
One of the most important features of the Commission ' s proposal for a new directive is that it would provide the right to information on the environment instead of freedom of access to information on the environment .
A more detailed definition of information on the environment is also provided and a closer deadline set before which authorities have to supply information .
The exceptions are also clearly defined , and it is proposed that authorities should actively supply the public with information on the environment and that they should only be able to refuse to supply such information if disclosure might adversely affect private or public interests protected by the exceptions .
Since the issue of public authorities was raised , I am able to say that the Commission has approved Mrs Korhola ' s amendment defining ' authorities ' .
This is entirely in line with the Aarhus Convention .
When public services too are privatised , as is now happening in the United Kingdom , it is up to the responsible national authorities to ensure that information on the environment is still supplied to people .
The Commission ' s proposal covers the most important obligations under the Aarhus Convention and , in certain respects , goes further .
The proposal nonetheless allows the Member States to decide how these obligations are to be put into practice .
The Commission ' s proposal has definitely been improved in the course of the last few months , and I should like to thank Mrs Korhola and the European Parliament for the good work that has been done .
Thanks to this , I am convinced that it will be possible to adopt a common position at the Council ' s meeting in June .
A number of Parliament ' s amendments are aimed at adapting the Commission ' s proposal to precise wordings in the Aarhus Convention .
In general , the Commission is able to approve these changes .
However , we cannot approve those changes which deviate significantly from the Aarhus Convention .
We think that certain amendments would lead to unduly detailed regulation of the issues included in the proposal .
I want to emphasise that this is a framework directive .
The main objective is to establish basic conditions for ensuring public access to information on the environment .
I therefore believe that the Member States ought also to be granted a certain flexibility in transposing the directive into national legislation .
One issue which came up during the debate was that of how we are to deal with registers .
The proposal provides for the possibility of setting up registers in the Member States , but this is not an obligation . No rules are laid down for compelling the Member States to set up registers .
Finally , I just want to say a few words about public access to information on the environment held by the EU ' s institutions , since this issue has also been touched upon in the debate .
I am currently investigating various alternative ways of ensuring that the Community ' s institutions also fulfil the obligations under the Aarhus Convention and I intend to come back to you on this matter as quickly as possible .
Naturally , we must first wait until the proposal being discussed right now has been dealt with .
We in the Commission cannot now approve the amendments affecting this particular issue because they fall outside the scope of this directive aimed at the Member States .
I also want to say a few words to Mr Bernié concerning the Life programme and different Life projects .
I personally believe it is incredibly important that we should supply information and be completely open when it comes to the Life project .
We nonetheless come up against the problem of the Member States ' saying that this is information which they themselves have produced and which they do not therefore agree to the Commission ' s handing out .
It is precisely this problem that is dealt with in the discussion of Article 255 .
These are issues to which we must return by proposing how we are to adapt the EU ' s institutions to the Aarhus Convention , and I promise you that we shall return to this matter as quickly as possible .
To summarise , the Commission is able to approve the whole of Amendment 3 and partly approve Amendments 1 , 11 , 15 , 19 , 21 , 24 , 25 , 26 and 28 .
The Commission is able in principle to approve Amendments 13 , 17 , 19 , 20 , 21 , 23 and 24 .
The Commission is unable , however , to approve Amendments 2 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 12 , 13 , 14 , 16 , 18 , 22 , 27 , 29 and 30 .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is Question Time ( B5-0018 / 01 ) . We shall deal with questions to the Commission .
Part I
Question No 47 by ( H-0191 / 01 ) :
Subject : Labelling of meat with place of origin During February , a Eurobarometer opinion poll showed that support for the EU 's plans for enlargement eastwards was in serious decline in several Member States .
In the three most populous Member States - Germany , France and the UK - a majority of respondents were opposed to enlargement .
These findings come at the same time as mad cow disease is at its height in most Member States .
When the EU enlarges to include more members , the geographical area from which our agricultural products originate will expand considerably .
It will then be even more difficult than at present for the public to know where a particular product comes from .
In order to help overcome the lack of confidence in meat producers , can the Commission envisage proposing the introduction of compulsory labelling of meat products with their place of origin , either on a national or regional basis , so as to improve information to consumers ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in July 2000 , when the European Parliament and the Council approved a compulsory labelling system for fresh and frozen beef and veal marketed in the Community , that represented a first step towards greater transparency and the restoration of consumer confidence .
Today , as we experience a second serious crisis in beef and veal production , the compulsory labelling system can start to prove its worth , because every piece of beef or veal is now retraceable , and it is clear where the animal was slaughtered and cut up .
And from the beginning of next year , this information will be supplemented by an indication of the place of birth and the place where the animal was reared .
With regard to the labelling rules for beef and veal products , which cover all types of food preparations containing beef or veal , the Commission must adhere to the timetable laid down in Article 21 of Regulation ( EC ) No 1760 / 2000 , which means that it is required to present a report to the European Parliament and the Council by 14 August 2003 on the labelling of these products , including any appropriate proposals it sees fit to make .
In the framework of the general labelling provisions , however , the Commission is working on a proposal regarding the indication of the meat and offal content of all foodstuffs .
This proposal would be another major step towards greater transparency in relation to meat products .
I would thank Commissioner Fischler for that answer and note that , on the issue of meat ' s place of origin , the places in which the animals concerned were born and bred will , as from next year , have to be stated .
In that case , will the name of the individual farm be stated , or just the name of the district ?
I ask this question in view of the lack of confidence in agriculture felt by more and more consumers .
That applies especially with regard to the meat industry here in Europe at present .
It is therefore important that this information concerning the origin of meat and other agricultural products should be available as soon as possible .
Allow me to inform Commissioner Fischler about a company in my home district of Mora in Dalarna .
The company , which is called Siljanet and whose innovator is Anders Lindberg , has introduced a form of data labelling for which a patent has now been applied and which enables meat to be traced back to the individual farm .
It was showcased at a conference on 6 March in Brussels .
Mr President , if I may reiterate the point somewhat more clearly , why is this distinction made ?
The provisions that entered into force on 1 September of last year relate to indications on the label providing information that can be ascertained at the abattoir .
Every animal has a numbered ear-tag , and if I pass the tag on with the meat , the meat can be retraced to the animal .
Secondly , the place of slaughter is obviously a piece of information I can provide at an abattoir , and I can also state where the carcass was cut up .
The other problem that has been acute since 1 January 2001 is that we also wish to indicate the places where the animal was born and reared .
I cannot establish that information at the abattoir , however , unless the animal comes to me with its life history , so to speak , and for this to work properly we need a suitable form of computerised registration .
This is where we have the problem , and it is also the reason why the second part of the system has to come into general use at a later date . The fact is that not every Member State has been keeping the requisite data for long enough to have every animal ' s place of birth stored in a computer .
Even on 1 January 2002 , this data will still not be available for every animal , but it will be possible to make a very precise distinction by that date .
High-quality meat and meat bearing a seal of quality will have the required information on its label , normally in the form of a code rather than a printed name .
From that point , no other meat will be marketable as quality meat .
That is the procedure .
Question No 48 by ( H-0193 / 01 ) :
Subject : Aid for the livestock sector in countries affected by BSE In recent years , cases of animals affected by bovine spongiform encephalopathy have been discovered in various countries after the United Kingdom had exported animal meal to them at a time when sale of the product had already been banned in the UK .
At the time when it occurred the European Union granted the United Kingdom substantial aid to tackle the crisis .
Now that other States are experiencing cases of mad cow disease , pubic opinion expects similar Community aid to that offered to the country which was at the origin of the disease .
Otherwise , we shall again be faced with the paradox , described by President Prodi when presenting the Commission ' s work programme for 2001 to the European Parliament , of a Europe that is ever more necessary yet which is seen as ever more remote .
What funding did the European Union provide for the measures taken to resolve the BSE crisis in the United Kingdom and what percentage of the expenditure did this aid represent ?
What funding is available and what percentage of the expenditure will the European Union provide to cofinance measures to assist the countries affected by this new BSE crisis ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in order to address the problems posed by the first BSE crisis , when the export of beef and live cattle from the United Kingdom was banned , Britain introduced the so-called 30-month rule , whereby the meat of all animals slaughtered over the age of 30 months was destroyed .
A calf-processing premium was also offered for the early slaughter of calves , not only in the United Kingdom but also in France , Portugal and Ireland .
In the four years from 1996 to 2000 in which the 30-month rule has applied in the United Kingdom , the cost to the EU budget has been EUR 1 275.4 million .
This amount is equivalent to 70 % of the purchase price of these animals , since 30 % of the purchase price and the entire cost of disposal were to be met by the UK .
In each case , 80 % of the amount was paid when animals were slaughtered , and the remaining 20 % was paid on presentation of evidence that any meat-and-bone meal produced from the carcasses of these animals had been burned .
It should , however , be noted that the entire cost of slaughter and safe disposal was the responsibility of the UK .
The calf-processing premium has been funded in full from the Community budget .
For the four Member States I mentioned , where these premiums were made available , the total expenditure amounted to EUR 326.6 million , of which 235.4 million went to the United Kingdom .
The Community action to tackle the first BSE crisis , however , also included full funding of public storage and an early-marketing premium for calves as well as additional direct aid amounting to EUR 1 309.9 million .
This direct aid - the early-marketing premium and the grants for public storage of more than 700 000 tonnes of meat - benefited all the Member States .
To tackle the present crisis , the Commission has not only provided EUR 238 million for interventions and 700 million for the destruction strategy but has also recently presented the Council and Parliament with a proposed package of measures for the beef and veal sector , comprising both intervention measures and other special market measures designed to reduce the production of bovine meat in the period from 2001 to 2003 .
In addition to the sum of around EUR one billion that has been voted for the 2001 budget , this entails further expenditure of 157 million in the year 2001 as well as additional expenditure of 1 145 million in 2002 and 181 million in the 2003 budget .
The Community will also meet 70 % of the cost of the buy-out operation and the special arrangements ; all other costs must be met by the Member States .
The storage of intervention stocks will be fully financed by the Community as hitherto .
Thank you for the information you have just given us , Commissioner .
Given the exponential growth of Community expenditure in this sector , do you believe that the various Member States affected by the second BSE crisis will actually be able to meet these requirements with the resources likely to be available to the Commission in the years 2002 and 2003 ?
Mr President , annexed to the package of measures we presented a fiche financière , which shows quite clearly the items of expenditure that will be incurred and how we intend to finance them .
In this respect , the funding is guaranteed from our point of view .
We expect to remain below the limit agreed in Berlin for the 2002 budget too , especially in view of the development in the euro / dollar exchange rate , which was not foreseen in Berlin , and because our export trade , especially in wheat , is continuing to flourish , while expenditure has been lower than anticipated in some other areas .
This means that we are able to take up the slack that has developed in these areas in order to help the pressurised cattle farmers while still operating within the ceilings that were adopted in Berlin .
There is a great deal of concern in Galicia , Commissioner .
This is an Objective 1 region affected by BSE where a model plan to combat the disease is being strictly implemented .
Commissioner , I should like to know whether , under the measures you referred to , direct aid to farmers is already being provided or will soon be .
In particular , since I have been asked to query this , have any specific measures been authorised or are there plans to do so concerning heifers aged between 9 and 24 months ? Also , are there plans to adjust the special premium for the slaughter of steers , changing the criterion from age to weight : 185 kilos ?
These are the requests I have received and they would be useful in the context of combating this disease .
Mr President , I am sorry that we always have a bit of a delay , but translations take a little longer than speakers ' speeches .
Let me say the following in answer to the questions from Mr Varela Suanzes-Carpegna : first of all , we are already spending all available funds on the points in our proposal .
In the 2001 budget we have no additional funds available for use as direct aid to farmers , for example .
This is also quite a different situation to the first BSE crisis , because at the time of the first crisis the old agricultural guidelines were still in force , and they were far more liberal .
Expenditure is now governed by the considerably tighter limits that were adopted in Berlin and reaffirmed at the summit in Nice .
In other words , the Commission is not at liberty to exceed the prescribed limit .
As far as the Objective 1 areas are concerned , operational support is not an option here ; the most that can be done is to provide support in connection with investments , agri-environmental schemes and suchlike .
For that reason , I cannot see any possibility of paying special income-support grants to farmers from Objective 1 resources .
Thirdly , I should like to point out that , in view of these circumstances , one option does , of course , remain available , but only within the framework of the rules on state aid .
Within that framework , national support may be provided by the Member States .
However , the provision of such support is subject to the proviso that aid awards must be notified and must not exceed the limits laid down in the rules governing state aid .
) Mr President , I just put two very specific questions to the Commissioner . He dealt with one , but has not replied to my question concerning premiums for beef .
Perhaps it was not conveyed through the interpretation .
I should like to repeat it if I may . Will the Commissioner authorise specific measures for heifers aged between 9 and 24 months and will he adjust the special premium for the slaughter of steers , changing the criterion from age to weight , namely 185 kilos ?
He has not provided an answer to these queries .
Mr President , there is only one slaughter premium .
The slaughter premium is regulated in the common organisation of the market and is the same for all animals .
For that reason , I cannot give you a more detailed answer - at least not to the question that was conveyed to me in the translation .
Question No 49 by ( H-0137 / 01 ) :
Subject : 1996 Convention on the Protection of Children The 1996 Convention on the Protection of Children is widely regarded by those of us who are involved in child protection as a very valuable instrument which will make an essential contribution in a wide variety of areas of child protection .
It is paramount that any new development of a system of child protection within the EU should not impede the implementation of the 1996 Convention .
Given that certain questions of competence in this field have been raised at EU level , can the Commission give assurances that Member States may proceed to ratify the Hague Convention of 19 October 1996 on Jurisdiction , Applicable Law , Recognition , Enforcement and Cooperation in respect of ' parental responsibility and measures for the protection of children ' without delay ?
Following the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam , which resulted in the transfer of the area of judicial cooperation in civil matters to the first pillar , the Council adopted in May 2000 the Brussels II regulation on jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments in matrimonial matters of parental responsibility for children of both spouses .
This regulation sets out rules on jurisdiction , automatic recognition and simplified enforcement of judgments in matrimonial matters and matters of parental responsibility for children .
As a result , in these areas , accession to the 1996 Convention on Parental Responsibility , to which you refer , has become a matter of Community competence .
This means that in these matters that I have mentioned , Member States can no longer proceed to ratify the 1996 Hague Convention on Parental Responsibility on their own .
The Commission is fully conscious of the need to reinforce European Union action in this area , both internally and externally and , as the honourable Member suggests , to do so without delay .
To this end , the Commission plans this month to adopt a working document on the mutual recognition of decisions on parental responsibility .
It is in this context that Community accession to the 1996 Hague Convention on Parental Responsibility is at present being considered .
Would the Commissioner be in a position to say whether there is universal support for the ratification of the 1996 Hague Convention ?
Just in case there is any confusion , this is not the Hague Convention on Parental Child Abduction - that dates from 1981 .
I am talking about the next one .
I understand that there may be some problems concerning ratification by some Member States .
If there are , could you tell us ( a ) what the problems are , and ( b ) which Member States are concerned ?
We have to clarify that conclusion of the 1996 Convention lies partly within the exclusive competence of the Community , because the rules in the Brussels II regulation are also affected , and partly within the competence of Member States , because the Convention has a much broader scope that goes far beyond the limits of parental responsibility deriving from the Brussels II regulation .
The working document that the Commission is producing this month will have two main targets .
The first one is the follow-up to the Brussels II regulation , which we have talked about on a previous occasion , because we recognise that it is necessary to go beyond the Brussels II regulation to guarantee parental responsibility at Community level .
But on the other hand , there is scope for Member States to adopt the Convention and therefore we think they should do it without delay .
We must recognise that it is necessary to clarify the way the Union can accede to the Convention , to improve the conditions under which Member States can ratify the parts of the Convention that do not fall under Community responsibility .
I do not have any indication of Member States having specific difficulties with the 1996 Convention but I know that only one Member State - the Netherlands - has ratified it up to now .
Mr President , the Commissioner has made it very clear that the Convention in a sense falls into two parts : those parts covered by Community law and those parts covered by the Member States .
But , as Mrs Banotti has indicated , the Convention is a holistic document and it would be wrong if some Member States had only part of it applied to them through the Community law method and did not ratify the other part .
Now I know it is partly at the Commissioner 's responsibility , but will he , in pushing forward the ratification of the Community part of the 1996 Convention , also make it clear to Member States that it makes sense for them to ratify the rest of that Convention at the same time so that there is no disparity between the Convention and the way it is applied in different Member States within the Community .
I totally agree with such an approach but , as the honourable Member will recognise , it will be extremely helpful if we clarify first of all the conditions under which the Community as such can accede to the Convention .
There are some legal problems because the drafting of the Convention only provides for Member States to be part of the Convention .
So we need to incorporate the fact that the communitarisation of the subjects of the Convention give the Commission and the Community exclusive external competence .
Once we clarify that , it will pave the way for Member States to ratify the rest of the Convention with the full support of the Commission because the Commission is committed to solving its own problem without delay .
Question No 50 by ( H-0149 / 01 ) :
Subject : Bank transfer costs Does the Commission believe that bank transfers in the Union , within the euro area , should cost the same as national transfers , as has repeatedly been called for by consumer associations ?
Does it consider that the costs currently charged to senders and recipients of transfers involving large sums of money are excessively high and out of step with the single currency and the single market ?
What legislative or negotiated measures will the Commission implement to ensure that bank transfers in the euro area and on Union territory cost as little as possible ?
I wish to begin by thanking the honourable Member for his question .
The Commission shares his concerns .
It is our political goal to have the fees of cross-border and domestic transfers converge so that it will be no more expensive to transfer money abroad than to transfer it within the borders of a single country .
This statement and objective has been repeated by the Commission on numerous occasions .
For example , in the communication entitled " Retail payments in the internal market " of January 2000 ; in my reply to Parliament on the Peijs report of 26 October 2000 ; and further in the Commission 's round table conference entitled " Establishing a single payment area " of 9 November 2000 .
I should like to stress that it is intolerable in a single-currency zone that charges for cross-border transfers exceed those for domestic transfers by several orders of magnitude .
However , the determination of charges and fees should be left to competition and market forces : European legislation should not aim at price regulation .
The introduction of the euro has only limited effects on transfer costs .
The reason is that the convergent costs of currency are only one element of the total transfer costs .
In fact , the currency convergence costs represent about 20 % of the total .
The remainder - the other 80 % - of the persisting high fees for cross-border transfers are mainly due to insufficient automation and standardisation .
There the Commission supports , and indeed promotes , the initiative aimed at changing and improving the present situation .
The Commission will continue to monitor the situation and keep pressure on the EU banks for the establishment of more efficient cross-border retail payment systems .
Commissioner , I am aware that you have spoken more than once on the subject of my question . However , I am taking it up on behalf of consumers ' and users ' associations .
Mere talk will not placate them .
The way to earn their gratitude is usually by resolving the problems .
They have raised this concern on a number of occasions yet they continue to be informed that their consumers are lodging complaints about current practice which it is indeed difficult to accept . This is because transfers do not only generate a high cost at their point of origin .
They also do so at their destination , inasmuch as banks make unjustified charges when the transfer is initiated and the recipient bank makes unjustified charges at the same rate on receipt of the money .
Current practice does not therefore seem to be in line with the aims of the single currency , due to enter into circulation on 1 January 2002 .
What specific negotiating action could the Commission undertake in this connection , to give some satisfaction to consumers ?
I reiterate and stress that the Commission shares the anger of consumers .
As I said in my first reply , it is not acceptable that cross-border payments are so much more expensive than payments made within the borders of any one country , so the concerns of the honourable Member are shared by the Commission .
However , I must repeat that the Commission is not in the business of regulating prices : the Commission cannot tell banks what to charge .
The Commission can urge the banking industry and national administrations to intensify their efforts in the following areas : standardisation , infrastructure of payment systems and simplification of reporting obligations .
To begin with the last point , the Commission has been able to achieve a certain success in avoiding the necessity to report operations under EUR 12 500 .
Parliament and the Commission are at one in wanting to increase that cut-off point to EUR 50 000 per transfer .
I made that clear when I spoke on the Peijs report .
So in the matter of the simplification of reporting obligations , the Commission has been able to achieve a step forward .
On the matter of standardisation , there is IBAN , the international banking account number , and the BIC , the bank identifier code .
Both of these codes should make the transfer of money simpler , faster and cheaper .
The Commission is actively working on familiarising the general public with both the IBAN and BIC in order to make them use them for so-called straight-through processing and therefore cheaper transfers .
As far as infrastructure is concerned , the Commission is again active on this front and has introduced a new low-value payment system - a particular system for small payments - called Step 1 by the Euro Banking Association .
That has been in operation since 20 November 2000 and ought to contribute to more efficiency and therefore lower prices .
In addition to that , some sectors have established their own systems , but only members or partners of those organisations have access to those systems .
So I would assure the honourable Members that we share their concerns .
It is not the business of the Commission to regulate prices - price control is a thing of the past .
The matters which occupy the Commission 's mind are , as I have said , standardisation , the infrastructure and simplification of reporting procedures and obligations .
The Commission is active in improving the situation .
No doubt , also as a result of competition , prices will go down .
But at the moment they are far too high , and that is not acceptable .
Mr President , I agree with the Commission that it is not its job to fix prices .
However , it is its job to ensure there is proper competition in the EU market .
It is not true to say that the banks are operating a price ring and deliberately keeping the prices high because with globalisation there are fewer and fewer banks , which means less and less competition .
What measures is the Commission taking to ensure that the banks are not applying anti-competitive prices as a way of keeping their bank charges so high ?
Mr President , I am not at the moment in a position to agree with Mr Titley 's statement that there is less and less competition in banking .
That is something that would require further research .
However , it is certainly the business of the Commission to see that fair competition prevails .
As Mr Titley will appreciate , it is my colleague Mr Monti who deals with competition .
I know that Mr Monti has made certain investigations , but they were more concerned with the exchange of currency .
There are two different aspects involved here : first the cost of transferring money , which was the original question put to me , and secondly the cost of currency exchanges .
The Commission 's investigations on this have not yet reached their conclusion .
The latter will , of course , be a thing of the past for the twelve " Euroland " Member States as from 1 January 2002 .
Question No 51 by ( H-0226 / 01 ) :
Subject : Safeguarding jobs in the merger between Aceralia , Arbed and Usinor The three steel companies Aceralia , Arbed and Usinor have announced in Brussels that they are to merge in order to form a new company which will control 60 % of the European steel market .
According to the chairman of the new company , Francis Mern , " the merger will create synergies which will enable EUR 300 million to be saved in the first year , a figure which will gradually increase to EUR 600 million by 2006 thanks to improvements in costs and productivity and an appropriately sized workforce . "
These words have prompted concern amongst trade-union organisations .
On the very day of the merger , Usinor announced the closure of the blast furnace in Charleroi .
In Spain , too , there is much concern regarding the possible loss of jobs in Asturias , the Basque Country , Aragon and the Valencia region .
In the light of the undertakings given at the Lisbon Summit as regards full employment , what action is the Commission intending to take in order to ensure that the new company keeps steelworks open and safeguards the jobs of the existing workforce ?
Part II
Questions to Commissioner Verheugen
Mr President , it is true that we live in an era of industrial change and reconstruction .
It is true that every day there are new acquisitions and mergers and that sometimes restructuring is synonymous with job losses .
This can have tragic consequences for the social fabric of any region , but particularly those regions where there is little potential for job creation .
The Commission appreciates that citizens and workers need to feel secure in this difficult time .
We believe that the cornerstone of successful adaptation to change is dialogue at all levels , based on full and transparent information .
The basic ideas that the Commission intends to highlight are as follows .
The first one is that decisions and corporate restructuring are both a prerogative and a responsibility for the management .
This means that , when considering action that will have social consequences , companies should always actively try to find less negative and less damaging solutions .
Secondly , when dismissals prove to be inevitable , everything possible must be done to assist with the redeployment of those concerned .
This requires forward planning , timely preparation and effective management of these processes .
Thirdly , nothing is more important than the social dialogue .
There must be timely , effective and comprehensive information and consultation with workers ' representatives and this must , of course , be before initiatives are launched or publicly announced .
Worker participation is not only a basic right but also a necessity if corporate restructuring is to be accepted .
Under the existing European legislation , employee representatives in merging companies may be informed and consulted on the potential social consequences of the announced measure .
There are concrete European directives which have been transposed into national law relating to collective redundancies , transfers of undertakings and European works councils .
But it is not for Europe to intervene at this stage as regards compliance with the directives .
They have been duly transposed into the national law of the Member States and any conflict or litigation arising from the application of the rules should be assessed by the relevant national authorities .
In my first point I concentrated on the social dialogue and the implementation of the existing European legislation .
My second point concerns the three enterprises concerned by the merger in particular , because they have considerable experience with restructuring and dealing with the social consequences and social dialogue and social partners .
In particular , if social measures were to be taken to assist the workers affected in order to redeploy them , to provide them with temporary income support or remove them from the labour market by early retirement before the ECSC Treaty expires on 23 July 2002 , the Commission could , at the request of the government concerned , provide additional aid under Article 56 of the Treaty .
This is the aid commonly known as readaptation aid .
Mr President , I should like to express my thanks to the Commissioner for her extensive explanation .
I fully share much of what she says .
Like her , I believe that dialogue is necessary and that the directives concerning workers ' rights and European works councils should be implemented .
You will , however , understand my concern when I tell you that I live in Asturias .
Asturias is a region that has undergone restructuring in coal , in mining , in arms manufacturing and in shipbuilding .
There have been dialogues and agreements with the workers , and there have been retirements and early retirements , which is what one of the chairmen of these three companies that we are talking about today is proposing for the Charleroi steelworks , for instance , which seems to be one of the first that will close .
My specific question , Commissioner , which probably already has an answer , is this : given that the Lisbon agreements talked about full employment , is it not awful to use public funds to create jobs in this way while continually losing jobs through company restructuring , privatisations and mergers ?
The problem in Asturias , where there have been retirements and early retirements , is that young people today have no prospects because more than 30 000 jobs have been lost .
Of course I share with you the concerns we have just mentioned because it is an area with big problems .
But you know that the entire area - Valencia and Asturias - belongs to Objective 1 of the framework support .
Within this framework the government of Asturias can possibly make some changes to the proposed programme for the next six years and maybe they could acquire some money , according to the regulation on implementation of the European framework programme and according to the governmental rules .
There is a need to combine the Social Fund , the employment strategy and the finance of the employment strategy and the implementation of the European and national - in that case , Spanish - laws .
What we are trying to do in this case is to find a combination of actions within the framework of this information and consultation .
This would mean that we can organise training courses and we can finance them ; we can support people in organising their own self-employment activity or small SME .
In some cases - and this is one of the cases in which it can be permitted - we have the early retirement system .
So we must find this combination and address the situation .
Obviously we cannot prevent companies from merging or making acquisitions .
Mr President , you too were born in the region of Asturias and so you are naturally concerned about matters involving our region .
A supplementary question for the Commissioner : do you believe that the main role for the Commission in this issue of creating or aiding large companies is to create a sufficiently efficient and competitive economic environment ?
I mean , we believe it is much simpler to guarantee employment through providing companies with an efficient enough environment to allow them to compete with companies elsewhere than to maintain a restrictive social policy that often works against the interests of the workers themselves .
Your question is the fundamental question of how we can combine economic and social policies .
This is the main problem we face in Europe : how to combine competitiveness and cohesion .
As far as this merger is concerned , this is a field with many problems .
We have major acquisitions and mergers across Europe .
The only way to address this is not through legislation or restrictions concerning jobs .
After every merger or restructuring in the industrial field we must see not only the number of jobs lost , but also the number of jobs saved .
In some cases mergers , modernisation and acquisition are very important for the future of the sector .
So what we have to do now is to address both : to support the competitiveness of our companies and to see how we can address the implications of these mergers in our societies .
This is what I have just explained .
In this case there are three main elements .
You can use the ECSC Treaty .
We only have one year now to use it .
The Asturias can be subsidised under the Treaty .
Secondly you can use the European framework .
And finally , you can use national money in order to organise or to implement social policies in the area .
Question No 52 by ( H-0134 / 01 ) :
Subject : Incorporation of the occupied territories of Cyprus as part of Turkey The Turkish Government has decided to implement a plan to incorporate the occupied territories of Cyprus as part of Turkey .
Measures envisaged under the plan include giving Turkish Cypriots and Turkish settlers Turkish citizenship , the settlement and distribution of land in the occupied territories , bringing the ' Turkish-Cypriot land register ' under Ankara 's control , etc .
These measures - which have also been confirmed in a Turkish newspaper interview by the Turkish Interior Minister , Mr Tzem - have been contemplated at the same time as the national plan is being drawn up under the EU-Turkey partnership which requires Turkey to take a positive approach to the Cyprus problem .
Does the Commission consider that the decision to incorporate the occupied territories of Cyprus as part of Turkey is consistent with the decisions taken at the Helsinki and Nice Council Summits , the relevant points of the EU-Turkey partnership , and UN resolutions ?
Mr President , the Commission is informed that Turkey has approved a financial protocol worth USD 350 million over the next three years in favour of the northern part of Cyprus .
This money is budgetary support , designed to enable the northern part of Cyprus to implement the budgetary consolidation plan that was announced last year .
The decision on the financial protocol was taken on 12 January 2001 at the fourth meeting of the so-called Association Council of Turkey and the northern part of Cyprus .
Other points discussed at the same meeting relate to measures for the facilitation of trade .
These measures are likewise intended to contribute to the economic support of the northern part of Cyprus .
Mr Gürel , a Minister of State in the Turkish Government , stated before the meeting that the aim of these measures was to overcome the economic crisis in the northern part of Cyprus .
He did , however , repudiate suggestions that Turkey sought to incorporate the northern part of Cyprus as its eighty-second province .
The Commission expects the Turkish side to make every effort to contribute constructively to the attempts to achieve a comprehensive settlement of the Cypriot question that are being undertaken in the framework of the UN peace process .
If the stalled UN talks are to be reactivated , both sides must demonstrate genuine willingness to resume their dialogue and to engage in substantive negotiations .
The Commission will continue to give unstinting support to the efforts of the United Nations Secretary-General and of all interested parties to achieve a lasting peace settlement .
This applies both in political terms and with regard to the provision of the requisite information on the aspects of established Community law and practice that should be taken into account in any settlement of the Cypriot problem .
The Commission takes every opportunity to reiterate its position to the interested parties .
The Cypriot question is one of the subjects of the intensified political dialogue between the European Union and Turkey that the European Council launched at its Helsinki meeting in December 1999 .
I thank the Commissioner for replying in his mother tongue , because we sometimes get the impression that , whereas we have a multilingual Parliament , with all due respect to the English language , we seem to have an English-speaking Commission .
However , I do not particularly thank him for the reply which he has given me .
I think that he underestimates the matter ; we have a clear statement by Mr Cem on the prospect of incorporation and the threat of incorporation of the part of Cyprus occupied by the Turkish army as part of Turkey as we approach integration and I should like to ask the Commissioner , who spoke as if both sides had the same responsibilities : Cyprus , the Republic of Cyprus , is the first of all the candidate countries when it comes to chapters completed and approved .
What is going to happen ?
What is going to happen ?
Cyprus is just about ready for integration , technically speaking , but the political problem has still not been resolved .
Are both sides equally to blame ?
Do both Mr Denktash and the President of the Republic of Cyprus bear the same responsibility ?
What initiatives does the Commission intend to take ?
Turkey needs to take a clear stand on this matter .
May I assure the honourable Member that the Commission does not underestimate this in any way - quite the reverse .
The Commission does not have the information that the honourable Member clearly possesses .
Only a few days ago , I had extensive talks with the Turkish Foreign Minister , and he did not mention this plan , of which you have evidently read or heard somewhere .
Nor have I heard from any other member of the Turkish Government that an annexation of northern Cyprus is planned .
I am not aware of any such plans .
If it were to happen , it would be a breach of international law and would have the appropriate consequences .
I have frequently made public pronouncements to that effect , and I am saying it again here .
You asked what happens next .
First of all , we shall continue the negotiations with Cyprus with no loss of momentum .
It is an important principle that our accession negotiations with Cyprus should not suffer because the political conflict has not yet been resolved .
At the same time , as I said , we are supporting the peace process with all the resources at our disposal , and we assume that the two processes - the peace process and the enlargement process - will support and reinforce each other .
At the moment , as you know , the peace talks have stalled . But without betraying any secrets , I can tell you that very strenuous efforts are being made in many parts of the world , in many capitals , to get these talks moving again .
Let me take the opportunity presented by your question to appeal earnestly to the representatives of the Turkish community in Cyprus to return to the negotiating table and to be prepared to contribute , through UN proposals , to a substantive and lasting settlement of the problem .
Thank you , Mr President .
I just want to inform Commissioner Verheugen that , last autumn in Mr Morillon ' s report on Turkey , the European Parliament called upon Turkey to withdraw its occupying troops from northern Cyprus .
That proposal from myself was adopted by the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy and by Parliament .
I wish to entrust Commissioner Verheugen with the task of requesting clarification from Mr Cem , the foreign minister , concerning what he said and what are his and the Turkish Government ' s intentions , for I consider the information that has emerged on this subject at today ' s Question Time to be very serious .
Mr President , may I thank the honourable Member for making that point .
The position of Parliament on this question is no different to those of the Commission and the Council .
I have very frequently discussed this point with all those whom it concerns , but at my next meeting with the Turkish Government , which is only a few weeks away , I shall gladly take up your suggestion and raise the issue again .
I can certainly assure you that nothing will change our view that the continued occupation of the northern part of Cyprus by Turkish troops is an infringement of international law .
Question No 53 by ( H-0220 / 01 ) :
Subject : Transitional arrangements for Poland and the Czech Republic What is the Commission ' s position in the present debate concerning the transitional arrangements for Poland and the Czech Republic in the fields of freedom of movement , freedom to set up in business and freedom to purchase land ?
Mr President , let me say to the honourable Member that the accession talks proceed from the principle that the candidate countries recognise the so-called acquis communautaire , the established body of Community law and practice , which is non-negotiable , and that they will apply it from the moment of their accession .
Transitional arrangements whereby the application of part of the acquis is postponed can only be authorised in properly substantiated cases .
In the strategy paper on enlargement which the Commission adopted on 8 November of last year and which President Prodi and I presented to Parliament on the same day , the Commission has laid down principles governing the treatment of requests for transitional arrangements .
The Member States have endorsed these principles , and they now form the basis of our work in this area .
They may be summarised as follows : transitional arrangements should not relate to the nature of the acquis but only to the postponement of its application for a fixed period ; they must not cause any significant distortion of competition ; they must include a clear implementation plan , including details of any necessary investments ; in areas connected with the internal market , transitional arrangements must not be too numerous and must be of short duration .
Freedom of movement , freedom of establishment and free movement of capital are fundamental elements of the single market .
Under the agreed negotiating timetable , the European Union has undertaken to formulate a common position on this chapter by the end of June of this year , if the information provided by the candidate countries so permits .
Deliberations to that end , which include the examination of some requests for transitional arrangements , are currently taking place on the basis of the aforementioned principles .
This also applies to Poland and the Czech Republic , and may I add that one element of our negotiating mandate is that proposals for transitional arrangements can also be made by the Commission if such arrangements are in the interests of the entire Union .
Mr President , Commissioner , as you know , I believe transitional phases should be as few , as short and as flexible as possible , and in that respect I very much welcome your reply .
However , I should still like to ask you about two specific points .
Firstly , do you consider it conceivable that there might be no transitional phases at all for these two countries in the three areas in question ?
Secondly , may I ask whether you find it conceivable that , if there are such transitional phases , one side ' s temporary derogation from freedom of movement in respect of certain groups of people will be balanced by the other side ' s derogation from freedom of establishment for particular groups of people ?
Mr President , I can answer the second part of the honourable Member ' s question with a categorical no .
Not only do I regard such an arrangement as inconceivable ; it would quite simply be non-negotiable as far as we are concerned .
We should resolutely resist any such attempt from the outset , but I have to say to you in all honesty that I cannot imagine that anyone at all would try to do something so utterly contrary to the spirit of the enlargement process .
What do I find conceivable ?
I find it conceivable that we shall be able to define interests of both sides that need and merit protection in the three areas to which you referred and that , having defined these interests , we shall indeed arrive at a highly flexible , highly refined and highly specific system of transitional arrangements .
But at the present time I cannot make any precise predictions .
You know that the discussion process and the decision-making process on these issues have only just begun .
Our talks are still in their infancy .
I do expect , however , that it will only take three or four weeks until the first decisions emerge .
Mr President , Commissioner , we are forever discussing transitional periods and the related problems .
Can you imagine our introducing the notion of pre-accession transition periods , starting to iron out the problems now by means of bilateral agreements between countries and developing an incentive system to that end ? In other words , for the key areas , which we all know and which are constantly being cited , we should devise a system of incentives that would enable us to solve these problems in advance , before these countries accede to the Union .
Let me say to the honourable Member that the Europe Agreements are in force with all these countries , and these agreements allow all Member States and applicant States to conclude bilateral arrangements on freedom of movement .
The Member States , however , have made very minimal use of this facility - if I am correctly informed , only Austria and Germany have done so - which compels me to conclude that there has never been a compelling need to conclude such arrangements .
Since the Europe Agreements are still in force , governments are naturally free to go on concluding bilateral accords .
Question No 54 by ( H-0238 / 01 ) :
Subject : Local organisations and enlargement In the information campaign for enlargement in both the accession countries and Member States , how does the Commission intend to promote enlargement to local organisations , such as councils , schools and so on ?
For example , are any measures such as twinning proposed ?
Questions to Commissioner Reding
I beg to inform the honourable Member that the Commission , in its communication strategy for enlargement , strongly advocates the involvement of local players such as communal authorities , town councils , members of regional assemblies , schools , chambers of commerce , craft and trade associations , unions , churches , societies and voluntary organisations as credible representatives of civil society .
The communication strategy will be implemented on a decentralised basis .
Our delegations in the capitals of the candidate countries will select cooperating partners there as part of a strategy designed to satisfy national and regional information requirements .
Local operators should , of course , take precedence in the selection of partners .
The underlying principle is that , because of the time constraints and the inherently restricted character of this project , we cannot create any completely new structures .
Nor do we have enough money to avail ourselves of the instruments of mass communication , which means that we cannot buy advertising space or write scripts for publicity spots on TV . It is therefore entirely logical that we should use the existing communication structures in those societies as vehicles for our message .
Each of the institutions and organisations to which the honourable Member referred is a suitable vehicle in my eyes .
I am especially grateful to the honourable Member for asking this question because it gives me an opportunity to express my gratification at the commitment to this communication strategy that has been shown by the Members of this House and to state that the campaign in the Member States is currently suffering - and in truth has not really started in earnest - because the amount allocated to this project under the budget heading PRINCE has not yet been released .
May I therefore also appeal for your help in ensuring that the funds allocated to the information campaign are released as quickly as possible so that we can make a start now on the actual implementation , since time is gradually slipping away from us .
It would be a bit late to tell people about enlargement after the accession Treaties have been concluded .
As I said , the Commission is not planning an advertising campaign but is focusing on information , communication and scope for popular involvement .
At the heart of the effort , of course , are the major issues such as the preservation of peace , the extension of the stability zone in Europe and common access to the peace dividend after the end of the Cold War .
We shall speak about the economic benefits of sustained growth in an area of Central and Eastern Europe stretching from the Baltic down to Istria .
We shall speak of the efficient use of the division of labour that will develop smoothly in the enlarged single market , which is now assuming continental dimensions and which must compete successfully on a global scale with the Far East and North America .
We shall speak about the application of EU standards in the candidate countries - environmental standards , transport-safety standards , competition rules , provisions relating to internal law and order , food-safety standards and the many , many other benefits accruing to citizens of the Union .
Another important subject is the use of human capital , of the unique historical and social experience acquired by the people of the candidate countries , to enrich the future integration process .
Let me sum it up in one sentence : our aim is to create awareness of the fact that we have a historic opportunity to overcome , now and for all time , the division that was imposed on Europe .
I thank the Commissioner for a very thorough answer and ask him three questions .
First , does he agree with me that we have got to sell enlargement to , in particular , the people of the European Union ?
If we do not sell enlargement we are likely to run into difficulties with ratification .
Secondly , how do these organisations get access to funds ?
Do they have to go through the national offices of the Commission ?
Is there information available on how they do that ?
Finally , he did not cover my point about twinning .
Is it possible to have projects which twin , for example , schools in Member States with schools in the accession countries and also to twin local authorities in Member States with local authorities in accession countries , to discuss the implications of enlargement and what it means for the candidate countries ?
Would it be possible to bring forward proposals such as that ?
In answer to the honourable Member ' s first question , may I say that it is indeed a matter of the utmost urgency that the people of our Member States should be made more aware of the enlargement process .
As you will know , this is one of my pet subjects , and my team and I have been working especially hard to achieve progress .
Things have certainly improved in this area , but the general level of public awareness is not yet satisfactory , and the subject is not one that sells itself automatically .
People must be told what is at stake , and we must address the anxieties , concerns and fears that are associated with enlargement and tell our people quite openly and clearly what we are doing to ensure that the contingencies they fear will not materialise .
Secondly , applications to take part in this project must indeed pass through our offices in the national capitals , because the whole project is decentralised , as I said before , and because we naturally wish to tap into the synergetic potential that exists in our Member States and in the candidate countries .
We are not the only ones , of course , who are active in this field .
Responsibility is spread somewhat more widely .
Others must also play their part in the communication process , and so it is only reasonable that we should devote part of our effort to the quest for coordination and cross-fertilisation .
That , then , is why the project is decentralised , and if you know of any organisations or groups that would like to be involved in this campaign , the right answer to give them is that they should contact the office of the European Commission in the relevant capital .
As far as the twinning of towns , schools , local councils , etc . , is concerned , I believe these arrangements fall into the category of ' existing communication structures ' .
My personal view is that town-twinning arrangements can be an extremely useful instrument in this context , because they enable us to operate through existing contacts and avoid the need to establish these contacts from scratch .
I also believe that exchanges between local politicians and schools are extremely valuable .
Our delegations and offices in the national capitals have been fully briefed on the eligibility of these schemes for support from the campaign budget .
Mr President , Commissioner , I only wanted to ask a supplementary question regarding the extent to which the Euroregions are incorporated into your strategy and the extent to which the candidate countries themselves will receive funding to enable them to obtain information from us about their own situation , because I believe our task is not only to inform these countries but also to enable them to converge with us .
I believe there are projects such as the planned Europa Centre at As in the Czech Republic and many others .
I wanted to ask whether this sort of thing is included in your plans .
My reply to the honourable Member is yes - the Euroregions are naturally included .
Indeed , they are an absolutely essential component , because we already have very close-woven information and communication networks at our disposal there .
I do not believe it would be wise for the Commission to provide the applicant States with money for their own public-relations activities .
I must say quite plainly here that I believe this would mean overstepping boundaries that we should not overstep , particularly in terms of interference .
This money is political money ; its use is a very sensitive issue . No country should accept funds from an external source if they are granted for purposes of information or public relations .
The candidates have never asked us for funds for this purpose , but you know that they do engage nonetheless in these activities .
Thank you , Commissioner .
As time is running short , I would ask you to refrain from asking supplementary questions unless it is absolutely necessary .
Mrs Reding has agreed to answer Questions Nos 56 , 57 and 58 together when their turn comes .
Question No 55 by ( H-0188 / 01 ) :
Subject : Exploitation of African footballers What action has the Commission taken with regard to the continued exploitation of young African footballers by either European soccer clubs of soccer agents ?
. ( FR ) Mr Cushnahan has asked this question because he is aware that exploitation of young African footballers by clubs or by agents has received broad media coverage and that this exploitation stems from several problems which must be treated separately .
With regard to football agents , the Commission ' s departments are still working on a process based on the rules of competition and the discussions that have taken place have led FIFA to change the ways in which the profession is organised .
These new rules came into force on 1 January 2001 .
Some Member States also chose to pass legislation in order to supervise more closely the activities of football agents .
Raising the moral standards of the profession is a concern shared by the public authorities and by the authorities that represent football .
We should not , however , blame the whole profession for the improper behaviour of some of its agents .
The second problem is that of commercial transactions which involve young players .
The Commission was recently given the opportunity to show its concern about this matter .
The Helsinki report on sport , as well as the European Sports Forum , which was held in Lille in October 2000 , pinpointed this problematic issue .
Furthermore , a whole workshop in Lille was devoted to the subject of protecting young people .
For reasons of competence , however , it is up to the Member States to pass legislation if they consider this to be necessary . One Member State has already done so .
Generally speaking , all the issues concerning the exploitation of young African footballers are the subject of in-depth consideration by public authorities and , in the Nice Declaration , made in December 2000 , the European Council expressed , I quote , its " concern about commercial transactions targeting minors in sport , including those from third countries , inasmuch as they do not comply with existing labour legislation or endanger the health and welfare of young sportsmen and women .
It calls on sporting organisations and the Member States to investigate and monitor such practices and , where necessary , to consider appropriate measures . "
This is in line with the approach that we are committed to , and Mr Cushnahan , you know very well that I gave an answer on this subject in the debate on football transfer rules . It is also in line with the new rules on the protection of young people that FIFA would like to be granted .
As the Commissioner is under pressure of time , I will forego my right to ask a supplementary .
I appreciate the Commissioner giving me a very full and detailed response today on this and other questions .
I just want to thank her for that .
As they deal with the same subject , Questions Nos 56 , 57 and 58 will be taken together .
Question No 56 by ( H-0219 / 01 ) :
Subject : Impact of European Year of Languages on regional and minority languages 2001 is the European Year of Languages , which has just been officially inaugurated .
What impact does the Commission believe the Year of Languages will have on regional and minority languages and how does the Commission intend to follow up the Year of Languages to create a lasting impact on the position of those languages ?
Question No 57 by ( H-0239 / 01 ) :
Subject : Multiannual programme for minority languages A whole range of minority organisations and representatives had hoped that the Nice Summit would result in a situation in which cultural matters would in future be decided on by qualified majority , so that decisions in favour of minorities or minority languages could no longer be blocked by individual Member States , as has frequently been the case in the past .
Can the Commission say how it assesses the present situation ( after Nice ) , with specific reference to the situation of minority languages and a multiannual programme intended for these languages ?
I shall try to answer all three questions at the same time .
They are not all identical but they are along the same lines .
It is too early to know what the impact of the European Year of Languages will be , so soon after its inauguration .
I can inform you , though , that already the whole of Europe is involved in an extensive debate .
There is an extraordinary fascination surrounding this event in our regions , universities and amongst the general public and it is not just for official languages , but for all languages , which is very significant .
Furthermore , several events and projects that have been funded for 2001 will fuel this debate and will even focus exclusively on regional and minority languages .
We expect there to be further contributions , from the European Parliament , which has commissioned a study into regional and minority languages , from the Committee of the Regions , which is preparing an own-initiative opinion on this issue , as well as from the Commission , which has begun a study into the economic and practical aspects of protecting languages .
At the end of 2001 , the situation will be much clearer , thanks to all these initiatives , all these discussions , studies and research projects , enabling us to consider our options , instead of the various legal , political and practical commitments , which will shape the action we take in this area .
It will , therefore , only be at the end of the European Year of Languages that the Commission will be able to draw conclusions from all these activities and to determine what initiatives can be taken to safeguard linguistic diversity in Europe .
To turn now to the subject of linguistic diversity , it is wonderful to see that the Member States have included all languages in the decision that has been made on the European Year of Languages .
Not one was excluded .
The issue was dealt with entirely openly in all the Member States .
I think that this is very important and is a marvellous thing , and I would also like to reiterate that linguistic diversity is highlighted in Article 22 of the European Charter of Fundamental Rights .
This linguistic diversity has been put into practice in the Member States for the European Year of Languages .
Thank you for your answer , Commissioner .
Clearly , it is too early to draw any conclusions , but I believe some progress could certainly be made both on cooperation concerning language learning methods and on the preservation of unusual languages .
I know that the Commission is aware of the current difficulties when it comes to cooperation on preserving minor languages and I hope that the Commission is able to use some of the experience that has been accumulated in order to maintain and develop those cultures and languages that belong together .
During this European Year of Languages , I have been travelling extensively within Europe and I always begin speaking in Luxembourgish , in order to demonstrate that there are no minority or majority languages .
There are only mother tongue languages , which shape individuals and their environment .
Rest assured , then , that as a Luxembourger , I shall fight for linguistic diversity in Europe , for all languages to be respected and for progress to be made in the teaching of all languages .
Furthermore , thanks to the Socrates-Comenius project , there are already possibilities for cooperation , and I can inform you that many schools are taking advantage of the opportunities provided by the Comenius project to put the spotlight on learning regional languages .
I have two slogans for the European Year of Languages : ' mother tongue plus two ' and ' learn your neighbour ' s language ' .
In a Europe made up of regions - and I am pleased that the Commissioner responsible for a Europe of the regions is sitting beside me - we must learn the language of our neighbours , especially in cross-border regions in order to have a successful Europe of the regions .
Therefore , the ideas of learning your neighbour ' s language , your mother tongue plus two and regional languages are all contained in this slogan .
Mr President , first of all I should like to congratulate the Commissioner for her commitment in this area and to thank her for that .
She has tackled this issue with an enormous amount of dedication and enthusiasm .
But unfortunately , the perception of the Luxembourg people is not shared throughout the Union , and there is still a great deal to do in this respect .
That is why I was particularly disappointed that it was not possible at the Nice Summit to bring this matter into the realm of majority voting .
We must resolve the various minority situations before they develop into problems .
We need a preventive strategy .
We have 60 minority situations in the European Union today .
In the continent as a whole there are a total of 300 .
Even though the unanimity principle continues to apply , making certain policies difficult to pursue , perhaps a way could be found by means of structural support .
Could I ask the Commissioner for her opinion on such an approach ?
To answer Mr Ebner ' s question , I would like to say that , of course , the people of Luxembourg are completely trilingual , but other people can also master three languages .
All they have to do is follow the example of Luxembourg , where children start learning several languages at the age of five or six , and this is a successful formula .
So , on the subject of unanimity and majority , cultural questions always require unanimity .
With fifteen Member States , it is therefore fairly difficult to take decisions that represent a step forward .
That is also why the European Year of Languages falls under the umbrella of education .
I very consciously placed this event within the sector including education , training , linguistic diversity and the learning of several languages , because this area affects most people .
Commissioner , first of all I should like to thank you for your answer and very briefly request that , since the Commission is the Guardian of the Treaties and the Treaties state that the Community must contribute to the enhancement of the cultures of the Member States and to respect for regional diversity , it should ensure that those Member States within which several languages that also have official status coexist can take part in organising the events planned for the European Year of Languages .
That is , you have said that no State had excluded any language from taking part .
That in itself is good news , but it is not enough for them to be able to take part .
It is very important that representatives of the peoples that use these languages should also be able to take part in the body that is to organise the events , as stated in the report we approved at the time , in order to guarantee their presence and enhancement .
I can reassure Mrs Ferrer that Catalan has not been omitted .
That would have been absolutely incredible because the legal bases of the European Year of Languages stipulate that the languages recognised in a Member State , even if they are not official EU languages , should be part of the European Year of Languages .
I tried to ensure that Europe ' s linguistic diversity was represented in the range of projects that were selected , and I am very pleased to see that things are getting off the ground and that , perhaps due to the European Year of Languages or perhaps because the time is right , we are adopting a more flexible approach to the language issue .
Furthermore , fewer problems will arise if we tackle the language issue through learning , through the learning of many languages , than if we approach this from a regionalist point of view .
My second answer is that it seems , for now , that we are holding all the cards .
Mrs Ferrer will remember that I quoted the Charter of Fundamental Rights , which makes linguistic diversity a requirement .
Well , this will be a strong component in the future development of our linguistic policies in Europe .
Thank you , Mrs Reding , for your answers and for confirming that Catalan will enjoy a strong presence in 2001 .
Question No 59 by ( H-0132 / 01 ) :
Subject : Progress and quality of major projects in Greece Can the Commission provide a new estimate , on the basis of current data or developments , of the date for completion of the major projects under construction in Greece ?
Does it consider that the deadlines for completing the work will be met within the financial estimates for each project ?
Is any more recent and detailed information available regarding the quality control of these projects ( a possible improvement in their quality ) and penalties against firms and organisations ?
What is the outcome of the cases already forwarded to the public prosecutor ( including the list of projects exhibiting highly substandard work ) ?
To go back to the previous debate , I would like to say to Mrs Ferrer and other speakers that I saw the importance of Catalan when I visited Barcelona on Friday .
If you agree , I shall now turn to the question that Mr Papayannakis asked me about major projects undertaken as part of the Community support framework in Greece , and in Athens , in particular .
Mr Papayannakis , the term ' major projects ' has a very precise meaning in the rules on the Structural Funds , since it refers to a project which is granted a budget of more than EUR 50 million .
Since there are quite a number of projects of this type in Greece , which receive cofinancing from the Cohesion Fund or the Regional Fund , mainly in the transport , environment and energy sectors , it is difficult for me to give a very accurate and thorough answer now , in a matter of minutes .
Mr Papayannakis , I would like to reiterate that granting a project Community cofinancing does not alter the fact that national authorities are still responsible for carrying out the project .
Furthermore , the information at the Commission ' s disposal is , of course , initially provided by those same authorities .
Rest assured that we certainly do take an interest in how the projects and their costs are progressing .
Our overriding concern , moreover , is to ensure that the financial resources granted by the Community to Greece enhance progress and the quality of life of the Greek citizens and this concern applies to all Member States .
With regard to major projects in Greece , there are three types or categories , rather ; the first includes those that have already been completed , and here I am thinking of the Athens underground system and Spata airport , which is due to be inaugurated in May .
Some of these projects have also been undertaken with or on the basis of concession contracts .
I could have mentioned other projects within the first category but the second category includes projects that are ongoing and that are also being undertaken with concession contracts , such as the Athens ring road and the Rio-Antirio bridge .
The Athens ring road should be completed at the end of 2003 and the bridge completed in 2004 .
There are , of course , other projects that I do not have time to mention , which have , in general , also been undertaken with concession contracts .
It is difficult for me to give a deadline for the completion of the work , Mr Papayannakis , as there are many projects and therefore many deadlines that will fall due over a period of time .
Does this mean that we shall no longer exert pressure to ensure that progress is made with these or other projects , such as the extension of the Athens underground ?
Certainly not .
I would like to repeat that , in accordance with the new rule for the Structural Funds , of which you are aware , Mr Papayannakis , we should remember that expenditure on programmes , which are part of these major projects , must evolve in line with the programme , and the Member States risk financial penalties if this does not happen .
I would therefore like to reassure you , Mr Papayannakis , and inform you that the Commission ' s departments will closely monitor the rate of progress and the changes in costs of these programmes and projects within the European Union as a whole , and in Greece in particular . With regard to Athens , because I , like you , am committed to successfully preparing for the next Olympic Games , in 2004 , I am also extremely anxious that the projects financed by the European Structural Funds and which will contribute to the success of the Olympic Games , run smoothly .
Lastly , I shall briefly touch on the subject of quality control .
Not long ago , on 29 January , the Commission ' s departments requested detailed information from the Greek Government on the independent checks that had been decided for the cofinanced projects in Greece .
As soon as I receive this information , Mr Papayannakis , I shall be able to pass this on to you .
The European Anti-Fraud Office has also said that it has not yet received any communication from the Greek authorities pursuant to Regulation No 1681 / 94 concerning irregularities and the recovery of sums wrongly paid in connection with the financing of the structural policies and the organisation of an information system in this field .
Mr Papayannakis , these are the details that I can give to you today .
Commissioner , I would like to thank you very much indeed .
However , the reason for my question was firstly so that you would provide a list of what is currently expected .
I have a list here from five years ago which provides some deadlines .
This list was drawn up by your predecessor , Mrs Wulf-Matthies and the deadlines specified at that time have not been met .
I would therefore like to know what is happening .
The second point obviously relates to quality .
We have constantly called for a blacklist of companies or individuals whose work was of a poor quality , so that they can no longer tender for contracts .
This is a very important point .
With regard to the cost - the comparative cost - I would like to know how much it costs per kilometre to build an underground system in Barcelona , Athens or Paris for instance , so as to be able to judge the state of Europe ' s finances .
Commissioner , I should like to end by saying that I am not very committed to the Olympic Games .
In actual fact , I am rather against them .
Since , however , we have scheduled this train , a train that is unforgivably delayed , I would like an explanation .
Mr Papayannakis , I have no problem with finding out the cost per kilometre of the underground system in Barcelona , Athens , or in any other city .
This information will , of course , be relative , because in the case of the Athens underground system , for example , you know as well as I do that many archaeological sites and remains were discovered during construction and considerable excavation work was also carried out .
Therefore , when you encounter these complications , although they are not always strictly negative , they do involve extra costs .
The reasons differ depending on the location .
Having said that , it will not be a problem to do the research you mentioned into comparative costs , with the help of my departments .
I shall now refer back to the list that you mentioned and which was drawn up , as you said , by Mrs Wulf-Matthies .
If you look at this list objectively , all the projects , the major projects , have been started and some of them have been completed .
I mentioned them earlier and I do not wish to go back to them .
With regard to the Athens sewage system , the water supply system or the gas pipeline , I do not think the reality is all black or rosy or , for that matter , green .
No doubt there have been delays .
Mr Papayannakis , some of the reports have also enabled us to see that there are quality problems on building sites in general - poor quality materials , inadequate control measures etc .
This is the reality .
I am striving to be objective and to shoulder my responsibilities .
That is why , for example , I took as much time as was needed before this week approving the first operational programmes , so that I could verify that every one of these operational programmes , which will be granted a great deal of money , some tens of billions of euros , will be managed by a properly-run agency .
Only when I have this assurance do I approve these programmes , and I do this one by one - I also have many more to approve this month .
I have taken careful note of the other questions that you have asked me , and , if you wish , I shall answer you in writing , providing information that is as objective as possible .
Question No 60 by ( H-0142 / 01 ) :
Subject : Steel closures in Wales Would the Commission report on any progress made in efforts to ensure that funds are made available as a matter of urgency for the workers , families and the communities affected by the Corus steel closures in Wales ?
Mrs Kinnock , as you know , most of these job losses at Corus in Wales affect the plant at Newport and the sheet steel factory which are , respectively , in the Objective 2 region , East Wales , and the Objective 1 region , West Wales and The Valleys .
The factory at Shotton , where there will also be redundancies , is also in the Objective 3 region , East Wales .
Some weeks ago , in a press release dated 2 February 2001 , when this problem began to be more serious , the Commission announced that it was willing to discuss any proposal , as soon as the National Assembly of Wales and the other parties involved decided that the European Union ' s programmes must be refocused and redeployed to take account of developments in this situation .
In the same press release , I also clearly stated that even if the current programmes could be refocused or redeployed , there is no possibility of the EU making extra funds available , either within the rules of the Structural Funds or of other policies .
The answer given to you was the same answer that I gave in relation to the recent natural disaster in Portugal and with regard to the earthquake in Greece .
We do not have a budgetary line to cope with exceptional and unexpected costs , but we can and do redeploy funds and packages to the affected regions .
On 28 February , our departments met with a delegation from the National Assembly of Wales .
The proposals that were considered on that occasion relate to aid for professional training , business development , site renovation , support for communities , infrastructure aid and as part of these discussions , we hope to receive more detailed proposals on the basis for regional partnership .
I should like to add , Mrs Kinnock , that aid from the European Social Fund may be granted using the Objective 1 single programming document , which covers the West Wales and The Valleys region and represents EUR 591 million .
The East Wales region is covered by the Objective 3 programme , which receives a budget of EUR 132 million .
Both these programmes contain measures which can relate to training , the professional retraining of those made redundant , as well as measures designed to help staff with ongoing training .
Lastly , the Commission also has resources from the ECSC budget until July 2002 .
A payment of this type could be granted on an individual basis to redundant steelworkers to help them train for other employment .
The amounts are not huge but they do , nonetheless , come to a maximum of EUR 3000 per person and the Member State in question is obliged to contribute the same amount .
These are the details that I wanted to give you in addition to the Commission press release that I issued on 2 February 2001 .
Commissioner , thank you for the enormous support and commitment you have made to Wales at a very difficult time with the job losses in the steel industry .
I was very interested , Commissioner , to hear that you have met Members and officials from the National Assembly of Wales and I wondered whether you had been given any idea of the timescales that are envisaged before any suggestions for programmes are made .
Secondly , Commissioner , my Labour Welsh colleague and I wrote to you last week inviting you to come to Wales to see first-hand what the problems are , what needs to be done and also to have an opportunity to meet some of the key people in the National Assembly and other areas .
So , Commissioner , I very much hope , although I do not expect an answer now , that you will look seriously at that request and that we will see you in Wales before too long .
Thank you very much for your invitation , Mrs Kinnock .
I was very pleased to receive an invitation from you and from your colleague , and I can , in principle , accept to come , as I intend , in any case , to visit all the regions of the UK - as I visited Scotland some weeks ago - and to hold discussions with the National Assembly of Wales , local partners of representative bodies and leaders of social and professional organisations .
I accept your invitation , therefore , in principle , although at this point , I am unable to give you a firm date .
Let us move fairly swiftly on to the subject of implementing new guidelines for some of the programmes , following the first meeting that was held with the representatives of the National Assembly of Wales .
I informed you that we were expecting very firm proposals , in accordance with the guidelines that were outlined the other day .
I promise that I shall act very quickly as soon as I receive these proposals for reallocation , concentration or redeployment to target more specific funds in the region for the men and women affected by these restructurings in the steel industry .
With regard to East Wales , which is an Objective 2 region , I hope that we will be able to finalise the adoption of the Objective 2 programme before 31 March 2001 . I wanted to confirm this date with you in my answer to your question .
Question No 61 by ( H-0144 / 01 ) :
Subject : Quality of projects in receipt of delayed spending under the 1994-1999 structural funds in Italy Twenty-five per cent of the funds granted to Italy for the 1994-1999 programming period have not yet been spent .
The Commission has set a final deadline of the end of 2001 for the funds to be spent .
A similar situation arose in respect of the 1989-1993 funds , which resulted in the loss of around 3 % of the funds allocated .
Faced with the delays , the Italian regions and the Commission were forced to reprogramme investments , which resulted in the danger of having to grant funding to projects that were not compatible with the principles of environment-friendly development and the rational use of natural resources .
Can the Commission guarantee that this will not happen again and that , if reprogramming is necessary , it will be directed towards investments that promote sustainable development ( in sectors such as energy , transport , biodiversity , tourism , agriculture and human resources , etc . ) ?
And if this is not possible , can it guarantee that the funds will instead be withdrawn ?
In particular , can the Commission provide assurance that dubious investments will not be made in the areas of road infrastructure , hydraulic works and the management of water resources , such as dams and channelling ?
As briefly as possible , I would like to inform Mr Celli that we have committed all the commitment appropriations earmarked for the 1994-1999 period for objectives 1 , 2 and 5b and for Community initiatives .
It is true that , on the basis of the latest figures supplied to us by the Italian Ministry for Finance , the situation for payments is much less healthy , and I would like to write to you , Mr Celli , to give you precise details of how quickly the payments for each objective are being made .
They are unsatisfactory , particularly for Community initiatives .
I have informed the Italian authorities on several occasions that they must step up the pace of spending and that control activities must be improved so that projects can be completed and payments can be made within the specified timescales .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would also reiterate that the rules governing financial management for the 1994-1999 period do not allow us to reprogramme the resources after the deadline for making payments .
The last reprogrammings to be carried out in this way were in 1999 .
In relation to the 2000-2006 programming period that has just started , I would like to inform you that coordination between our departments has again been improved , in order to achieve better interaction between the Habitat Directive and Structural Funds programming .
Mr Celli , I share your concern to ensure the environment , biodiversity and sustainable development are respected in line with the principle of subsidiarity .
It is up to the Member States to identify programmes and projects to be financed which adhere to the legislation in force .
Commissioner , I would like to know whether , in effect , all these projects , which have been reviewed and maybe altered , are genuinely in line with adequate environmental impact studies .
I regret to say that , in the past , we have been confronted on several occasions with a number of occurrences : in Italy , for example , the Trasimeno Lake protection proved to be maize planted along the banks of the lake which draws up water and thus reduces the level .
We have even had Directive 2078 , which authorised the use of insecticides instead of reducing it .
Therefore , my question is this : are all these projects - which have been reviewed because the funds had not been used until shortly before the deadline - all compliant at the current time ?
Has the Commission genuinely ensured that the environment will not suffer at precisely the time that it should be being protected ?
Mr Celli , I am not going to go into the good or the bad aspects of how this was managed in the past .
I cannot say that all the projects , both here and in other countries , worked perfectly , but , to tell you the truth , I am not very pleased to have had to carry out urgent reprogramming at the end of 1999 , which involved very considerable sums of money , for Italy and for other countries . This had to be done after I noted that the projects that were initially devised were not or were no longer feasible .
I was not very pleased to carry out this enormous reprogramming exercise in the very last months of the previous period , 1994-1999 , but I did this so that the money would not be lost and I intend to make sure that we do not find ourselves in the same situation in this period .
The general rules agreed at Berlin allow us to impose increased sanctions and restrictions on Member States , and so avoid this sort of reprogramming .
Now , Mr Celli , with regard to what was carried out at the end of the year , all the assistance provided from the Structural Funds should , in practice , be consistent with Community policies , and should therefore respect the legislation in force , particularly with regard to the environment .
If irregularities or infringements do come to be identified - whether you inform us of them , whether we carry out inquiries or evaluations or whether Member States also inform us of them - the Commission will , by virtue of the regulation , be able to eradicate the irregularities in conjunction with the Member State and consider reducing or sometimes even withdrawing some financial assistance .
In this respect , I can assure you that , in conjunction with the Member States , the greatest care and attention will be paid to the issue of the environment during the period for which I am responsible , in other words 2000-2006 , as , personally speaking , it has always been one of my overriding political concerns .
Thank you , Commissioner Barnier .
Since the time allotted to Questions to the Commission has elapsed , Questions Nos 62 to 113 will be answered in writing .
That concludes Questions to the Commission .
( The sitting was suspended at 8 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Emissions of pollutants from large combustion plants
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0068 / 2001 ) from Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , concerning the common position of the Council with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council regulation on the limitation of emissions of certain pollutants into the air from large combustion plants [ COM ( 2000 ) - C5-0562 / 2000 - 1998 / 0225 ( COD ) ] .
Mr President , thank you so much for giving me the floor .
I am delighted that so many MEPs are attending today ' s debate on an issue of such importance .
I understand that a large number of British MEPs had a meeting in the bar and discussed how they could prevent me from speaking .
That plan did not work .
But I would like to take this opportunity also to thank my Spanish fellow MEPs : I cannot fault their behaviour which is entirely in tune with the Rules of Procedure , for although we do not see eye to eye in terms of content , they still made the effort to be here .
All credit to the Spanish .
As for my British counterparts , I can no longer show them any respect because they surreptitiously tried to cancel all debates this evening within my own group .
Mr President , we have been working on this directive since as early as the autumn of 1998 . On the basis of that directive , we will adapt the rules on emissions of pollutants from large combustion plants .
Despite all opposition on the part of a number of Member States and despite all warnings and protests from some interested parties in the electricity sector , my instinct tells me that we can amend the original regulation without any problems .
The technical facilities are already widely available and , in a large number of the EU Member States , the modified rules are already prescribed and are hence normal policy .
The environmental requirements which , in a number of countries are prescribed for large furnaces , are invariably stricter because the acidification of our environment is still ongoing .
Add to that the issue of ozone - you will be aware of the fact that many citizens suffer from respiratory disorders , which are partly caused by nitrogen oxides originating from traffic and the sector at issue today - then surely it should be more or less a point of honour for everyone in this House to address these problems when it is possible to do so in a simple and effective manner .
The original Commission proposal to amend the 1998 directive was not what you would call a runaway success : standardisation was poor and existing installations were kept outside the range of the directive .
Parliament showed its best side at first reading and did what parliaments are expected to do , namely to lend substance to the care for humans , nature and the environment in general .
The Council ' s common position came about with the greatest difficulty .
Moreover , the European Parliament ' s wish to include existing installations in the directive was also taken into consideration , and legislation was tightened up to some extent .
The snag - and my fellow Spanish MEPs regret this - was that each country managed to negotiate their own exceptions , and if it was up to the Court of Ministers , we would be using old and polluting power stations not updated with state-of-the-art technology ad infinitum .
The common position lacked any vision whatsoever ; it was a pick-and-mix with something for everyone .
Alongside environmental arguments , I have also supplied evidence for the need to tighten the common position : in addition to the need to protect public health ( ozone smog ) , I also came up with a few economic alternatives , for it is true that we would like to develop an environment industry in Europe .
If we compare the Council ' s emission requirements with the regulations which currently apply in the United States or Japan , we come off rather badly .
Some people claim that there is no need for requirements with regard to combustion plants , for , thanks to Mrs Myller ' s report , we are being given emission ceilings anyway .
If we meet the expectations of those in favour of liberalising the energy market , in other words if we do not prescribe requirements , or if we allow exceptions , with regard to generating electricity using old , polluting power stations , the market mechanism will be disturbed , and those who neglect the environment will be rewarded with a headstart thanks to their cheap energy prices .
That cannot be the intention of European environmental legislation .
Mr President , I wanted to speak before the debate actually started , because we had been led to believe in our group meeting that one of the other political groups had tabled an amendment under Rule 146 calling for this debate to be adjourned until the next part-session .
I understand that it has not been brought forward and therefore I would have liked to put it forward in my own name at that time .
As we have now started the debate we cannot do that , but I would just like to express my concern that I was not called before the debate started .
Mr Goodwill , to avoid any misunderstanding , let me say that I knew such motions might come from the floor , so I cast a careful eye around the Chamber before inviting the rapporteur to speak to see whether anyone wished to raise a point of order .
There were no hands raised when I looked round .
I am sorry , but an intervention tomorrow is the only option left to you .
It is up to you , of course , whether you exercise it .




I am sorry .

I assume that the other points of order concern the same matter .
Is that so ?
It seems to be the case , so there is no need for me to call anyone .
Mr President , I have no wish to punish anyone , so I shall come to the point fairly quickly .
It is true that the European Union has finally overcome its reluctance to introduce European rules on combustion plants .
The importance of these European rules lies very simply in the fact that we have a liberalised electricity market in the European Community , and it goes without saying that , in this liberalised market , standards for atmospheric pollution and the like should be comparable throughout Europe .
The Commission has therefore reacted properly by focusing primarily on the old plants , for which there have regrettably been no rules since 1987 and which , to put it bluntly , have caused quite heavy pollution throughout Europe .
I fully support the Commission ' s activity in this area .
I warmly welcome it , and I believe it represents a step in the right direction .
Of course there is room for argument about whether particular exceptional arrangements can be extended for a year or two in the case of small power plants .
That would not have posed us any problems in our quest for a compromise .
The great pity is that we have not arrived at such a compromise .
The approach is right .
And anyone who thinks - and I wish to say this in spite of all the anger that has been voiced here - that environmental policies are a national responsibility is quite wrong , because most of the pollution emitted by these power stations ends up in the territory of our partners in Sweden , Finland , Denmark and Norway .
I believe we are jointly and severally bound to find an answer .
I believe we have found that answer and that we have also found ways of ensuring that special arrangements can be made for small plants for the next few years .
I believe the rapporteur has presented a good report .
We should continue along this path .
Mr President , we have in front of us today a very important piece of legislation .
It will affect our air quality , our water quality , the general quality of our environment throughout the whole of Europe and beyond in the coming years if we bring it to fruition .
That is , of course , if the Member States have the will to do so .
The proposal has now reached its second reading .
We have insisted very strongly at first reading that the most stringent measures are taken to control gaseous emissions from large combustion plants throughout the Union because of the acid gases that are formed , because of the effects upon the environment , and because of the effects upon human health .
We have now reached the point where we have in front of us the common position .
I understand the Council has worked very hard to achieve this and it does propose new and better levels of emissions .
However , my group thinks that things can go further .
My group thinks that in combination with a number of other factors , Mrs Myller 's report which is to follow for example , it is possible to put a little more into this proposal than we see already .
In that respect , I would commend to you the amendments , particularly those that apply to the articles and the annex which control the emission limit values from the large combustion plants .
It seems to me that we are confronted with a very difficult choice tonight because we must decide if what we vote tonight is at least in some way acceptable to the Council .
The Council has indicated that it is unwilling to accept further amendments from Parliament .
If we achieve the appropriate votes tomorrow , that unwillingness becomes an obligation and the Council will have to sit down and negotiate with Parliament .
That cannot be a bad thing in terms of the recognition of the ability of this Parliament to achieve a high level of environmental protection for the people of Europe .
It seems to me that what we can do tomorrow in the vote is to take a few more steps forward to achieve a little bit more in terms of benefit to the environment .
That has to be balanced against the possible consequences for the energy strategies and the energy industries of the European Union .
We are very mindful of that .
If you look tonight at the amendments which the Socialists will be supporting , we have relatively long timescales for these new regulations to be incorporated into EU law .
We must take this step forward , but inevitably we must also allow for the fact that this step needs to be accommodated not just by the environment but economically as well .
You have in front of you a report with the amendments , the majority of which the Socialist Group can support , some of which we feel go too far .
However , I would commend the report to the House .
Mr President , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten ' s report is sound .
The report on large combustion plants , take two , is also an important report .
It concerns acidification , traditional air pollution and ozone smog .
Acidification was a buzz word in the 80s .
That is when it all started .
Many citizens believe that the problem of acidification has now been resolved , but that is not the case .
We have a long way to go yet .
At the same time , the energy market has been liberalised .
That means that it is becoming more difficult to uphold environmental rules .
For example , in my own country , the Netherlands , a Belgian company is buying up Dutch gas plants and is replacing them with coal plants , which are many times more polluting and also bad in terms of CO2-emission .
That is why we need environmental rules , and strict ones at that .
The Environmental Committee has fortunately supported these , but the Environmental Committee ' s amendments will , unfortunately , not make it : they are unlikely to attract 314 votes .
But the Green Group would like to know who will then be responsible for this .
The Green Group will be supporting the Christian-Democratic amendments , albeit with an aching heart . These are weaker because they leave ammonia out of the equation for no good reason .
That is an unnecessary concession to the farmers who constitute their grassroots support .
Despite this , we will be supporting those amendments , for the Greens , too , have now grown up .
Mr President , obviously we need limits on emissions of atmospheric pollutants in order to protect the environment and human health .
However , the measures proposed in the common position are one-sided .
Basically , it proposes to abolish lignite and coal as energy sources , ostensibly to protect the environment , but it ignores or is silent on the subject of other major sources of pollution , such as cars .
At the same time , it ignores the fact that 70 % of new power stations in the United States and 50 % in Japan use solid fuels , such as coal , because production is cheaper , even if initial investments are more costly .
We would also point out that , if lignite and coal are abolished , a large number of power stations will close and the numbers of unemployed , which are already high , will swell still further , whereas we could be discussing additional measures to prevent pollution , such as filters , green belts etc .
Perhaps this one-sidedness at the expense of solid fuels comes from a willingness and an intention to promote natural gas , which serves certain interests in the European Union .
In Greece , we use lignite as a basic and financially satisfactory source of energy .
At the same time , we are pressing for as many protective measures as it is possible to take .
If , as the experts say , natural gas reserves will run out in a hundred years and solid fuel reserves will run out in two hundred and fifty years , we should be discussing how to make the best possible use of all these sources of energy , not abolishing some of them , especially at a time when the energy question is paramount and affects the cost of living of our workers .
Mr President , all large combustion plants together account for 63 % of the sulphur dioxide and 21 % of the nitrogen oxide emissions in the European Union .
There are therefore major environmental gains to be had in this sector .
Rapporteur Oomen-Ruijten has made sound proposals to this effect .
The Council has reviewed the directive in its entirety , but there is sufficient reason for making a number of further adjustments at this stage .
First of all , the emission limit values must be brought into line with the current scope of technology .
If we realise that waste incineration plants and cement kilns are only allowed to emit 40 mg of sulphur dioxide , I am surprised at the values for combustion plants which can be as high as 2 000 mg .
I can just about understand why the rules for large combustion plants are more relaxed , but forty times more relaxed is unacceptable to me .
As the state-of-the-art technology stands at present , it is altogether possible to reduce the level of SO2-emission down to 100 .
Therefore , the values proposed by the Environmental Committee , which vary from 1 200 to 300 for existing plants , are definitely not too strict .
Strict standards can be prescribed for new plants since the new technology can be used here .
The amendments which we have tabled in tandem with the Green Group include limit values of 400 for small plants and 200 for large plants .
Secondly , the bizarre exemption provisions must be deleted .
The fact that large , old combustion plants are allowed to pollute 2 200 hours annually is unacceptable , as is the fact that it is permitted to exceed the emission limit values if the fuel , such as highly polluting brown coal , is extracted from the country ' s own soil .
In my opinion , the exceptions for Spain and the islands of Crete and Rhodes are also unacceptable .
The liberalisation of the energy market should bring with it equal environmental conditions . We therefore need to abandon the aforesaid exceptions in order to avoid distortion of competition .
In addition , incentives must be given to rejuvenate or renew old and heavily polluting plants , instead of allowing the serious pollution of the atmosphere to continue .
Thirdly , the offshore gas turbines must also meet emission requirements .
Because of the changing composition of fuel , I am aware that it is impossible to meet the strict emission requirements at certain times .
But if offshore gas turbines are written off completely because of it , any incentive for improvement is taken away .
The amendment I tabled contains very flexible emission limit values by way of alternatives .
My fourth point concerns the approximation of this directive to the waste incineration directive .
In the event of different fuels being mixed , the ultimate emission limit value in both directives is calculated in a different way .
It makes little difference to the result but , in practice , the combination of these two calculation methods is not only very complicated but also unnecessary .
I have proposed an adaptation in Amendment No 43 .
Mr President , I want to begin by congratulating the President on having handled the first part of this discussion so well that we do , in fact , have an actual document to discuss .
However , I also want to emphasise my disappointment at the fact that Members of this Parliament , and above all members of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , are unable to accept the democratic process embarked upon three years ago and now to be brought to a conclusion , but are , at the last minute , trying to thwart this document .
I also want to thank the rapporteur for the work she has done , even if I have not always understood the path she has chosen , the course she has subsequently charted and why the end result appears not to reflect the original , higher ambitions .
We know that our use of fossil fuels is not a sustainable use of energy .
That is something we are really all agreed on .
We have known about the problem for at least 30 years , and it is now time to do something about it .
I have said it before and I shall say it again : Parliament supported a strategy on acidifying air pollution three years ago .
Now it is time to put this strategy into effect .
That is what this directive is about .
It is not only about acidifying air pollution in Sweden , Norway or Denmark .
It is about half a million people who , in different places on this earth of ours , die each year because of the use of fossil fuels .
It is about all those who contract chronic illnesses , for example chronic bronchitis , because of the burning of fossil fuels .
It is not only , therefore , a question of tightening up limit values but , to just as great an extent , a matter of our people ' s health .
That is something which Members must not forget .
It is in actual fact possible to retain a good level of service in the energy field and , at the same time , to work towards a better environment .
We are on the right road .
It is we who have the opportunity to set the pace if 314 Members have the courage to take up a definite position tomorrow in favour of the more ambitious alternative .
It is scarcely surprising that the Council should have submitted a compromise in the form of a text which is a watered down version of that which Parliament approved at first reading and would have liked to have seen .
It is also obvious that , at second reading , we should again put forward the same demands in order to put pressure on the Council and obtain a good negotiating position for ourselves in the inevitable conciliation , for we know that we must act now if we are to get to see any results at all within the foreseeable future .
We must dare to set strict limit values for all types of plant , both old and new , large and small .
The Council ' s limit values are not as far-reaching .
The Council appears to have lost faith in our ability to develop new technology at all .
It is absolutely crucial that old plants which already exist should be covered by this directive and that they should also be subject to strict limit values .
Nothing would be as intended if too many exceptions were granted .
Nothing would remain of the high ambitions entertained .
Small plants too must , therefore , be covered by the directive .
It is also important to point out that the directive establishes a framework for that liberalisation of the energy market we are seeing today .
Without such a framework , there would be total anarchy in the European energy market .
Minimum environmental requirements are needed in order to create common ground rules .
Those requirements we are now imposing upon ourselves in the European Union are also demands which must apply to the Union ' s future members .
Today and tomorrow , we have the opportunity not only to put a stop to dangerous emissions but also to improve public health and prepare the ground for a successful future enlargement of the European Union .
Mr President , the biggest event in the football calendar in Britain is the FA cup final .
At half-time millions of kettles are turned on to make a cup of tea - for those who have not been drinking beer since the start of the match at least .
The demand for electricity - a commodity that cannot be stored - peaks .
To meet this demand , or at similar times such as particularly cold days in winter , some of our older coal-fired power stations are pressed into service .
Amendments to the common position threaten the future of some of these stations and the jobs of the miners who supply the coal .
It is technically possible to upgrade them , but in many cases it would be cheaper to build new gas plants and retro-fit these stations with exhaust scrubbers .
The main plank of our air quality strategy in this area is the national emission ceilings and , as long as they are met , Member States should have a degree of flexibility .
New gas-fired plants have already contributed to the UK meeting its targets .
How a Member State meets its obligations is an issue of subsidiarity .
Some of the proposed amendments will be counterproductive .
For example , the inclusion of an end date of 2012 will result in old plants being run harder to use up the time remaining and will increase pollution during those four years .
The common position is already a compromise and takes account of first reading amendments by adding in measures on existing plants which were not part of the Commission proposal .
We should not destabilise the delicate compromise package by seeking to further amend this directive , which already delivers substantial and very real environmental improvements .
Mr President , this directive is important for the EU in terms of the environment , energy production and competitiveness .
Up-to-date limit values for large power plants are needed both in the Member States and the candidate countries .
For that reason , we must thank the rapporteur , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , sincerely for her hard work .
The committee is imposing substantially stricter limits with no adequate differentiation being made with regard to their size and type .
The one-off investments in new technology the directive calls for are the same irrespective of the size of the plant .
This would particularly threaten the ecologically recognised combined production of heat and power .
In my own country , for example , this might mean a step backwards in ecological terms .
In Finland many different bodies share this concern , among others the Ministry of the Environment .
The amendments tabled by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy would mean investments that were not cost-effective in terms of ecological benefit , and difficulties for the combined use of energy-efficient wood and peat and the combined production of power and heat .
The latter process is carried out mainly in medium-size plants , which would now be treated in the same way as the large ones .
On the other hand , the use of peat is justified .
It promotes the added use of wood in power plants , as combined combustion improves the way the combustion process can be controlled , reduces problems of corrosion , and adds to the reliability of fuel being available .
The report does not support this objective either , one which is directly linked to the matter of bio-fuels .
It might even be said that the report could be accused of environmental avarice in some of the amendments and that it is therefore in danger of stifling many important environmental objectives .
However , it is important that the report should be adopted and the directive be brought into effect , as it will prevent emissions from drifting long distances and acid deposits affecting the natural environment of another Member State .
With its amendments , in search of compromise as they are , my own group is trying , among other things , to ensure that the combined production of heat and power in small and medium-sized power plants can continue , while the large plants are compelled to invest in technology that can adhere to stricter limit values .
In addition , the compromises seek to ensure that burning peat , which contains very little sulphur , does not require needless extra investment , as opposed to processes using fuels with a higher sulphur content .
This is contained in Amendment No 36 .
We appreciate it very much that Mrs Oomen-Ruijten has agreed to these compromises .
We find ourselves once again in a situation where a legislator has to face the fact that different environmental conditions also mean different environmental effects .
Unless we can find the right solutions to these problems , our last resort may have to be to have our own directive for fuels within the context of the northern dimension , although this would not be a very good solution .
Mr President , Ireland does not in general have a problem with stricter ELVs for new plants , as these can simply be incorporated into IPC licensing and will help achieve national emission ceilings .
However , we must question further tightening beyond the common position and whether it will bring any significant additional environmental benefits .
The common position was developed in tandem with the proposed NEC directive and represents a coherent and balanced approach to achieving environmental objectives over time .
The proposed amendments are not justified in terms of environmental benefits and associated costs and other impacts and would disturb the balance achieved .
Further tightening would increase costs and reduce Member State flexibility in meeting agreed national targets and accelerate increased dependence on natural gas with attendant fuel security concerns for electricity generation , particularly in countries like Ireland .
Additional restrictions on existing LCP are not justified in the context of Member State commitments under the NEC directive to reduce overall emissions and the impending application of the IPPC directive .
Some amendments will even have a perverse effect .
For example , stringent and uneconomic ELVs for small plants will hinder combined heat and power development and others do not support an integrated approach to the environment .
Proposals to tighten ELVs are not proportionate regarding costs and benefits and fail to recognise that the common position is a balance between improving environmental performance and avoiding excessive costs and other impacts .
No cost-benefit analysis is provided for the further reduction of emissions from plants with already low emission concentrations .
One amendment I have difficulty with is the proposal to reduce NOx emission limits from 650 to 200 .
It is technically feasible but will require the installation of costly end-of-pipe controls .
This will require more energy input and result in increased CO2 emissions , the use of more raw materials and the production of hazardous waste .
The Council 's proposed ELVs could be met by primary means at a much lower cost .
As noted previously , these additional costs will ultimately be borne in high electricity prices .
However , it is not at all clear that the benefits in additional NOx emission reductions outweigh the associated environmental and economic costs , i.e. this is not consistent with an integrated approach to the environment as a whole .
Mr President , air pollution remains a real threat to citizens ' health and well-being in many parts of Europe .
Our ecosystem continues to suffer from acidification and eutrophification .
It is an issue where Europe can and must act since air pollution knows no borders and this directive will make an important contribution to reducing atmospheric pollution .
Let me turn to the key issues under discussion .
The question of existing plants has been the major point in the debate on this proposal , both at first reading in the Council and now at second reading .
After a very difficult discussion in the Council , the common position was achieved with unanimity .
It now includes significant new and tougher requirements for these plants and this will result in considerably reduced emissions of sulphur dioxide from the large combustion plant sector of the existing Member States and ultimately in an enlarged Community .
While I consider that it is necessary to keep a degree of flexibility in the approach to existing plants , I share Parliament 's view that a final date should be established , after which the obligations for everyone will be clear .
Parliament has played a very important role in pointing towards the outcome on existing plants , and I am grateful to Mrs Oomen-Ruijten for her efforts as rapporteur .
Parliament has proposed a number of amendments to make the emission limit values more stringent , both in the case of existing plants and plants that will be licensed after the new directive comes into force .
Already the common position will reduce emissions of sulphur dioxide from the LCP sector considerably .
Therefore I see little justification at this point to further tighten emission limit values for sulphur dioxide for existing plants .
However , in the case of nitrogen oxides the effect will be less significant as the standards that apply to existing plants are not very demanding .
Hence there is some merit in tightening emission limit values for nitrogen oxides .
In the case of new plants , economies of scale which reduce the cost of compliance allow for further tightening of emission limit values for both nitrogen oxides and sulphur dioxides .
On the question of indigenous fuels , the time has come to remove the divergent treatment of indigenous solid fuels and other fuels and the process of phasing-out should now begin , especially in view of the changing commercial nature of the large combustion sector .
In this context , the Commission can accept Amendments Nos 3 , 4 , 7 , 8 in part ; 9 , 12 , 13 , second part ; 14 , 16 , 17 for plants over 300 MW ; 18 and 19 , both for plants between 100 and 300 MW ; 21 , 28 and 29 , both in part ; 39 and 40 .
However , the Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 6 , 13 , first part , 15 , 24 , 25 , 26 , 30 to 38 , 43 , 44 , 49 , 50 and 51 .
I should like to make a short comment on the other proposed amendments .
Let me assure you that the Commission has considered carefully all the 50 amendments tabled .
Overall we can accept 23 , either fully , in part or in principle .
The Commission can accept Amendments Nos 10 and 11 , which will simplify the obligations for refineries , and Amendment No 23 in principle , subject to ensuring that its implementation is compatible with other legislative requirements on access to this type of information on emissions .
The Commission can also accept in principle Amendment No 1 , dealing with economic instruments ; Amendment No 2 , concerning the alignment of the definition of biomass with the recently adopted directive on the incineration of waste , and parts of Amendment No 5 requiring further examination of emissions of heavy metals from the LCP sector and emissions from large combustion plants in the maritime sector .
However , the Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 20 , 22 and 27 as they would detract from the common position or introduce inconsistencies with recently adopted and related legislation on waste incineration .
It is preferable to await the outcome of the review in 2004 before including gas turbines in offshore applications .
We have not yet assessed all the technical implications but that will be done in the review in 2004 .
Thus Amendments Nos 42 , 45 , 46 , 47 and 48 are not acceptable .
By way of conclusion , I should like to say that in both readings Parliament contributed to improving this legislative proposal .
This will have an impact not only in the present European Union but ultimately also in an enlarged Community .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
National emission ceilings for pollutants
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0067 / 2001 ) from Mrs Myller , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , concerning the common position of the Council with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council directive on national emission ceilings for certain atmospheric pollutants [ 10674 / 1 / 2000 - C5-0563 / 2000 - 1999 / 0067 ( COD ) ] .
Mr President , representatives of the Commission and the Council , I would like to warmly thank all the members of the committee for the constructive debate this part of the directive fuelled in committee , and I also wish to thank the division responsible for servicing the committee .
We are in a rather special situation in the sense that the committee in the second reading was even able to improve on the results of the first reading , and this is due - thanks again to the committee members - to the adopted amendment , which combined the best aspects of the first reading and the Council ' s common position .
We have therefore drawn up some very ambitious aims for limits on emissions by the year 2010 to present to Parliament .
Last summer ' s common position took the results of Parliament ' s first reading into account only to a very limited extent .
However , the committee ' s own vote on the issue shows how much it wanted to support the results of that first reading , and so we now have adopted a good and purposeful position with regard to tomorrow ' s vote .
I hope this position will prove successful tomorrow .
This directive is an attempt to reduce the quantity of certain pollutants in the air , which are sulphur dioxide , nitrogen oxides , volatile organic compounds and ammonia , so that in the long term we reach a situation where there is no danger to people ' s health .
This is to be achieved by setting some interim targets for the year 2010 .
These interim targets should help us to get to a point at which areas where the critical acidification loads are exceeded will be halved , where the ozone load that affects health is reduced by two thirds , and where the ozone load in excess of critical levels for vegetation is reduced by a third .
Regrettably , these decisions will not , however , enable us to achieve the targets that were agreed in the Community ' s Acidification Strategy .
For this reason , the parliamentary report now being dealt with is proposing a deadline until 2015 , when these critical loads may no longer be exceeded , and a target for the year 2020 , when critical levels should not be exceeded either .
The proposal for a directive also contains the call for a review of the situation in 2004 .
The point of this is to better enable us to steer a course towards the 2010 deadline , see if we are on the right track , and consider what to do to achieve the targets .
The proposal for a directive under discussion places a demand on Member States to reduce the proportion of pollutants in the air to a level that is safe for people ' s health , although the Member States themselves can choose the remedies they need to attain results .
The biggest threats , and thus the most challenging problem for the Member States , are emissions that result from energy production , and in this respect Mrs Oomen-Ruijten ' s report , which has just been debated here , was a most important one , and I genuinely hope that in tomorrow ' s vote we can achieve the best possible results , as that will have a direct impact on how the emission ceilings this directive deals with can be achieved .
Other causes for concern are industry and traffic .
Industry is the only area that has been able to reduce emissions in the last few decades , while traffic only appears to continue to produce increased emission levels .
Member States therefore have to do something about it .
Traffic is a real challenge .
We must be able to reduce traffic and change our behaviour , favouring alternatives that are less polluting , rail traffic and public transport , and , at the same time , lend support to technical developments that will have an impact on cleaner transport systems in other ways .
And lastly , I would like to say that the costs of this directive have been set too high in various connections .
If we take into account what was decided in the Kyoto Protocol , for example , we will get to a position where we can halve the proposed costs .
If then we compare them to the benefits we will derive as a result of this directive in terms of improved health , they will be worth many times the costs incurred .
Mr President , the present draft directive concerning national emission ceilings tackles the main atmospheric pollutants .
The salient points of this directive , therefore , concern the reduction of emission levels of the said substances to below the critical levels and loads .
The directive ' s key element , or rather the most talked-about part of this proposal is , of course , the table which lists per country the permitted annual emission for each substance .
A key concern in the discussion on this subject matter was that when at UN level , the 36 countries , including the EU Member States , agreed upon other , and often less strict , standards for the same substances , this met with a storm of protest .
Consequently , at first reading , many argued in favour of replacing the European Commission table , which may have been ambitious , by the UN ' s so-called ' Gothenburg table ' , which allowed higher ceilings .
During the discussions at first reading , I already indicated that the line of reasoning was rather weak .
After all , UN agreements always have a lower level of ambition due to the fact that it is difficult to compare the situations in rich , prosperous , and thus often more polluting countries , with the situations in developing countries .
Moreover , our continent suffers the direct environmental effects of the emission of sulphur dioxide , nitrogen oxide and volatile organic substances and , albeit to a lesser extent , ammonia .
At first reading , the PPE-DE Group adopted the European Commission ' s ceiling at first reading .
However , we have improved the ammonia table , partly because the risk of spreading is less pronounced .
My instinct tells me that the Council ' s compromise proposal with regard to SO2 , NOx and the VOC will lead to higher emission levels .
Only with regard to ammonia can I identify with the Council ' s compromise .
The Commissioner is as aware as we are of the problems involved in implementing the nitrate directive : in actual fact , none of the Member States meet the standards specified therein .
The Commission ' s proposals to further reduce the ammonia ceiling are not feasible , in my opinion .
I would add to this that the effects of ammonia emission are also partly a local phenomenon , and that a lower goal can therefore also be justified .
That means that we largely go along with the rapporteur : we support the first eight amendments ; we do not endorse Amendment No 9 .
In the table , we support the SO2 , NOx and the VOC and , where ammonia is concerned , we would refer to the Council ' s proposal .
We are also struggling with the rapporteur ' s notion that what we want to reach in 2010 should , in actual fact , be reached in 2004 .
That seems highly ambitious to us .
Finally , I must also say that the working relationship with this rapporteur was highly successful , and that the work on the large combustion plants was excellent too .
I would like to express my gratitude in this connection .
Thank you , Mr President .
A lot of what was said in the previous debate is of great relevance to this directive too .
These two documents form the basis for the acidification strategy that we adopted three years ago .
When measurements were taken last Monday in my own home district , the level of acidity was higher than it had been for a very long time .
Acidification is still a problem to which we cannot avoid drawing attention .
I want to begin by thanking Mrs Myller , who has done a magnificent job , as well as my fellow MEPs in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , who have contributed to our now having a proposal which is looking really good .
The problem , however , is that the path between the committee and the plenary sitting of this Parliament is at times fraught with obstacles .
The closer we get to the day of decision , the more afraid some of us seem to become .
Once again , we see the conflict between industry , employment and the environment rear its head .
Many who have previously been environmental campaigners are transformed into preservers of the status quo in their own countries and regions and embrace the old coal-fired power stations in their home districts .
The long-term view and acceptance of responsibility are suddenly things of the past when the issue arises of how we are to obtain a sound environment for life in the future too .
At Parliament ' s first reading , we supported those emission ceilings proposed by the Commission .
In this connection , it must also be pointed out that the ceilings and figures presented by the Commission were based upon countries ' own reporting to the Commission .
These were not invented figures , plucked out of the air .
Certain people appear now to be denying these figures .
The figures were not over-optimistic and , just as Mrs Myller said earlier , the economic calculations were , in actual fact , a good reflection of the reality .
When , now , the Council contributes its own points of view , it will come as no surprise if , this time too , a much more meagre result is arrived at , a result very close to the figures in the Gothenburg Protocol .
In this connection , I would also remind you that - to begin with , at least - the Commission refused to sign the Gothenburg Protocol because it thought it was so inadequate and not ambitious enough .
I really do hope that the Commission will now show that it supports what Parliament has said , above all in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
If we opt for the Council ' s line , we in actual fact choose poorer health for our citizens in a situation in which children and asthmatics are among the most vulnerable .
We also choose to exceed the critical loads and levels over a further several hundred thousand hectares of land .
The list could extend much further .
I hope that , tomorrow , we shall have the courage to approve the proposal tabled by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
Mr President , at first reading the Liberal Group gave its support to the Commission 's proposals .
We want to see a significant reduction in air pollution within a period of time that reflects the serious environmental problems we face .
The Commission argued that the economic benefits would far outweigh the costs involved , but Member States dissented and said that they could not go beyond the targets agreed at the Gothenburg Protocol .
Parliament was right , then , to back the Commission .
I am pleased that in negotiation the Commission was able to overcome Member States ' resistance , make some progress and secure more ambitious targets .
But at second reading we are in a rather different position .
The Commission has said that it has made a firm agreement with the Council and is sticking to it .
It will go no further , it says .
It will not support the amendments tabled by the PPE-DE or the Socialist Group .
I would like Member States to be more ambitious .
But at first reading , Parliament supported proposals based on a Commission model which I find fiendishly complicated .
In the absence of the Commission 's support now , I do not see how we , as legislators , not technical experts , can propose more ambitious targets for individual countries unless we pull figures out of the air , which seems to me a rather poor and amateurish way of making law .
So I have accepted that this is as far as we can go for the time being .
But I am also aware that this is a poker game and I am a rotten poker player .
It may be that Member States have cards up their sleeves which they are prepared to offer up if pushed in conciliation .
It may be that the Commissioner secretly wishes Parliament to pursue its original agenda .
If that proves to be the case then I have misread the game .
I am waiting with interest to hear from the Commissioner whether she has been keeping cards close to her chest or whether her public position remains the same .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mrs Myller on her sterling report on national emission ceilings .
There are four polluting substances involved .
For two of the substances , sulphur dioxide and nitrogen oxide , an adequate solution can be found in Mrs Oomen-Ruijten ' s report on large combustion plants .
The problem of ammonia must be solved at local and national level .
As for volatile organic compounds , we are , in actual fact , still missing part of the legislation .
There are now rules which apply to volatile organic compounds which are released when filling up with fuel , as well as for substances of this kind used in industry .
However , for volatile organic compounds in households , which , after all , account for one third of all emissions , such rules do not yet exist .
That is why I am asking the European Commission when it will at long last come up with an EU directive on paints .
We must move towards water-based paints , and it is time that rules were drafted to that effect .
The Gothenburg Protocol has been signed by 36 countries , and is subject to the right of veto .
The common position is hardly more ambitious than the Gothenburg Protocol .
The right of veto on environmental legislation has been abolished within Europe .
It would be disgraceful if the European Union were unable to prescribe environmental standards which are substantially stricter than the Gothenburg Protocol .
Tomorrow , Parliament has the opportunity to prevent this disgrace .
I hope that 314 or more of my fellow MEPs will be voting for Mrs Myller ' s excellent report .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur as well and to ask how far we can trust the Council .
It is nothing personal .
This is one of the very few proposals I can recall which has come with a price tag attached .
It is true that it is printed on page 112 of the original proposals .
It does not appear on the Internet version any longer , but it was there on the version that was originally submitted to Parliament .
This shows us the actual cost of implementing the proposed directive on national emission ceilings .
It was news to the Belgian members of my committee that this proposal would cost them EUR 1 000 million a year .
We showed it to the Belgian members and they did not like the look of that at all .
Can the Commissioner state whether the cost of what is being proposed has been discussed in the Council and what , for example , the Belgians have said about it ?
What about the French , for whom this measure will cost an additional EUR 916 million a year ?
What about the Greeks ?
According to the Commission 's estimate , this will cost them an additional EUR 338 million a year .
So how far are they actually willing to pay the cost ?
Mrs Müller has addressed this problem .
In her Amendments Nos 1 and 6 she rejects the word " broadly " and says that the Member States must actually agree to remain " exactly " within the emission ceilings .
If Parliament accepts that , we have an even greater right to ask how far the Member States will actually agree to abide by these proposals .
When the Commissioner comes to reply , could she perhaps say something on Amendment No 8 ?
Does subsidiarity apply here or not ?
If it does not apply , then presumably we have to await proposals from the European Commission .
If so , since the instruments cannot be taxes , which would not be agreed , what will they be ?
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I believe we have an important report before us .
I welcome the directive ' s objective , namely a drastic reduction in air pollution , with open arms , as well as the fact that we are setting a new deadline for 2020 .
As Mrs Jackson observed a moment ago , my objection pertained to the table in Annex 1 , in particular the calculation method and the implications thereof for Member States with a small surface area and high population density .
Commissioner , I assume that , as you already stated in the debate at first reading , we can expect a fairer distribution of the burden , also for small Member States , during the review in 2004 .
That is why I will be voting against Amendment No 10 which has again included the Commission ' s old table in Annex 1 .
Mr President , the acidification of forests , fields and watercourses is the single biggest environmental problem in my own country .
Almost all acid rain comes from the burning of fossil fuels used in energy production in other European countries .
Acidification is therefore a problem ' imported ' into our country .
The natural environment in large parts of the north of the EU has little capacity to act as a buffer against pollution .
That is why acid rain causes a lot of damage in Denmark , Sweden and Finland .
Major efforts are made each year to reduce the damage by liming lakes and watercourses .
Without being able to put my finger on the exact figures , I would venture to maintain that , over the years , Sweden has , in financial terms , invested more in liming in order to combat acidification than certain Member States have invested in reducing acidifying emissions .
Certain areas are extremely vulnerable to acid rain , such as south-western Sweden , certain mountain areas in northern Sweden and , especially , southern Norway .
I would address all you MEPs from different Member States .
If we are to be able to save the valuable countryside in these areas , we need your help .
We appeal to you to see the issue from a European perspective and to help us with the major problems caused by acidification .
Moreover , reducing combustion emissions is an important health issue in quite a few EU countries .
Many people in my own country with an interest in the environment are pinning their hopes on the European Union .
The UN has proved to be poor at tackling environmental problems in Europe .
I believe that taxation is an issue for the individual nations .
The national parliaments must choose the best and most practicable ways of achieving the national emission ceilings that have now been proposed .
I cannot therefore support the proposal for EU taxes to combat emissions .
I also want to comment on the unemployment argument .
Overall , a good environment and better health do not lead to unemployment .
In the long run , efforts in favour of a sound environment and better health are a good investment , leading to reduced costs and a better economic position .
The situation in Russia would have been much better today if there had been no need to inherit the ill health and the environmental catastrophe left behind when the Communist system collapsed .
The Council ' s common position is remarkable for its lack of ambition and for the fact that the Council does not want to set a date for when the measures are to come into effect .
So we know how the directive is to be complied with . It will quite simply not be complied with at all .
Parliament should therefore again be as ambitious in combating acidification as the Commission was in setting what have been called emission ceilings .
With Parliament and the Commission shoulder to shoulder on this issue , the Council ' s position is becoming rather embarrassing for the governments of the Member States .
Finally , I want to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Myller , for her efforts to achieve results in this important area of environmental concern .
Mr President , President of the Commission , I agree totally with the previous speaker that acidification , eutrophication and the increase in ozone levels in the soil are problems we have to effectively address throughout Europe .
Effective national emission limits must therefore be set for the main pollutants .
After some long and hard negotiations the Council achieved consensus on national emission ceilings .
The Commission , for its part , supports the Council ' s common position .
The Council ' s common position would mean a significant reduction in emissions .
It is perhaps not as ambitious as Parliament , in its first reading , would have liked , but perhaps it is the best possible compromise in this situation .
Our Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy has unfortunately finished up by making some proposals that are so dramatic and ambitious that , if they were implemented , the general consensus that has been reached would be jeopardised .
In this respect I am in agreement with the views expressed earlier by Mr Davies .
When emission limits were being discussed in Parliament ' s first reading in March of last year , I stressed that new targets should not be set before the earlier ones had been achieved .
The Commission must check that there is continued improvement in all Member States , and promote measures to help industry to make the necessary changes .
It is important that environmental targets are achieved as cost-effectively as possible .
For that reason , Mrs Jackson ' s question is more than justified .
As worthy as the tighter restriction on emissions as proposed by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy are , we should be aware of the possible adverse effects of our hopes and voting behaviour .
Delaying this directive and embarking on a course of prolonged conciliation , the poker game which someone mentioned , would certainly be the worst alternative from the point of view of the environment .
And besides , the environmental benefits gained from more stringent measures would be very slight in comparison with the costs .
Mr President , I would like to begin by thanking the rapporteur for her work on this important proposal .
I know you have a lot to do on the Sixth Environmental Action Programme and other things .
The proposal for a directive on national emission ceilings aims to tackle acidification , eutrophication and ground level ozone simultaneously .
It is therefore highly significant for two of the four priority areas identified in the Commission 's proposal for a Sixth Environmental Action Programme : nature and bio-diversity and health and the environment .
There are still important areas of the Union where nature and biodiversity suffer from the impact of acid rain eutrophication and citizens are affected by ground level ozone , as has already been commented on by Members of Parliament .
We must solve these problems .
Amendments Nos 10 and 13 seek to reinstate the emission ceilings originally proposed by the Commission .
In their common position the Member States endorse both the long-term goals and the interim objectives of the proposal .
They have re-examined the commitments that they made in the Gothenburg Protocol and have signed up to more action .
But they all consider that there are uncertainties and other factors that may change the picture in a few years time : energy plans , accession and so on .
This is why Member States have agreed to look again at these issues in 2004 .
The Commission can accept this as a first step on the understanding that our aim in 2004 will be to make up the shortfall .
I am very concerned that it would be exceedingly difficult to have successful discussions on Amendments Nos 10 and 13 with the Council .
There are different requirements for each Member State and fifteen points of view in the Council .
The Commission therefore does not accept Amendments Nos 10 and 13 .
The Commission can , however , accept Amendments Nos 11 and 12 .
We will indeed have to look again at the Commission 's original proposal for emission ceilings in 2004 and decide whether it would be better to share the burden differently in the light of more recent developments .
Amendments Nos 11 and 12 explain this very clearly .
In answer to Mr de Roo ' s questions , I want to say that the Commission has completed two studies on volatile organic compounds .
We are now doing preparatory work and expect to be able to discuss potential proposals with experts actually before the summer .
That is perhaps important information .
As regards costs , and how far the Member States , Mrs Jackson , are willing to pay the costs ?
As you know costs were discussed at enormous length in the Council .
Member States believe we can meet the target and they have signed up to what they feel they can do now .
They want to look again at the costs in 2004 before signing up to more .
Of course the costs are higher for some countries than for others because of where the pollution emissions come from .
All emissions are not equal because of different weather patterns .
That was also noted in the discussions in Council .
As far as the remaining amendments are concerned , Amendments Nos 1 and 6 are related to Amendment No 10 .
The Council inserted the word " broadly " in recognition of the fact that the emission ceilings of the common position will not go all the way to meeting the goals for 2010 and the Commission does not therefore accept these amendments .
Amendment No 4 would set dates by which the long-term goals of this directive should be met and it is still the Commission 's view that , with our present knowledge , any date would be mere guesswork and we should not put it in a legal text .
The Commission must therefore reject Amendment No 4 .
I hope we will have a clearer forecast when we review the directive in 2004 , but then - if you will forgive the joke - some emission figures will have to be taken out of the air .
The Commission agrees wholeheartedly that emissions from international shipping are important and must be tackled effectively .
We must also look at the effect of aircraft emissions .
The Commission can accept fully Amendment No 2 and can accept in part and in principle Amendment No 3 .
We would however prefer to quote Directive 99 / 30 more directly .
We cannot accept Amendment No 5 , nor the first part of Amendment No 7 .
Emissions from international maritime traffic and cruising aircraft cannot be assigned to individual Member States .
We must instead follow up action already taken in the International Maritime Organisation and decide what else is needed .
The Commission can accept Amendment No 8 in part and in principle .
Bringing forward proposals on economic instruments is something that we will look at as part of our review of the directive in 2004 .
We can accept in part and in principle the second part of Amendment No 7 and Amendment No 9 .
Again , the Commission cannot accept the requirement to bring forward proposals .
All the issues highlighted by Parliament should be considered during the review .
I thank Parliament for its time and look forward to progress on this very important dossier .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Environmental inspections
The next item is the report ( A5-0041 / 2001 ) by Mrs Jackson , on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council recommendation [ C5-0001 / 2001 - 1998 / 0358 ( COD ) ] providing for minimum criteria for environmental inspections in the Member States .
Mr President , I report to the House at the end of a long and not wholly satisfactory saga .
The European Parliament 's delegation wanted to see this recommendation on environmental inspection cast in the form of a directive .
We were very forceful about that and we tried to persuade the Commission to sympathise with us .
It did not .
We tried to persuade the Council of Ministers to agree with us and it did not .
This is very sad but it is a situation which we have unfortunately had to live with because , if we had not agreed to the texts which we now have in front of us , we probably would not even have had a recommendation .
Many of my colleagues - I hope all my colleagues - feel that we are dealing with a very unsatisfactory situation .
In effect , we are constantly adding to the burden of European Union legislation on the environment , with the very good intention of improving our environment , but the Member States are signing up to legislation which they are in many cases unable to put in place in the form in which they adopt it .
They may in the end be able to reach the standards that they agree to , but we have to ask how long this will take .
In some instances the Commission is still very much in the dark about whether Member States are really complying with legislation because the Member States are very slow in telling the Commission about the state of implementation in the reports that they are obliged to send to Brussels .
So , if you want to put it at its most dramatic , the European Parliament finds itself complicit in a deceit on the people of Europe .
We are telling them that we have very forward-looking environmental legislation but in instances such as the nitrates directive and the urban waste water directive we find that in fact Member States are taking much longer than required to comply with legislation .
Indeed the case of the fine that the Greek Government is still paying to Brussels for failing to comply with a waste directive shows that it can be a quarter of a century before a Member State is even taken to court for failing to comply with legislation effectively adopted in the 1970s .
Parliament felt that the way to deal with this was to take what was originally a recommendation on environmental inspections and use it as a way of enforcing common standards throughout the Member States by upgrading it to a directive which Member States would , we had hoped , want to take more notice of .
As I say , the Member States were against this .
It was rather enlightening to go to the meeting of the Conciliation Committee where it was quite clear that some Member State delegations were not interested in the subject at all , let alone in that particular meeting that we went to that night .
This is a situation in which only a minority of Member States are really interested in compliance .
For most it comes very low down on their list of priorities .
So I am afraid we have settled in a sense for second best .
We still have hopes that we will be able to return to this issue .
Indeed we intend doing so because , although we have a recommendation , within it we have a revision clause which will mean that the Commission comes back to Parliament within the lifetime of this Parliament - I think I am right in saying in 2003 - in order that we can try to assess how the Member States are performing in relation to this particular recommendation .
That would mean that Mr Davies and I , if we are spared and have managed to survive foot-and-mouth , BSE and everything else that seems to be afflicting the United Kingdom , will be able to make sure that we move to a directive if we feel that the recommendation is getting us nowhere .
We hope that we will have the support of the Commission in making that reassessment in 2003 a really serious exercise .
I am sure that Mrs Wallström , who is very keen on getting better compliance , will want to support us in that .
We also managed to get into the recommendation the idea that the reports on inspection must be publicly available within two months of their completion and submission to the Commission .
We want to make sure that more people in Europe are interested in the issue of compliance - more people throughout the Member States , not simply in a selection of the northern ones .
And finally , might I draw attention to the fact that , although we could not formally record this , we have said that we will put a standard clause into directives that will simply say " Member States undertake to have in place , by the date of entry into force of the directive , systems of environmental inspection which will enable them fully to comply with the provisions of this directive " .
We do not see how any Member State can possibly oppose that .
Mr President , I should like to begin with a word of gratitude and congratulation to our rapporteur .
I believe the parliamentary delegation to the Conciliation Committee fought very hard before reluctantly consenting to the result of the conciliation process , and that is also how my group will vote in the Chamber .
Nevertheless , we cannot be satisfied with the joint text .
The European Parliament wanted a binding directive rather than polite recommendations .
The Member States dug their heels in and must now take responsibility for the stagnation of environmental policy in the Union .
At the present time , proceedings for infringement or non-observance of current environmental legislation are pending in more than 150 cases .
As much as this Parliament rejoices at every step forward in the field of environmental policy , we also have every reason to doubt the sincerity of the Union ' s commitment to the environment if it omits the most important step , namely the application of its policy , the enforcement of its rules .
The best legislation is worthless if it is not enforced .
The conditions we imposed , namely the coordination of inspections between Member States in cases of cross-border environmental crimes and the publication of inspection reports two months after each inspection , represent an improvement .
But Parliament ' s most important demand , in my opinion , relates to the revision clause which Mrs Jackson described , the clause requiring the Commission to present a report to Parliament after two years on the application and impact of the recommendation and , should it prove to be a dead letter - which I fully expect it to be - to present a proposal for a directive too .
Since I do not quite trust the very wishy-washy wording of this revision clause , which now states that the Commission should present such a report as soon as possible , rather than in two years ' time , I must ask Commissioner Wallström to reaffirm her determination to ensure that this report will be on the table in slightly more than two years from now .
I do hope , of course , that the report will provide evidence that the recommendation has borne fruit , that our environmental legislation has become more effective , that the situation has improved .
At the present time , however , although I have heard the message , I am still lacking in faith .
Mr President , I know of no one who disagrees with the view that environmental legislation should be enforced equally and effectively across the Union .
This report gave us the opportunity to take some practical action .
It seems to me that for more than a year and a half we have had a dialogue of the deaf and the result is that we have achieved nothing worth having .
I do not blame the Commissioner who inherited this from her predecessor , but the recommendation from the Commission was deeply flawed and thoroughly unpopular with Member States , who supported it only because it was non-binding and could therefore be ignored .
The view of Member States , that it was too prescriptive , came to be shared by many Members of this Parliament .
But there was never an opportunity to have a serious discussion between the Council and Parliament about the best means of achieving what should have been shared objectives .
Perhaps this was a failing on our part to take some kind of initiative .
On the other hand , the radical yet eminently sensible compromise proposal made by Mrs Jackson and backed by the Conciliation Committee gained no support either from the Presidency or the Commission .
So maybe no meeting of minds was possible .
But the commitment secured from the Commission to consider introducing some kind of directive in a couple of years ' time , while welcome , given the Commissioner 's declared support for ensuring that we are enforcing rules and laws effectively , should have been coming any way and adds nothing to previous statements .
I regard this entire law-making exercise as a failure .
There was simply no proper dialogue between the institutions .
I feel we have let down our constituents across the European Union .
With hindsight , I believe it would have been better for Parliament to have let the conciliation process collapse .
The Liberal Group will be voting against adoption of this recommendation tomorrow .
I just hope we can all do better next time .
Mr President , I will keep Parliament regularly informed on implementation and the rate of compliance .
This is one of the most important issues we have to work on in the next few years and that is also why it is given as one of the priorities in the Sixth Environmental Action Programme .
We have to concentrate on implementation .
I will , of course , come back to Parliament and if necessary introduce legislation , the so-called guillotine approach .
We will put pressure on Member States .
I think when people come to the conciliation process they put a lot of time , effort and energy into it and they want to agree , so it is worthwhile .
It will help if the citizens of Europe are kept informed about implementation and we are proposing different ways of doing that .
Any more ideas on how we might achieve this and keep up the pressure on the Member States will be welcome .
The difference of opinion was on the legal instrument that would best meet the objectives .
I am glad that we have reached an agreement on the form and wording of the instrument by taking on board Parliament 's amendments .
I also support Mrs Jackson 's suggestion that this sentence should be inserted in all the proposals from now on .
It is a good reminder for the Member States .
The amendments will tighten up the requirements in the recommendation .
For instance , reports on site visits should be available within two months of the inspection taking place .
We now have to ensure that the recommendation is fully implemented .
I should like to acknowledge IMPEL 's role .
Its work on minimum criteria for inspections helped in the drafting of the recommendation and they are a very important instrument .
IMPEL now has a mandate under the recommendation to review inspectorates , inspection practices and best practices in the training and qualification of inspectors .
The recommendation would now require Member States to report to the Commission on the operation within two years .
The Commission will then consider whether to put forward a proposal for a comprehensive directive covering the inspection 's life cycle .
We will definitely come back to this and I hope that together we will be able to improve the implementation of the acquis communautaire on the environment .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Motor vehicle heating systems
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0055 / 2001 ) from Mr Miller , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , concerning the common position of the Council [ 7074 / 1 / 2000 - C5-0615 / 2000 - 1998 / 0277 ( COD ) ] with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council directive relating to heating systems for motor vehicles and their trailers and amending Council Directive 70 / 156 / EEC and repealing Council Directive 78 / 548 / EEC .
At this point we are reminded of the momentous nature of our work here in terms of the future of the European Union !
Mr President , I should like to begin by pointing out a technical correction .
This is something that should have been picked up in committee but , unfortunately , it was not .
It refers in Annex IV , 2.2 , to gauge pressure of 500 HPA , where in fact it should actually refer to 0.5 HPA .
I would be most grateful if that small technical correction could be made .
I am sure all manufacturers of car heating systems would also be grateful .
There are two further amendments on this .
Both are very technical and have been suggested to me by the industry .
When I looked at them I did not see any problem .
I have submitted them to the committee and it has approved them .
The very fact that I have stood up here and said that two further amendments have been submitted to me by the manufacturers highlights the dilemma Parliament faces with this type of directive .
Last month , I moved a report on making buses accessible to disabled people .
Certain people criticised that report because it was far too technical .
I had actually taken a lot of the technicalities out of it .
However , when we come to this report , I wonder what I am doing , standing here at 10.30 p.m. on a Tuesday night , arguing over technicalities .
This is not a job for Parliament .
We should be directing policy in the way it is going , but we should not be discussing technicalities which would have been better addressed elsewhere .
I would like to suggest to the Commission that some of us get together at some point in the near future to stop this sort of report coming on to the agenda of Parliament .
It is wasting the Commission 's time and it is wasting our time .
It is high time that we started looking at ways of removing these technical reports - which are not political by any means - from the agenda .
They should be discussed within the appropriate forum where engineers , technicians , scientists etc . , or whatever technical group , would look at these specifications rather than coming to me .
I am not an engineer : I was a milkman in my first trade .
I do not know how I am expected to know the difference between 0.5 HPA and 500 HPA .
I make a plea to the Commission that we address this problem .
Hopefully we can get a decent night 's sleep some time in the future .
Mr President , I really can only echo what my friend and colleague , Mr Miller , has said .
He and I alternate from one side to the other as rapporteur and shadow rapporteur of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market on these technical files .
I can also reveal to him that not only have I been nominated for this task in the Legal Affairs Committee , but I currently have on my file six other technical regulations - wearing my other hat - for the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy .
Perhaps it is because I was an engineer in my previous life .
But seriously , we must consider first of all the whole way in which this work is to be carried out .
This is an important directive . We should not underestimate the importance of it .
I thank Mr Miller for the work he has done on basically sorting out the finer details of it although , as he said , it is not really a job we should be doing .
Commissioner Liikanen 's services need to make sure that they are sorting out the fine detail .
The fine elements of this - the technical detail that the car or component manufacturers are advising us about - really ought to be handled by him before it comes to us .
Indeed , now that the Commission has acceded to the protocols of the Economic Commission for Europe in Geneva , which has been where the bulk of motor vehicle legislation in Europe is handled , we are faced with another set of issues - most of which are being handled in the Industry Committee at the moment - where Parliament does not have the right of amendment as we have with this sort of directive .
That is probably right but there are still the political elements that we need to consider .
In fact , Mr Miller should be receiving an invitation from me , so I am pleased to say that I had already anticipated what he was going to invite me to do tonight .
He will be receiving an invitation from me to a meeting next week where I have been asked by the Industry Committee to convene a group of interested parliamentarians .
I know that Commissioner Liikanen 's motor vehicle colleagues will be well represented and are keen to come and exchange views with us , as are the motor industry trade associations and the European and Japanese component manufacturers , to have a look at how we handle this growing and important issue and how we relate to it politically .
Essentially , we are looking for some shape of strategy and for key issues requiring a political input , so that we can then leave the technical side to the Commission .
There may be then , in the case of EC regulations , simply a right of veto at the end or , if we feel that the work has not been done properly , we will simply not accept it until it comes back in its finally completed form .
Then we should not have to be dealing with this sort of technical work .
Hopefully , by the time we come around to another cycle of these procedures , Mr Miller and I will not be here late on a Tuesday evening , talking about the technical details of heaters , tyres or whatever it is , but we will have had a chance to make an overall political input into the scope of motor vehicle regulation .
I know that Commissioner Liikanen is interested in seeing this process streamlined , not only in the fine technical detail , but also by looking at the ways in which the industry itself can be encouraged to develop its own technical regulations within an overall public policy framework and indeed , on crucial issues like safety , to be able to move beyond those and to use its own technical resources to help make better , safer and more environmentally-friendly vehicles for us to use .


Mr President , it has become a habit for Mr Miller , Mr Harbour and I to spend the evenings here in Parliament and I am happy to see so many parliamentarians wanting to join this debate - Mrs McNally , Mr Wijkman and Mr Chichester .

I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Miller , for his report .
It has been asked why this proposal has been put forward .
The answer is that it is a matter of extending the scope of the directive .
I really hope that we can find some solutions so that the Commission , the Council and Parliament can concentrate on issues of political importance .
Outsiders might find it difficult to understand why we spend our time on directives like this .
The proposal amending the Council directive relating to heating systems for motor vehicles is aimed at extending the scope to include all vehicles and not just cars .
The provisions for combustion heaters are introduced to ensure that these devices comply with high safety and environmental standards consistent with current technology .
The industry is also supportive as this harmonisation will offer it the benefits of the internal market .
I am therefore pleased that the rapporteur largely agrees with the common position .
He has proposed two technical amendments regarding the specific requirements of combustion heaters .
The Commission can accept these amendments as they do not interfere with the current safety requirements in the proposal .
The Commission will further investigate specific requirements for LPG combustion heaters to be added in Annex VIII .
It will also take into account the implications of the second amendment .
This report will pave the way to a speedy adoption of this directive .
In conclusion , the Commission can accept Amendments Nos 1 and 2 .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Energy efficiency
The next item is the report ( A5-0054 / 01 ) by Mr Wijkman , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the communication from the Commission to the Council [ COM ( 2000 ) 247 - C5-0567 / 2000 / 2265 ( COS ) ] , the European Parliament , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions on the Action Plan to Improve Energy Efficiency in the European Community .
I feel sure that motor-vehicle heating systems will play a crucial role here too !
Mr President , the Commission ' s proposal for an Action Plan to increase energy efficiency is welcome .
As the rapporteur , I can , at the same time , see that the plan has many shortcomings in its original form .
I hope that the proposals in Parliament ' s resolution will be valuable in the way they complement the plan and that , as the Commissioner responsible , Mrs de Palacio will make our proposals her own .
In the course of discussing the Action Plan , it has become very clear how neglected energy saving is as a policy area and in society generally .
Many people are doubtless aware that we have to change the direction of energy policy and reduce our considerable dependency on fossil fuels .
If , however , you ask them how we are to do this , they do not as a rule come up with many answers .
Some people propose renewable energy sources .
Extremely few would state that it is especially through more efficient energy use that the change should be brought about .
The reason , of course , is the lack of knowledge about what can be done .
What is more , there are not enough economic incentives to facilitate investment in more efficient energy use .
One major problem is that energy savings are invisible .
When we invest in a wind park , it is obvious to everyone what the money has been used for .
If we put a corresponding amount of money into the rational use of energy , the investment is seen as being significantly more diffuse .
I therefore hope that the proposal to turn all the EU ' s institutions , that is to say the buildings we work in , into symbols of the rational use of energy will be adopted .
We can , of course , begin with this Parliament .
There is very great potential within the EU for saving energy and using it in rational ways .
In my view , the Commission is too cautious in its assessments .
At least 30 % of the energy used today could be saved through rational behaviour .
If , moreover , the environmental costs of energy production and consumption were built into prices , the potential would be even greater .
The report ' s demands that environmental costs should be internalised and that the problem should be overcome by means of different types of tax , especially a kilometre / tonne charge on heavy vehicles and a tax on bunker fuels , must be seen against this background .
In the same way , it is important to use the tax system to promote energy-efficient vehicles and buildings , or equipment which contributes to the more rational use of energy .
There is a lot to be done in this area to increase the incentives for the rational use of energy .
A general overhaul of tax policy is needed in order to promote what is good and positive from an environmental point of view rather than what is anything but good and positive .
That is additionally important in the current situation in which electricity markets are being deregulated .
Deregulation is excellent , but it has led to such low prices that , for example , problems involving counter-pressure have arisen .
The report demands a series of new directives aimed at stimulating energy efficiency in different areas : the building sector , combined power and heating , electronic equipment of different kinds and the transport sector .
Another important proposal is that of linking the intelligent use of energy to what is being called the Lisbon process .
The Lisbon Summit set the goal of making the EU into the world ' s most competitive and productive economy .
Such a programme would be significantly impaired if the environmental aspects were not covered .
These could be covered by a demand for energy efficiency within the European Union to increase annually by , for example , 2.5 % .
Even if no account were taken of the environmental aspects , there is a lot to be said for putting energy efficiency on the agenda set by the Lisbon process .
The more efficient use of natural and energy resources would be an excellent contribution to the European Union ' s competitiveness and productivity .
Nor must we forget countries in the vicinity of the EU .
If these aspects are important to ourselves , it is also important that they should be emphasised in the negotiations with the candidate countries in the context of the enlargement process . That also applies , of course , in connection with the aid we supply .
In the course of the work done on the report , it has become clear to me how important it is that systematic , long-term work should be done on these issues .
Together with three other MEPs - Mrs McNally , Mr Turmes and Mrs van der Laan - I have therefore prepared an initiative called Energy Intelligent Europe , which has already been supported by many representatives of different political groups and Member States .
The intention is , in various ways , to stimulate the debate about the rational use of energy and to propose initiatives that should be taken by the EU and the Member States in order to make our energy use more intelligent .
There is therefore every good reason to return to these issues .
Mr President , it is right that we should consider another aspect of this communication , namely the fact that the planned 18 % saving would also be a gigantic boost to the European economy .
An energy saving of 18 % is equivalent to a drop in energy consumption of 1 900 terawatt / hours .
That represents a saving of EUR 124 billion , which could be used to enhance the economic potential of the regions within the European Union .
If we extrapolate from these figures , we find that consistent implementation of this programme could create about a million jobs in the European Union .
The second issue is the protection of resources .
We must be aware that 90 % of the oil that is extracted today was found more than 20 years ago ; in other words , it comes from sources that are more than 20 years old .
Only 10 % of the oil that is being extracted today was discovered in the last 20 years .
Once again , I cannot fail to mention here that the procurement of oil is inextricably linked with the use of military power .
We see that in the Middle East , we see it in the Caucasus , and we see it in Africa .
The most important things in this context are to create awareness and to develop intelligent models for the use of combined heat and power , judiciously funded contracting models .
If we are serious about this , it is essential that the aims which are formulated here be given binding force .
Otherwise our work will merely have been a statistical exercise and an inefficient use of our own energy .
It is imperative that we remove the fiscal , bureaucratic and financial barriers .
Mr President , Commissioner , as we speak about energy efficiency today , we naturally think primarily of the security of energy supplies , and security of supply is undoubtedly an issue that is very high on the agenda of the European Union .
For that reason we wish to aim for a reduction in energy intensity .
The political objective for us at the present time is a 2.5 % reduction .
It goes without saying that the widely divergent starting points of the 15 Member States must be taken into account when such targets are set .
That is precisely why we believe that this target must be binding , and the process should begin in that country where the level of energy efficiency is highest , the country most capable of effecting such an improvement .
We also believe that the share of combined heat and power generation in the energy market could be increased to 18 % by 2010 and 25 % by 2015 , because that would also put electricity supply on a secure basis .
Cogeneration , of course , can be achieved with fossil fuels as well as with renewable forms of energy .
We are backing renewable energy in particular , and there are encouraging examples in this domain , such as pellet-fuelled heating , with which heat and power can be cogenerated very efficiently .
It is also important that the European Commission steps up its coordination effort in this area .
Coordinating European initiatives is a highly demanding task , if we think of programmes such as SAVE , Altener or the Fifth Framework Programme for Research and Energy .
Many programmes are available , but the important thing is to ensure that they are carefully targeted .
My last point concerns public tendering and centralised procurement .
Special consideration should be given in these contexts to small and medium-sized companies ; to that end , the cost of new appliances and systems should be calculated on the basis of their entire life expectancy , including the price of total energy consumption over that period in addition to the purchase price .
Mr President , congratulations to the rapporteur , who has achieved a quite remarkable level of consensus right across this House .
That consensus is leading to the joint initiative he mentioned , which we shall be announcing tomorrow .
This is unusually good working together .
Thank you , too , to the Commissioner , who works within the limits of a very inadequate Treaty .
There is no energy chapter in the Treaty .
This is a big gap and we must continue to put pressure on Member States if we want a coherent policy .
That is what disappoints me about this action plan .
It does not seem to be part of a coherent energy policy with short-term , medium-term and long-term strategies .
It is a piecemeal approach in which the emphasis varies according to the publication .
The case for energy efficiency is clear and unanswerable .
It meets all three requisites of an energy policy : environmental impact , security of supply and competitiveness .
All are helped by energy efficiency .
So if this is so self-evident , the obvious question is why do we need an action plan ?
Why is this not happening automatically ?
We know what the barriers are to accepting such a common sense solution .
Ignorance of the facts , particularly at household and small firm level .
Lack of incentive - energy in the European Union is artificially cheap because of the subsidies for the conventional forms of energy , which are often denied but certainly there , and the failure to take on board the external costs .
In many Member States , there is no requirement to even look at demand site management .
Commissioner , what has happened to the rational planning directive ?
Please bring it forward again .
It has not finished its journey through the legislative process .
Transport is , of course , a particularly difficult area and action is needed .
This action plan of the Commission 's is unambitious .
A 1 % per annum improvement would be very easy to achieve .
We need at least 2.5 % ; that is attainable .
We want to give serious consideration to the setting up of an energy programme agency with the task of producing the coherent energy strategy I mentioned .
We can look at energy appliances .
However , I am dubious about voluntary agreements .
The Sixth Framework Programme gives us an opportunity to look at research and I hope that tomorrow , Commissioner , you will join with us in looking forward to a more intelligent use of energy in the European Union .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is a fact that in the European Union , across all sectors of the economy , and also in the world of the private consumer , there is great potential for boosting energy efficiency levels .
It is therefore essential that an effective strategy be developed .
It is the task of the European Commission to formulate proposals to improve building regulations , to promote the energy efficiency of electrical appliances , for which , among other things , standards must be laid down with regard to the standby function , and , last but not least , proposals for measures to adopt a Community policy for a sustainable transport system .
In my opinion , the European Parliament also has to act as a model .
Why , for example , can we not install solar panels in the European Parliament buildings , both here and in Brussels ?
After all , the energy generated would supply sufficient energy to operate the hundreds of computers in the European Parliament .
Energy efficiency is not just about installing more efficient technology .
It is , above all , a matter of behaviour patterns .
Where the Member States are concerned , instead of getting bogged down with levy increases or the introduction of a CO2 levy , they should just focus on creating incentives for investments in energy efficiency , for example by reducing VAT rates on energy-saving appliances and services , or by reducing property tax for buildings which meet high energy-efficiency standards , and on granting special tax benefits for cogeneration , in particular .
Such measures constitute a considerable encouragement to promote energy efficiency , and I believe that we must urge everyone to actually make this happen .
Mr President , energy efficiency is arguably the poor relation in the overall supply situation .
We all agree that it is a good thing .
But , rather like Saint Augustine , who prayed to God to make him good but not just yet , we tend to put off doing something about it .
I wish to congratulate the rapporteur on his determined effort to put this right , both in his report and the initiative that my colleague has referred to for an energy-intelligent Europe - although I confess that I would describe efficiency and conservation more as common sense than intelligence .
Everywhere one looks in the energy-rich world we inhabit in Europe , and the USA in particular , one can see examples of energy extravagance , even profligacy .
The challenge lies in persuading members of the public of the need to change their ways .
The rapporteur lists many sectors where improvements can be made : by public authorities , industry , business and individual consumers .
However , I do not believe it is necessary to have an energy chapter in the Treaty , nor to impose punitive taxation in order to impose an improved efficiency .
It is better to proceed with a combination of setting higher standards and offering fiscal incentives , coupled with a campaign to persuade people to change .
Above all , we must change attitudes and encourage people to look at the world in a different way .
That is the way forward to achieve energy efficiency .
Mr President , the Commission has given us a good basis for discussion .
However , I should also like to thank the rapporteur for substantially improving and enriching the original ideas .
The ideas themselves , in fact , are not new .
We have been talking about them for the last ten or fifteen years .
There have been reports and studies - we already know everything we really want to know .
The question is how we can implement it all .
How can the technology , which is already available , be combined with the money , which is also available ?
And here I wonder whether the European Investment Bank could play a bigger part .
The second problem I should like to address concerns administrative matters .
Let me cite one small example in the federal State from which I come . Our State has a number of universities , but let us just take one of them as an example .
Some of the university buildings were to be better insulated and have better energy systems installed .
It took many years before the buildings were refurbished .
Why ?
Because the buildings belonged to the Ministry of Finance , but the Ministry of Science was their user .
In other words , one ministry would have had to invest , but another would have benefited from the investment .
Because each of them has its own separate accounting system , they did not sit down together .
It took many years until they were able to agree - and it took an EU study to bring them together , incidentally .
Absurd it may seem , but that is how things are !
By the way , in my home town , cars with extremely high petrol consumption are going for a song at the moment , whereas dealers are finding it difficult to sell cars with low fuel consumption .
This is a third problem , a question of consumer behaviour .
Consumers bear responsibility too , not only legislators .
If administrators , consumers and legislators get their act together , we can achieve something , and I eagerly await the Commission ' s proposals .
I can assure you , Commissioner , that we shall support you in these efforts , and we shall also present initiatives of our own to that end .
Mr President , my colleague , Mr Wijkman , has been engaged in some valuable and creditable work in preparing this report .
This is a very important issue : we are not only speaking about the protection of the environment but safeguarding the supply of energy .
Any Member State that wishes to steer its emissions in a cleaner direction by means of taxation must be considered jointly responsible to the Union as a whole and our common environment .
We , for our part , must ensure that we do not support the distortion of competition in the name of free competition at the cost of caring for the environment .
A Member State that manages its carbon dioxide emissions responsibly , for example , must not be allowed to get into a situation in which countries that produce their energy with a proportionately greater quantity of polluting fuels have a competitive edge over it .
It is on this basis that harmonised environmental taxes are justified .
This example of mine is a clear depiction of the distortion of competition .
This scenario could eventually lead to a situation where environmental considerations are not predominant when deciding energy policy .
There is a danger that , with the liberalisation of the electricity market , Member States that attend to their obligations with regard to emissions may lose their electricity markets to countries that ignore their obligations .
Combined heat and power production is important for energy efficiency .
The special conditions that prevail in small and remote countries are also relevant here .
The special climatic features of Member States have to be taken into account at Community level .
I hope that Mr Rübig ' s amendment will gain support among my colleagues on this basis .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is not long since the Commission reopened the debate on the security of energy supply in the European Union .
The Green Paper put forward by the Commissioner is an important instrument for energy policy in the European Union and clarifies some of the priorities in this field .
Amongst other things , it proposes decisive action in connection with energy demand .
If energy efficiency can be improved by 2.5 % or 1 % as the Commission proposes , we shall have succeeded in adding one more grain of sand towards achieving the objectives of the energy policy , which are to respect the environment , achieve a competitive market and improve the security of our energy supply .

In this context , I have to congratulate the Commission on its proposals for encouraging renewable energies , energy efficiency , security of supply and biofuels , and the rapporteur , Mr Wijkman , on his references to future directives on building construction and cogeneration of heat and electricity , and I trust that the Council will give a much-needed boost to all these proposals .
GDP in the European Union is growing by an average of 3 % , and we citizens of Europe are enjoying increased well-being .
We do not want to forgo this well-being , but we can make it more sustainable , especially in the construction and transport sectors .
I do not think this is the moment to reopen the debate on the CO2 emissions tax , given the differences in tax rates imposed by the Member States and their effect on inflation .
In addition , it has no effect on energy efficiency .
Neither should we separate this question from other additional measures to ensure that the internal electricity market works properly .
Lastly , it must be made quite clear that improved energy efficiency does not cut CO2 emissions but simply optimises them , since they will only come down through a reduction in the use of fossil fuels .
It is important that at the same time as we debate this issue we should think about promoting other forms of energy and carrying out consistent policies in other fields .
Mr President , first of all I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Wijkman , and all the Members who have spoken today for the contribution they have made to this debate .
As we all know , energy efficiency is a question that has figured prominently while we have been drawing up our energy policy .
As Mrs Ayuso was just saying , we have to look at it in a consistent way .
Energy efficiency is one of the elements in a consistent , rational energy policy .
But I have to say that it is one of the elements that can help us meet the Kyoto targets , help make this a lasting development , and also help enhance the long-term security of supply .
As indicated in the Green Paper on the security of supply and the Kyoto commitments , issued by the Commission in December , energy efficiency and energy savings contribute to energy policy , since every kilowatt saved is the equivalent of needing to produce one kilowatt less .
I am aware of how difficult Mr Wijkman ' s report was to prepare and the effort he had to put in to present such a clear and concise document as he has presented today .
I want to tell Mr Wijkman and everybody else here that in general I fully agree with what his report contains .
The scope of the report and the constructive opinions it contains will help us push forward and consolidate the implementation of the energy efficiency action plan .
I know that for some of you it seems rather unambitious to set ourselves an objective of a 1 % increase in energy efficiency to be sustained over the next ten years .
You must , ladies and gentlemen , realise how much effort it will take over the next ten years to maintain this 1 % increase in energy efficiency .
Of the approximately 18 % margin that we have calculated could be obtained in energy efficiency we should be able to achieve two thirds by 2010 , that is an improvement of about 12 % in energy efficiency .
One per cent sustained : this is not 1 % for just one year but an effort that will have to be kept up for some time .
I am pleased that Mr Wijkman concludes in his report that we can continue uncoupling economic growth from energy consumption .
That is , we can grow more and at the same time still contain growth in the demand for energy .
I fully agree with Mr Wijkman ' s demands for improving efficiency in construction .
A draft directive has already been circulated in the Commission to regulate efficiency and the construction standards within the European Union that ensure energy efficiency in buildings , especially public ones .
The Commission may present this directive soon , and I look forward to your contribution to it .
We also intend to put forward a framework directive on electrical equipment in buildings .
Up to now there have only been industry regulations or rules for particular types of electrical appliances - Mrs McNally has also brought up these matters - and what we intend to do is make a global regulation covering all electrical appliances that go into buildings of all kinds , whether domestic , industrial or commercial .
I also want to tell you that the proposals included in the White Paper on transport policy , which I hope to present soon , are entirely compatible with what we have been talking about here today and with what the Green Paper says .
Therefore I hope to be able to count once again on your backing and support for all these initiatives .
The idea put forward by Mr Wijkman that the Commission and the Member States should turn major public buildings into symbolic demonstrations I think is highly appropriate , and this is something I have emphasised in the past .
On the subject of the directive on the energy performance of buildings I hope to be able to make some progress in this direction .
I must also say that I fully agree with Mr Wijkman on the importance of the SAVE programme .
In order to guarantee the future of that programme and to determine its guidelines and scope , we shall soon be beginning to draft a new decision on the execution of the programme from 2003 onwards , and Mr Wijkman ' s opinions and those given in the report we are discussing will obviously be taken into consideration .
With regard to the European Energy Programme Agency , this issue is likely to be more complicated , as you well know , but in any case the important thing is not so much which body or administrative division will carry out these activities but rather that the activities should be carried out .
On that we are in complete agreement .

I should like to conclude by stressing that the requests and observations made in the Wijkman report , together with all your contributions , will be taken into consideration - some of them very soon , like the buildings directive , for instance - and I think they are wholly consistent with the general energy policy that the Commission is putting forward . You already have concrete evidence of this : the directive on electricity from renewable energy sources , the communications - like this one - on energy saving , the Green Paper , and soon the directive on energy efficiency in the construction industry .
In today ' s case , we are approving something that is not to do with energy saving but with the effectiveness of the whole system : the liberalisation of the gas and electricity sector .
This is in no way at odds with the existence of additional measures encouraging us to save energy or use it better .
Human behaviour is essential .
As some of you have said - Mr Chichester and Mr Beysen , amongst others - the key is education and making people aware of how we must be really careful in using energy , because even though we may be able to pay for it there are certain costs beyond the price of the energy itself that we must never lose sight of .
We must not squander it .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Thank you all for keeping within your allotted speaking times .
As a result , we can put the light out 45 minutes ahead of schedule , which will save a great deal of energy .
Thank you very much .
( The sitting was closed at 11.14 p.m. )
Madam President , I wish to inform the House that today is the UK 's No Smoking Day .
As half a million EU citizens die needlessly each year from smoking yet 80 % of smokers want to give up , I hope that colleagues will see fit to sign the tabled written declaration calling for an EU no smoking day .
Today alone 1500 EU citizens will die from smoking .
Let us , the European Parliament , lead the way in preventing these deaths .
Thank you , Mrs Stihler .
I have the feeling that the applause from your fellow Members shows that they have indeed listened to your message and I do not doubt for a single moment that they will all observe the UK ' s No Smoking Day .
Madam President , I simply wish to ask whether we could once again check that the no smoking rules in this House are being enforced .
It has come to my attention that was not the case earlier this week .
I would urge renewed vigour in the application of those rules in this House .
Thank you , Mr Watson .
I see that Mrs Banotti has indeed been listening to you , as have the other quaestors , and we shall look into this .
Madam President , as you know I am a very enthusiastic anti-smoker .
However , I would just like to remind colleagues that they can smoke in comfort and away from everybody else in the designated area over there to the right at the window .
Fine , thank you , Mrs Banotti .
Follow-up to Nice
The next item is the Council and the Commission statements on the follow-up to Nice .
I would like to welcome the President-in-Office . Mrs Lindh , you now have the floor .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , ' I am delighted to see that the Commission has taken concrete steps to include European citizens in a debate that is going to determine the long-term future of the Union . '
This is the beginning of the first contribution on the website on the future of Europe from Russell Pickard of the UK .
He hopes that as many citizens as possible will express their opinion on fundamental issues such as ' What kind of Europe do we - Europe ' s citizens - want ? '
' If we want things to change , let us ' be ' the change ' , writes Vincente Garcia-Delgado Segués from Spain .
' Now every European citizen can say exactly what he or she wants - whether negative or positive - and the responsible leaders in the EU can listen to the citizens and take into account their wishes and hopes ' , writes Ann Catherine Talbro from Denmark .
Kurt Linderoos from Finland proposes that all EU citizens contact an additional fourteen people , one from every other Member State , to discuss the future of the EU .
Last week , Parliament ' s Vice President David Martin , the Prime Ministers of Sweden and Belgium and President Prodi launched the debate on the future of Europe .
You , Madam President , the two Prime Ministers and the President of the Commission made a joint statement and the website , which was initiated jointly by Parliament , the Council and the Commission , was opened .
With last week ' s launch and today ' s debate we are leaving " the follow-up to Nice " behind us and instead entering into the debate on the future of Europe .
According to the Nice Declaration , this broad debate on the future of Europe must be followed by a new Intergovernmental Conference in 2004 .
This year , the Swedish and the Belgian Presidencies will work with Parliament and the Commission to encourage wide-ranging discussions with all parties concerned : representatives of national parliaments and of public opinion , schools and universities and representatives of civil society .
We will place great emphasis on what the various political groups in Europe , inside and outside this House , have to say .
We must naturally include young people in this debate - it is their future in Europe we are discussing - as well as the candidate countries , as they too will be involved in building the Europe of the future .
The entire process must take place with the greatest possible openness .
Our goal is to bring the Union and its institutions closer to its citizens .
According to the decision made in Nice the process will address issues including restricting the competencies of the EU and the Member States so as to reflect the principle of subsidiarity , the future status of the EU ' s Charter of Fundamental Rights , simplification of the treaties without changing their content and the role of national parliaments in the structure of Europe .
When we initiated the debate last week at one of the European Schools in Brussels it was clear that the interests of citizens extend far beyond the examples of institutional issues given in Nice .
I believe that it is correct and important for us to be able to conduct a broader debate on the future of Europe .
If we are to begin this discussion at the right end , we should , just like the school pupils in Brussels and the contributions on the website , ask the fundamental questions of what tasks we want the Union to take on and what role we want the Union to play in Europe and globally .
We have to be able to show our citizens that the EU is a strong force on the important issues : dealing with globalisation , human rights and democracy , a common asylum and immigration policy , employment and growth throughout Europe , combating crime , the environment , sustainable development and food safety .
It is important that we begin this debate with the factual issues , which our citizens can identify with .
In this work I really look forward to the contribution of Parliament as it is you Members who have direct contact with your voters around Europe .
This house has so often spearheaded important European debates on openness , the environment , expansion , the Charter of Fundamental Rights , to name but a few examples .
It is now time to move from discussing form to also discussing facts and substance .
Then it is , of course , also important to return to the question of form , the best way in which we can reform the Union ' s institutions and way of working .
Let me first say that the community method , which has played such an important role in European cooperation , must naturally retain a strong position in the future too , even if , in some areas , we supplement it with the new open coordination method .
A strong Europe requires strong institutions .
I noticed this myself when I was environment minister and worked closely with both the Commission and Parliament .
Let me also say that from the Swedish point of view we have an open attitude to the question of the form continued preparations will take .
I can see both advantages and disadvantages in the ' convention method ' which several players have suggested as an important or possible model for debate .
Madam President , we are at the start of an incredibly exciting process .
The future of Europe is now being discussed throughout the Union , from Termonfeckin in Ireland today , to the Canary Islands in Spain next week , the following week in Kiruna in the far north of Sweden and the following day in Sparta in Greece .
Next week , as the first in a line of measures , this Parliament will organise a meeting with participants from the parliaments in the Member States and the candidate countries .
I look forward to being involved in the debate next week .
Later this year , the Commission will make an important contribution through its White Paper on European Governance .
I myself will also take up this discussion in the Council ( General Affairs ) and with the candidate countries in conjunction with the unofficial meeting of foreign ministers in Nyköping .
Sweden will also initiate a conference on the external role of the EU this autumn .
Every country will naturally conduct a national debate in the light of its own traditions and conditions .
We ourselves are responsible for ensuring that there is a broad debate which also involves the national parliaments and addresses the issues and organisations which are relevant in our respective countries .
What I have talked about so far naturally only concerns the very first initiatives .
The process will continue and the participants will inspire each other .
The Swedish and the Belgian Presidencies , Parliament and the Commission will share the main responsibility for this first phase , which demands close and trusting cooperation .
The internal debate within Parliament will be particularly interesting to follow .
The preliminary signals we have received are exciting and I look forward to the resolution from this house which is planned in May .
A report on issues concerning the future will be submitted to the meeting of the European Council in Gothenburg in June .
The European Council will then adopt a view on the continued process at the meeting in Laeken / Brussels in December .
Madam President , what kind of Europe do we , the citizens of Europe , want ?
The question has been asked - let the debate commence !
Robert Schuman once said that Europe will not be made all at once , or according to a single plan .
It will be built through concrete achievements .
It is important to remember this even today .
Let the debate begin . Let us start from all those who have participated in the debate from the days of Schuman onwards and let us include all the young people who are talking to us today through the schools of Europe or participating in the debate on the website .
I now look forward to hearing the visions of the Members of Parliament on the future of Europe .
Madam President , Madam Minister , President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , we too wish to hear the proposals and suggestions made by the Members of Parliament but , if I may , I would like to sum up the position of the European Commission on this major debate , which was promised at Nice in the early hours of the morning , when the ink had not yet dried on the agreement .
It was almost as if the Heads of State and Government were not really satisfied with what they had just done after three days of negotiations .
So they decided , at the same time , to call for a broader-based and more in-depth debate on the future of the European Union .
Less than a week ago , the Swedish Presidency , together with the future Belgian Presidency , invited Parliament and the Commission to participate in this debate .
In a broader sense , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission looks forward to and will encourage this debate on European issues .
The Commission had already structured its approach a year ago , as I am sure you remember , by proposing , with you and with your support , a dialogue on Europe which was to be a first step .
However , for this debate to achieve the objectives laid down in the joint declaration signed on 7 March by Nicole Fontaine , your President , Göran Persson , Guy Verhofstadt and Romano Prodi to highlight the challenges facing the European Union and encourage proposals , it is necessary to define the principles , the method and the agenda of this debate .
In the few weeks ahead of us , let us take the time to work on these principles , this method and the agenda .
This is , and will continue to be , the subject of work we will be carrying out together , especially in Parliament and the Commission , throughout the Swedish and Belgian Presidencies , as we must achieve a high level of ambition concerning this debate and future reforms in Laeken .
A basic principle , first of all : it is the content of the debate , the future of the Union , which must inspire the form of this debate and remain its priority .
What sort of Europe do we want in the future ?
What do we want to do together ?
What will our plan be ?
Do we want more integration or not ?
Do we or do we not want a more political Europe ?
I will add another question : how do we reform the Community model ?
Even if it seems difficult to find simple answers to these complex issues , and perhaps for that very reason , the debate must enable our citizens to become aware of them and participate in it .
The first principle is therefore that of transparency and of the objectivity with which this debate must be conducted .
We must not deny , indeed we must encourage , the expression of contradictory opinions .
We know that , in each of our Member States , opinions are diverse and often contradictory .
In order to respect the principle of transparency , however , we must ask disturbing questions , as I have just said .
The second principle is that of proximity .
Such a debate cannot be joined correctly if it is conducted solely from Brussels or Strasbourg .
There is the Internet , of course , which today is an irreplaceable information and dialogue tool , and this debate is already open on the website , even though , I admit , this site is far from perfect .
However , dialogue over the Internet is not enough .
The European debate must be opened up to people where they live , where they work , where they study , and to their national and regional elected representatives .
So , it must , of course , take place at a European level and be based first and foremost on the debates organised in each Member State at the most appropriate level which is , from my point of view , the level which is closest to the people of Europe .
If the Community institutions can make a contribution to the organisation of the debate - and the Commission is playing and will continue to play its part in this - these national debates will first of all have to be organised by the Member States .
The third principle could be that of anticipation .
Even though the candidate countries are not yet members of the European Union , they soon will be in a matter of years .
The future of this Union , therefore , concerns them here and now as much as it does existing Member States .
I believe that we must find a way to ensure that they are involved in the debate ; that they take on an active role .
After the principles , ladies and gentlemen , we now come to the method .
The final decision-making stage of this debate which , as you have said , Madam Minister , we hope will be as short as possible , will , of course , be the Intergovernmental Conference in 2004 .
We hope it will take place as early as possible in 2004 , as was suggested by President Romano Prodi .
It is only by holding an Intergovernmental Conference as provided for in the Treaties that the Treaties can be reformed or changed .
We know now that this is the only possible method .
On the other hand , we also know that we must make careful preparations for this IGC and , without doubt , differently than in the case of the preceding IGCs in Amsterdam and Nice .
We must translate the challenges of the public debate into concrete proposals for the revision of the Treaties .
The structure or the competent body must , I believe , find inspiration precisely in the model or the precedent of the Convention thanks to which , in the course of a few months , the European Union adopted a Charter of Fundamental Rights , which was solemnly proclaimed in Nice .
In other words , this structure or this body must not only be involved in debate but also in work and putting forward proposals , bringing together the different sources of the democratic legitimacy of Europe : representatives of the Members States , the European Parliament , national parliaments and the European Commission .
Having said that , many questions remain open .
What will the decision-making procedures of this body or this future convention be ? What will its composition be ?
Most notably , what place will be reserved for the representatives of the candidate countries ?
What will its mandate be ?
Does this preparation have to follow the public debate or is it preferable to undertake it in parallel throughout the process leading up to the IGC ?
The Commission is very attentive to the replies that the European Parliament is giving and will give to these different questions of procedure .
And we ourselves are working on this .
I also think , Madam President , that our proposals , yours and ours , must be brought into line as closely as possible in the run-up to the European Council in Laeken .
And so I think we must step up the work done together by our two institutions , in consultation of course with the Swedish and Belgian Presidencies .
To this end , it will also be essential that the structure called upon to accommodate the debate is not a place reserved for experts alone , but rather a permeable structure which is open to external contributions .
Finally , having talked about the principles and the method , I would like to say a few words about the agenda for this debate .
Throughout recent years and this very long round of interinstitutional negotiations which began in Maastricht and ended , at least temporarily , in Nice , the European Parliament and the Commission have always united their efforts to ensure that real reform can see the light of day .
And at this stage , Madam President , I want to pay tribute to you and to thank you as well as Chairman Napolitano and the members of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs for the intelligent work you have carried out in close cooperation with us .
This was especially true , I think , of the last IGC , on the occasion of which , in its resolutions of November 1999 and February 2000 , Parliament had expressed the desire to discuss global reform of the institutions in the same spirit as the Commission .
I think we must now keep this convergence intact , even if this means that , beyond our work together , we have to open doors and windows , stretch out a hand , listen and participate in a much broader debate .
If we really want to address all the challenges facing the Europe of the future , the next IGC cannot settle for simply examining the four issues mentioned in the Nice annex , which are constitutional in nature .
In all honesty , some of these four issues , at least two in my opinion , may have a negative or even a regressive impact on the level of integration of the European Union , if they are tackled in the wrong way .
So let us not be afraid to tackle these four issues and let us not tackle just these four issues .
On these four issues , then , which are simplification of the Treaties , the legal status of the Charter of Fundamental Rights , the debate on powers and the place of national parliaments in the European architecture , let us be careful not to undermine the Community acquis or weaken the Community method by tackling them in an inappropriate manner .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , to successfully turn this public debate into discussions which are necessarily more technical and precise at the next IGC would be a measure of our success in achieving a more ambitious reform than that obtained in Nice .
It would also be an effective remedy to counteract the fears and all the prejudices which these fears underline or support and which some people bandy about to slow down the progress of European integration .
For these two reasons at least , which may be crucially important in the runup to the enlargement of the Union , the European Commission , its President and all the members of the College of Commissioners will leave no stone unturned to breathe life into this major debate which was promised in Nice by the Heads of State and Government .
Madam President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , Commissioner Barnier , ladies and gentlemen , our group welcomes this morning ' s debate with the Council and the Commission .
We make no secret of the fact that we , the European Parliament , and our group in particular , are in broad agreement with the Commission on these matters , which is important if we are to succeed in our joint venture .
However , I must say , Madam President-in-Office , as there has perhaps been a degree of friction over recent weeks , which is quite understandable and perfectly usual in politics , that I expressly acknowledge and respect the tone and atmosphere which you brought to this morning ' s debate .
I think that this internal attitude towards the future of Europe and cooperation between the institutions may be a good starting point , provided that deed follows word .
However , before we turn to the future , I have a direct request to make of the Swedish Presidency and the Council , which is now being represented by the Swedish Presidency .
Sweden is renowned and we appreciate Sweden for the transparent and open ways of your wonderful country .
But , please , use this fundamental openness and transparency to change the Council ; make the Council more transparent in relation to the other institutions .
This is not intended as a criticism , merely as a statement of fact .
Do not use your presidency just for administrative purposes ; use your presidency to take a stand for greater transparency , more openness and - and this is no criticism of Sweden - to ensure that the Council attends Parliament more frequently .
Yesterday during the motion , during legislative decisions , and this is not meant as a criticism of the Swedish Presidency , we sorely missed the Council .
We would have liked to have heard the Council ' s views , which is doubtless why our President intends to hammer out new rules with the Council , with the support of this House , to ensure that the Council attends the European Parliament more frequently .
Surely it is not asking too much to expect a presidency which only lasts six months to attend plenary not just once , but two or three times , so that we can discuss our joint tasks .
( Applause ) Now to the follow-up to Nice .
First : when you address the future , you have to be honest .
Nice was not the greatest success ; I do not want to go into all that again , but it has to be said .
That is why I am critical on this point , but only on this point , of the Swedish Prime Minister ' s letter of 7 March , which I otherwise welcome , in which he says that Nice represents a strong institutional basis for the future of the European Union .
In our opinion , that is just not true and we shall continue to criticise it .
We also ask that you have the courage to say as much , just like President Chirac of France did when he said here , in his capacity as President-in-Office , that the Intergovernmental Conference was no longer the right way to set about reforming the European Union .
This verdict is a verdict which all the governments of the European Union must come to and once we have this verdict , then we can find the right method and it is the method which I should like to address .
I was delighted to hear , Madam President-in-Office - if I address fewer comments to Commissioner Barnier , it is because we are in broad agreement - that you have an open mind on the question of the method , including the convention method .
I am delighted to tell you that our group here in Parliament , the European People ' s Party , has proposed a preparatory conference which would then table a proposal to the governments .
This conference should start work in 2002 .
The method will not be decided under your presidency , but it is important for you to start paving the way towards Laeken .
That is where the decisions will have to be taken .
We believe that a preparatory conference attended by Members of the European Parliament , members of the national parliaments , governments and other delegates is a transparent instrument .
A great deal has been said about a steering committee .
A steering committee would only make sense if it were both a sort of executive bureau of the conference and also fully involved in it and certainly the position of the chairman or chairpersons will play an important part , as it did at the fundamental rights convention under the chairmanship of the former German President Roman Herzog .
If you want good results , you need a reasonable method .
I have just one further comment to make regarding the timetable - as far as the subject matter is concerned , I am in full agreement with Commissioner Barnier : this sort of conference could start work in 2002 .
It could work through to the autumn of 2003 and then table its proposal to the governments .
This would mean that the governments could meet in conference at the end of 2003 , rather than in 2004 , and state their views on these proposals , and that a new Treaty could be prepared ready for signing under the Irish Presidency in the spring of 2004 .
This would ensure that we do not run over into the European elections and into the period when the Commission ' s mandate runs out .
One final comment , Madam President-in-Office : you spoke of the Community method and Robert Schuman .
I am most grateful that you did , that you reminded us of one of the pioneers of Europe and of our group , because he stood for the Community method .
It is precisely the small countries which stand to benefit from the Community method , because if the large countries alone opt for the intergovernmental method , then the small countries will go under , which is why it is important that we apply the Community method . Europe must be strong .
Europe must be able to act . Europe must be democratic and transparent and , if you follow in Robert Schuman ' s footsteps , then you will be on the right path .
( Applause )
Madam President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Socialist Group , I would like to welcome this debate which is finally taking place in the European Parliament , and the presence of Minister Anna Lindh . It is she who can interpret for us the statement in Annex IV , which has become statement 23 , which we do not believe was simply the result of fatigue and frustration during the early hours of Monday , but which is a modification , a development , and not merely repentance , but a political change towards greater democracy .
The President-in-Office has said that the debate began on 7 March .
I have taken good note of what she said and furthermore I would like to thank her publicly - because I raised the question at the previous plenary session - for the fact that Parliament has finally been incorporated into the statement of 7 March , something which did not happen initially , and that you have amended the letter that you sent us which had rather too much of a tone of the secretariat of the Council , including annexes .
You have produced a shorter letter so that we can understand one other better .
You have launched a website .
If I may be so bold , my Group had already raised the issue on 1 March .
Then you began the debate in the European School and I must point out that you were really playing on home ground , because the children are sons and daughters of European officials and they are well-versed .
The night before you put very pertinent questions to the parents .
I think that it would be worth going to Kiruna or the Canary Islands to speak to the ordinary folk .
In this instance , I think you were playing with an advantage .
To turn to the heart of the matter , I must say that my Group , as we stated in plenary , agrees with President Prodi ' s proposal for a structured debate in three phases , because this is neither an academic debate , a chat over a cup of coffee , nor a talk show .
This debate must yield results .
The important issue for my Group is to know how you see the organisation of the debate , because since I agree with and respect Sweden ' s essential role and tradition of openness and transparency , you will agree with me , Madam President , that the shock may be even greater if , after holding a very broad debate , open to civil society , we then take decisions behind closed doors .
What is unacceptable today will be even more so in the future .
It is very important , therefore , to know how you view the structuring by phases , especially because we are in representative democratic systems , and how you view the second phase , in which the various representatives of civil society , which are basically the European Parliament , the Parliaments of the Member States , the Council , the governments and the Commission , can truly make our contribution .
The NGOs , various forums , colleges and universities must also participate .
This is an absolutely decisive question .
We propose an open and transparent method which involves all the participants .
That is what gave us a successful convention and we believe that it is absolutely essential that the Swedish Presidency , without waiting for Laeken , makes some proposals on method , because in Laeken content will be discussed and you have an historic opportunity to lay a first stone , to launch this debate , giving it order and structure .
To this end , you can count on our support .
And although , in the end , we have corrected the statement of 7 March , I must say that it did not have the most auspicious start .
We hope that the Swedish Presidency , with the greatest respect for its democratic and open tradition , is capable of understanding the message , which I believe Parliament and the Commission agree on , and that this process may begin , in order to ensure that a debate is held and that decisions are taken on the future of Europe .
Madam President , Mr President of the Commission , on behalf of my group I welcome the tone of the Council 's contribution and the content of the Commission 's contribution .
It is early days yet for us to have a definitive idea of how this process will develop , but I do believe that you , Madam President , have been excessively cautious and I would like to raise one or two questions with you and invite you to respond to them at the end of the debate .
You have said that you look forward to seeing the European Parliament contribution and , of course , the resolution in May .
I join you in that .
You have said that you can see advantages and disadvantages in the convention method and I am aware that many in the Council would share that view .
Could you please expand on that and not leave it in suspended animation ?
Part of the purpose of this dialogue is for us to seek rational solutions if people perceive disadvantages in what we propose .
So please could you let us have your assessment of the pros and cons to which you have referred .
You have referred to the four dimensions in the Nice annex , the debate on competencies , the Charter of Fundamental Rights and the role of national parliaments .
You also , if I understood the translation correctly , believe that the Treaty should be simplified but without changing its content .
Is it possible to look at competencies , the role of national parliaments and the role of the charter and not change the content of the Treaty ?
That seems to me to be a contradiction in terms .
Like the other institutions , the European Parliament is currently considering how things might be presented for the next Intergovernmental Conference .
I and my group strongly believe that the convention method could be adopted .
This Parliament has a democratic legitimacy .
It is rooted and founded in the European treaties .
We are not a mendicant seeking alms at the European door .
We have a right - in fact a duty - of participation .
I believe the convention method open to the Member States , national parliaments , the Commission and perhaps ideally also to candidate states can provide a very good framework - not necessarily a single-choice menu , but a framework of rational and consistent choices - and an Intergovernmental Conference can then be invited to proceed .
Finally , without anticipating the future too much , my own group feels sufficiently strongly about this participation that if Parliament was inappropriately excluded or diminished in its institutional role we would consider recommending that it should not give any opinion on an Intergovernmental Conference .
That would be a difficult decision and I hope it will not be necessary but it is a constitutional requirement under Article 48 that this House should give an opinion before an IGC even though , regrettably , we have no right of assent after an IGC .
That is something we should note at this stage because full democratic participation is vital .
Madam President , 2001 is the year of public debate .
I am truly amazed that the presidency has not announced an initiative at European level involving civil society .
The Internet is not enough , Madam President .
There was talk of the possibility of the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission organising a great initiative , geared to mobilising civil society to study and write about Europe ' s aims and its future .
It seems that that initiative has encountered some strange and inexplicable resistance , even within this House from a large group on your left , Madam President .
It really is a sin , especially as the utter dearth of ideas the President of the Council has presented to us in - if I may say so - a rather bureaucratic and vague speech , demonstrates how much our governments are in need of some fresh inspiration .
Why is Sweden abandoning an initiative which could give its presidency a positive image and also allow it to fulfil the mandate it received at Nice ?
The dialogue with civil society is a great deal more than a rhetorical flourish or a few e-mails .
I agree that we need to have national debates , but there is now such a thing as European public opinion and , at this stage , it needs to mature .
This will also facilitate the preparations for the Laeken Council which should be preceded by a great conference of European national parliaments , the natural follow-up to the public debate supposed to have taken place this year .
That is the only way to make the debate on the future of Europe public and exciting , and that is the only way Parliament and the Commission will be able to find the allies they so badly need to break the purely intergovernmental logic of the forthcoming reform , give words like ' convention ' and ' Community method ' a revolutionary and constitutional meaning and make the 2004 Intergovernmental Conference more than a mere formality .
Madam President , please tell us whether or not there is room in your programme for a European initiative like that , and if not , why not ?
Madam President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , Commissioner , as you know , many of my fellow Members are critical of the Nice Treaty .
My group - and I personally - are also deeply concerned about the future of the Union , because numerous issues which determine the daily concerns and needs of the people are still unresolved or have only been tackled half-heartedly .
More importantly , we are still a long way from a social Europe .
Nice - I am convinced and many of my fellow Members obviously share this view - has weakened the Community .
In the final analysis , the governments simply fought to maintain their national right of veto .
More democracy , greater transparency , a greater ability to act and take decisions - all were left out of the Treaty , which is why the follow-up to Nice must tackle a programme of ambitious and truly far-reaching reform with a twofold purpose .
First , it must not reverse the progress already made towards integration . I specifically share the concern expressed by Commissioner Barnier in this regard .
Secondly , we need reforms which make the Union truly viable for the future .
In my view , this means introducing a quasi-constitutional process , as a result of which a unified Europe is established by the will of its people .
It means holding a broad , public , open debate .
But it also means , in my view , that the Intergovernmental Conference is no longer the right method for taking Europe forward .
We need a different method .
As a member of the convention working on the Charter of Fundamental Rights , having experienced its success first hand , I expressly recommend the convention method as the right way for us to work together and take Europe forward .
Madam President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the situation in which we currently find ourselves is rather strange : Nice has not yet been ratified , much less come into force and yet we are already debating the ' follow-up to Nice ' .
We know what has led us to this point but , politically speaking , it is not a good idea to adopt a Treaty with the next Treaty already in mind ; this should never be done and can only be a sign of a series of mistakes , a succession of slip-ups , not to say a whole forest of barely disguised lies .
Now that we have reached this point , however , and that the debate has already begun , we must draw the lessons from the failures in Nice and we in the European Parliament must learn how to do things differently in future , for 2004 . Otherwise , we will be in danger of repeating the same mistakes , the same frustrations and the same failures .
I wish to say two things that I think are crucial : firstly , we must listen more and talk less .
As Members of this Parliament , our duty is not just to speak .
Often , however , on these fundamental issues , it is our duty to know how to listen , to listen and to act on the genuine feelings of our citizens and not only on the corporate desires of our institutions .
Secondly , we must allow debates to take place at national level and not be afraid of them .
The issues that ran aground in Nice are the same issues that had previously floundered in Amsterdam , and many of them have been on hold since Maastricht .
These issues concern our citizens and the future of the Nation-States very closely , and I would therefore say that what we need most of all at the moment is not so much a European debate but 15 in-depth national debates .
Alternatively , thinking in terms of enlargement , we need 27 genuine in-depth national debates held by the Portuguese with the Portuguese people , by the British with the British people , by the Germans with the German people , by the Czechs with the Czech people , by the Poles with the Polish people etc. on what they want the European Union ' s future to be .
Only in this way will we be able to achieve , by 2004 , a decision-making body that is properly equipped to take the decisions of the future .
Otherwise , we will run aground on the same mistakes and embarrassing failures that we saw in Nice .
Madam President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , Mr Barnier , ladies and gentlemen , a fundamental point seems to have been recognised at last by Parliament .
There were very good reasons to look ahead to the next conference .
I am very pleased to see that this Parliament has remembered that there will in fact be elections in 2004 , that it was not elected in perpetuity , and that there was a certain amount of interference between Parliament and the appointments that had been proposed to us .
Basically , we can only say that there is still not much meat in the pot , as the Italians say , and that we are talking about the gender of angels , that is , the role and the links between the national parliaments and the European Parliament .
This is a subject which , like the Loch Ness monster , keeps rearing its head in our debates but has never got us very far .
The people of Europe are not very interested in this kind of debate .
They would rather know who does what at European and at national level .
They would like a bit less Baroque construction and a bit more clarity .
They would like the European Parliament to have a bit more influence over matters which concern them rather than over matters which do not concern them .
They would like national parliaments to have a bit more visibility and a bit more influence over issues which should clearly be left to national parliaments .
The people of Europe would also perhaps like to be able to elect the President of the Commission , for example , so that they know who is responsible for making the major choices , and for the major issues which must be decided at European level .
My view is that we must not think civil society is always lagging behind in the debates we are able to have here within the European Parliament .
Unfortunately , the contrary is often the case and our Parliament should perhaps travel somewhat more amongst the people of Europe to equip itself with new ideas .
I would finally like to address a question to the President-in-Office , to the President of the Commission and , above all , to the Chairman of the Group of the European People ' s Party and European Democrats , my friend , Mr Poettering .
I hear that the Belgian Minister , Mr Renders , a Liberal , is proposing to create a new Baroque figure , a ' Mr Euro ' on the model of Mr CFSP , which was disputed not only by us but also , I believe , very forcefully by Mr Poettering and by the Group of the European People ' s Party .






Is Mr Poettering in favour of the creation of this slightly Baroque figure of a ' Mr Euro ' on the model of Mr CFSP , as I believe I heard him say in his conclusion of the European People ' s Party Congress in Berlin ?
I would be very grateful for an answer to this question .
Madam President , I should like to congratulate the Swedish Presidency on a good home page .
It is splendid to be able to see agendas for meetings in the various working parties .
May we also be given the names of the participants and access to the documents and minutes from the meetings ?
I would also congratulate the presidency on the Futurum home page initiative .
Why , however , must it start with interventions from the top , from Mr Persson , Mr Verhofstadt , Mr Prodi and Mr Barnier ?
Why are there not also interventions from people who are opposed to the Treaty of Nice and the centralisation of more administrative power in Brussels ?
How can a Swedish President-in-Office issue invitations to a debate at the European School in Brussels without having a single critical voice on the panel ?
According to Eurobarometer , only 18 % of EU citizens prefer decisions to be made in Brussels .
63 % prefer them to be made at local , regional or national levels .
Why do the 18 % all have places on the panel in the first debate about our future , while the 63 % are not represented at all ?
The critics of the EU in my group and in the intergroup , SOS Democracy , are prepared to engage in debate both at the European School and in community centres .
We should like to explain why we wish to see an open , democratic and slimmed-down EU in which decisions are taken close to the people they affect , an EU which addresses far fewer cross-border issues , but then whose work is free from bureaucracy , waste and fraud .
In future , initiatives for devising common rules should be taken by the national parliaments and not by the Commission or Parliament .
Why not create a sort of council of the parliaments that could meet a couple of times a year and agree upon the work programme and the legal basis for projected bills ?
It is the legal basis which , of course , decides whether it is to be a case of voluntary coordination or binding rules .
In that way , it will be elected representatives from the Member States who decide in each case whether decision making is to be transferred to the EU from the electorate and elected representatives in the Member States .
In that way , democracy will at least have a chance in relation to the present system of legislation by officials to which we have become accustomed , even if all fifteen Member States profess to be democracies .
We are , of course , in the absurd situation in which , if it were one of the candidate countries which adopted laws in the same way as we do , we should have to turn down the country concerned for not being democratic .
Madam President , may I begin by welcoming the highly ambitious programme of the Swedish Presidency .
A great deal has already been said and written about the follow-up to Nice .
I was delighted just now to hear many of my own thoughts voiced here today .
But there is another aspect of all this which I should like to highlight today .
During the course of the first debate on the Méndez de Vigo / Seguro working paper in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , one of the requests made was for the historical introduction in the first part of the report to be angled not from the point of view of the Council ' s victories or the Commission ' s victories , but from the point of view of Parliament ' s defeats .
I can understand , with the impression made by Nice and the power games played out there , why one side or the other is tempted to resort to aggressive or belligerent words .
Surely there can be no victory or defeat for one institution over another ; surely there can only be progress or retrogression with regard to the overall concept , i.e. the concept of Europe , and we should not lose sight of that .
I therefore feel that , as parliamentarians , we should stop using this sort of vocabulary ; avoiding it will send out a message of cooperation between the institutions .
Madam President , I would firstly like to welcome Mrs Lindh .
We work very well with the Secretary of State , Mr Danielsson , and it is therefore a pleasure to have you here today .
Mrs Lindh , I believe that I do not need to speak at length , since the President of our Group , Mr Poettering , has made a clear , apposite and brilliant speech in which he has spoken loud and clear .
Therefore , allow me simply to point out certain issues on what we expect from the Swedish Presidency and from this European Council in Gothenburg .
You have said that we have to organise the debate .
Of course we do .
I agree with the words of the Socialist spokesman : the 7th was a good start , but we have to do more .
Therefore , what we want is for you to structure the debate , to make proposals to structure the debate .
How must this be done ?
This Parliament has certain ideas and we are very happy to give them to you .
However , as a starter , I will say that it has to take place on a national level , in democracy that is close to the people , and on a European level .
This debate is very important and cannot be closed .
It cannot be simply delivered on a plate , ready-made .
This debate must have conclusions , which will make up the second phase .
This debate would be frustrating for the participants if it did not include room for drawing up and proposing ideas .
That is what we call the convention method .
The convention which drew up the Charter of Fundamental Rights was a success , because it brought together national and European legitimacy and it included transparency , publicity and participation by the people .
Furthermore , all of this led to a document which you yourselves , at the European Council in Biarritz , recognised as being positive .
Therefore , things may be amended , others may be joined together , but it provides us with a model which may be of use .
I think that it will be very useful to work together on this model .
Finally , with regard to the timetable , it seems to me that if we do all of this , the IGC 2004 will have to be very brief , since the work will already be largely completed .
I believe it is also very important that this model allows for the participation of the candidate countries .
Europe is not only being built by those of us already in the Union , but also by those who are waiting to join it .
Madam President-in-Office , I believe that you are going to take away a very favourable impression of this debate today , since all the participating spokespeople from the extraordinarily varied Groups have said more or less the same thing . The parliamentary groups are whistling the same tune .
I believe that if we work with you and , of course , with the Commission - and I would like to thank Commissioner Barnier for his marvellous speech - from this one common tune , together we will be able to compose a fine European symphony .
Madam President , Commissioner Barnier ' s speech has confirmed how close the positions of the Commission and Parliament are .
I listened carefully to the speech made by the representative of the Council , and it is to her that I would like to address a few brief comments .
Mrs Lindh , the new IGC is the last thing to be talking about .
The important issue is how to get there .
You have called for maximum transparency in the debate now beginning and in the whole process described in the Nice Declaration , with a debate as close as possible to the citizens .
Well , the preparations for the Intergovernmental Conference before the Nice Summit demonstrated minimum transparency and maximum distance from the citizens .
A new method is vital .
There is a precedent , which is the Convention for the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
That idea came from the Heads of State or Government , felicitously invented by them in Helsinki , so it is hard to understand why those same Heads of State or Government should now mistrust that method .
It is not a problem of the name ; it is a problem of substance .
As well as the Commission , the European Parliament and the national parliaments should be involved not just in the debate but in drafting and drawing up the proposals as well .
We should be writing the answers to the great questions on the future of the Union together .
Mrs Lindh , we feel sure the Swedish Presidency will want to commit itself to dispelling the extraordinary suspicion meeting every proposal made by any of the groups in the European Parliament .
We hope the resolution from the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , and hence from Parliament as a whole , will also help to make you more convinced than you are this morning and , in the meantime , we look forward to our meeting of 20 March with the representatives of the national parliaments of both Member States and candidate countries .
Madam President , I have looked at Futurum , a website for debate and dialogue which has recently opened , and it is good .
This morning , 76 citizens from different countries had chosen to take part in the debate .
Of course , this figure could have been considerably higher , but this is a good start .
The question is naturally what will happen to this input to the debate .
Will these opinions lead their own lives until 2004 when the Council will once more shut itself away behind closed doors in marathon negotiations on a new treaty ?
The speech of the foreign minister indicated that this would not be the case .
However , it is important that we tell people today how these points of view will be used and channelled so that we really do achieve a broad debate rather than just empty words .
I am sorry if we here in Parliament sound like we are nagging , but this is really important for us across group borders .
Just like us , citizens need to know how these points of view will be channelled .
Will it be some kind of convention where those of us who are elected representatives at various levels will really be able to use them to contribute to the design of the new treaty ?
Mr President , I shall speak with a voice that has not been much heard in this debate so far , despite the two words in Mr Barnier 's speech about regional parliaments .
It must be remembered that Europe is not just a Europe of central institutions and Member States .
Within the Member States there are self-governing countries - called , in the parlance of this House , " regions " .
Many of their citizens regard themselves as citizens of ancient European nations deserving as much recognition in this Union as others .
Mr Poettering rightly said that the Community method is a good one from the point of view of small states .
Let it also be a good method for small countries that are not , or not yet , Member States of this Union in their own right .
If , in the debate over the next three years , the voices of the democratically-elected parliaments of the countries and regions of Europe within the Member States are not heard properly and taken as fully into account as the voices of the Member States themselves , the " national " parliaments and - as Mrs Frassoni rightly said - the NGOs , then the debate will have been a failure .
Subsidiarity is a two-ended concept .
At one end it requires that decisions be taken as close to the people affected as is consistent with efficiency and equity .
But that implies that many decisions can only be taken at the other end , at the higher level , when , for the sake of equity and efficiency , the whole of a great polity must be included .
That great polity will not do well , however , unless it avoids taking power from the little people , the more local levels of government .
The " regions " of Europe must be properly represented in this discussion and proper attention must be paid to subsidiarity .
Mr President , I have two things to say .
The first concerns the method : I consider it of vital importance that power over the treaties lies with the national parliaments .
If power is passed to the European Parliament , a vital step will be taken towards converting the EU to a state , which I oppose .
I am therefore also sceptical regarding the convention method .
If such a method is to be applied , it must be a convention for the national parliaments who are to discuss the treaty .
My second point concerns content .
In my opinion it is not sufficient to discuss the points stated in Nice .
Instead , discussion should centre upon democratic reform of the European Union , providing full insight into the legislative work and reducing the power of civil servants , especially within the Commission .
A unique situation currently prevails where civil servants have the deciding influence over the content of legislation , which is a problem in terms of democracy .
Mr President , the European Union has a problem in that , despite the systems it has established and the extensive jargon and impressive rhetoric it makes use of , its people are either indifferent to , or directly opposed to , the integration process that has been on the agenda in recent years .
This is referred to by the polite euphemism of a ' democratic deficit ' .
The reason why it is a euphemism or understatement is that the institutions operate in practice in a way that actively contributes to eliminating participation by the people .
It is actively anti-democratic .
Against that background , it is , if anything , absurd to attend today ' s debate .
The idea is to establish a democratic dialogue .
It sounds so appealing , of course , but this very project reflects a total misunderstanding of the nature of democracy .
Democracy is literally government by the people , which means that the people ' s wishes , demands and political views prevail , without direction from above .
What is now on the agenda is very reminiscent of another union which collapsed a few years ago .
It is the same trend and the same mechanism for development whereby living democracy is dismantled piece by piece in favour of government by an élite .
That must be humiliating for the Swedish Presidency in particular .
What is happening is in direct conflict with the best grassroots traditions in Scandinavia .
Sweden has an unusually pronounced and progressive tradition of transparency and the rule of law , and the Swedes are the people in the European Union who most actively oppose the integration process .
It is a most regrettable situation and a political identity crisis for our Swedish friends .
Mr President , the debate on the future of the European Union , which was decided at the Nice European Council , will have to avoid one major pitfall : limiting itself to the circle of specialists in European matters , including the members of the institutions of the European Union .
That would once again run the risk of couching the issues in a language and code only accessible to the initiated and of finally widening the gap which separates Europe from its people .
To bring this closed circuit a bit more up to date , certain federalists are proposing a solution which is a mere façade : a convention inspired by the one which has already prepared the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
This convention is composed , for the most part , of docile creatures and headed , for more security , by a steering group or a drafting group to lead the debate in the direction the institutions want it to take : towards more federalism .
This method would be very dangerous .
We should not forget that the previous convention produced the text of a Charter which was unacceptable to all Member States and that it was necessary to mask the differences by proclaiming it a non-compulsory text .
If a future convention worked with the same methods in a rarefied atmosphere , it would produce , in 2004 , an ultra-federalist text which would be unacceptable to all or some of the Member States .
This would spell disaster for Europe .
However , neither should we have a debate dominated by confusion and disorder .
We must stay close to the people , move at their speed and stay orderly to stay productive .
That is why , Mr President , we think there is only one viable solution : to organise the debate around national parliaments and under their responsibility .
Mr President , I particularly welcome the efforts of the Commission President , Romano Prodi , to set the contours of this debate , which follows on from our debates in January and February in this House .
Now , it is not the post-Nice debate but the debate on Europe 's future .
It is vital that European institutions get this opportunity right .
It is a rare occasion in history where peoples of Europe can potentially have their own say on what a so-called constitutional framework would look like post-2004 .
It is now up to Europe 's political leadership to set the terms and determine the nature , breadth , substance and intensity of this debate .
At present there is some imagination but little action , given the extensive nature of Annex IV of the Treaty .
This morning I looked at the website that the President of the Council mentioned .
There is no mention of Parliament participating in the debates on 7 March .
It is simply a web page with no facility for citizens to communicate their own views by e-mail .
There is only a skeleton programme which is put on this web page under the Belgian Presidency , who will have a business forum .
It is deeply unimpressive and needs to be looked at immediately .
So let us look at the future debate .
First , its nature .
It needs to be politically led rather than bureaucracies being left to run expensive programmes which will look like propaganda in the view of our citizens .
Perhaps this would be a subject for Stockholm : stimulating heads of state to start debates .
Madam President-in-Office , you have said that this should be something which should be done but in my own country our Prime Minister , Mr Blair , has been curiously silent on this subject .
Secondly , the breadth .
This needs to be something which will involve all parts of society , as Mr Bonde has said .
You cannot simply preach to the converted as you did in the European School a few days ago .
Thirdly , the substance of the debate : that needs to be considered in terms of papers , broad dialogues and other ideas of this kind .
Lastly there is the intensity of the debate , which needs to be developed with the best technological means available .
I conclude by saying that in our Parliament we need to network with the national parliaments , the Council needs to give us the lead through the heads of state in each of the Member States and last , the Commission can produce guidelines so that we know what course this debate will follow .
We can then discuss this when we come to ratify the Nice Treaty a little later this year .
Mr President , I wish , first of all , to congratulate the Commission on the content of the position that it has adopted here , but I should like to ask Commissioner Barnier a specific question : is the Commission going to content itself with this statement or do you , Mr Barnier , and Mr Prodi intend immediately to visit the governments in order to persuade them to accept your positions ?
This is what differentiates a centre for discussion from an institution which is able to implement and make policy .
I would like you to give me a specific answer to this question because , at the time of the Treaty of Nice , the Commission put forward good proposals and good positions , which were then ignored by the Council .
With regard to the issue that has been raised here of the ' follow-up to Nice ' , I wish to express my satisfaction at the agreement that has been reached in terms of the items on the agenda .
The Commission , the Council and the European Parliament have agreed that the four items are inadequate .
As a matter of fact , this is inevitable , because we cannot stimulate a European debate and then restrict the intellectual exercise of extending it to other issues , as the President pointed out .
Nevertheless , I should like to ask the Swedish Presidency two questions . Firstly , is it prepared to review the date for drafting this Treaty ?
I think that 2004 would be the worst year to undertake this exercise , not only for the reasons that Mr Dupuis has just given , but because , instead of uniting the parties in each Member State that is in favour of the European project , the election campaign often divides them .
Therefore , I should like to know if the presidency and the Council are considering this issue of the date .
Lastly , Madam President , neither the Council nor the presidency itself must use the debate as an excuse to do nothing .
It must be an event that leads to some form of action .
My specific question is this : why is the presidency afraid of there being a forum or convention that can make proposals ?
We do not want to replace national governments and we do not wish to take decisions - you are the decision makers - but I should like to ask , why are you afraid of our ideas , our proposals and our contribution ?
Mr President , why is it that we insist that the specific legitimacy of the European Parliament is recognised in the preparation of the IGC ?
This is not simply because of our wounded self-esteem , but because the Member States left to themselves will quickly become obsessed with their own national power relationships .
The common European interest will only be fostered if all those who share executive power - the European Council and also the Commission - collaborate with all those that share legislative power - the European and national parliaments .
A true constitutional step forward will be achieved only if such a pluralistic formula is agreed .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , solving the historic task of the Union will be no easy matter ; describing it is a piece of cake .
Our most pressing task is to found a European democracy .
That is the nub of the discussion and the conflict between us .
The biggest obstacle now on the path towards a European democracy - and it needs to be said - is the Council ' s claim to power , the claim to power of the national governments , which are not content merely with governing and legislating for Europe , they also want to write its constitution .
The Council failed in Nice in its bid to become Europe ' s constitution-writer .
It was the arrogance of power which gambled with the acceptance of European unification by our citizens .
The most important unanswered question in this discussion about European democracy is the position of the Commission .
Madam President-in-Office , you spoke about transparency , about being close to the citizens , about dialogue , the spearheading role of parliaments and broad public debate and you meant , you believed , that you were talking about democracy .
You were not talking about democracy .
Democracy in Europe demands that we talk about the fundamental principles and elements of democracy , about the separation of powers , about the fact that it is unacceptable for national administrations to legislate .
Democracy demands that we talk about the principle of legislating in public , about the fact that it is unacceptable for the Council to pass laws behind closed doors and for citizens to be stripped of their right to know who decided what and why and of their right to hold the decision makers to account .
Democracy demands that we talk about a catalogue of human rights , about legal validity and about citizens ' access to the Court of Justice , that we talk about a system of checks and balances and about the fact that writing a constitution never has been and never will be the prerogative of governments ; it is the original , inalienable prerogative of parliaments .
Unless the Council renounces its claim to power and puts these elements of democracy at the top of the agenda , we never shall solve this major historic task .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , first let me thank you for the optimism which you expressed in your speech - it makes a welcome change from the last presidency .
That aside , I should like to use my brief speaking time to make a proposal .
The proposal discussed by various political groups to set up a second chamber of the European Parliament to represent the national parliaments could be dispensed with if we followed the Austrian example here .
Under our federal constitution , the Austrian representative to the Council is directly responsible to the national parliament and the main committee of the Austrian National Council can influence the position taken by the Council representative .
This ensures that the representatives of the Austrian people control and help shape political negotiation in the Council , without the need for a second chamber .
Involving national parliaments at the very earliest stage makes a second parliamentary level unnecessary and would be a simpler and perhaps cheaper and less bureaucratic solution .
Mr Brok , you now have the floor for two-and-a-half minutes .
You thought it would be three , but if I give you two-and-a-half , it will be at least three anyway .
Brok ( PPE-DE ) .
( DE ) Mr President , thank you for the warning .
We must , I think , acknowledge that we have a broadly-structured discussion process before us , during which it will become apparent that the intergovernmental approach under the leadership of the Council will be unworkable with 27 Member States and that the executive leadership of the Commission , with Parliament as equal co-legislator , i.e. the classic Monnet approach , will therefore be the only way of ensuring that we are able to act within the European Union .
However , Madam President-in-Office , your comment that you were looking forward to the contribution of the European Parliament has already aroused my suspicions , because the European Parliament has no contribution to make here ; according to my reading of the Nice paper , the Council , Parliament and Commission are supposed to shape the overall debate together .
In other words , we are not your sub-contractors , we are joint project managers of this broad , European dialogue .
As far as I can see , there is as yet no guarantee of this whatsoever in the preparations , which I find somewhat telling .
In my opinion , there are three stages : the broad , public debate led - and I mean led jointly - by the three institutions , which must be held over the course of this and next year , but which must also accompany the overall process through to the end .
Then comes the preparation of the subject matter which , in my view , should follow on logically within the framework of a convention or whatever else you want to call it , whereby it is important for Laeken and for us , Madam President-in-Office , not only for the convention to be set up but for there to be no doubt as to the status of its outcome , by which I mean that it will not produce one of many papers but the paper which will be the basis for negotiation for the decisive round of Heads of Government .
I should like to point out that , as Hungary and the Czech Republic will be using the enlargement agreements to deal with institutional matters , precisely because they have no voice in the European Parliament , the question of improved decision-making procedures in the Council should be taken into consideration during enlargement negotiations , meaning that enlargement negotiations also form part of the post-Nice process .
At the same time , I should like to pick up on the question of the timetable .
I , like many of my fellow members , are worried about wrapping this up in 2004 in the middle of the European election campaign .
I think it would therefore be a good idea if we used this year and next year for the broad public process and started on the convention in the second half of next year , so that we have the whole of 2003 for negotiations and can wrap things up at the end of 2003 or by the beginning of 2004 at the latest so that the outcome can be discussed during the European election campaign .
This would allow us to initiate a public plebiscite on the outcome and to seal the dialogue , as it were , with the expression of the will of the people of this European Union .
( Applause )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , taking the floor for the last time before this House , which I will be leaving in a few weeks ' time , I would like to address a few words to my fellow Members .
Of course the problems of the method adopted in the follow-up to Nice are important : the Community method , the Convention method , and so on .
What is even more important , however , is that there is a plan and a driving force to push it forward .
Each time the European Union - and the Economic Community before it - made progress , there was this plan and this driving force : the Spaak committees before the Treaty of Rome , the White Paper produced by Lord Cockfield before the Luxembourg Treaty , the strong proposals made by the Commission and the strength of the France-Germany axis with the Treaty of Maastricht .
We know that , in the chancelleries , there is no plan and even less political will to move forward .
We also know that , despite the very interesting proposals made by Commissioner Barnier , the Commission has neither the strength nor the authority it had ten years ago .
So there remains the European Parliament . Over the years it has proved itself to be the strongest link in the institutional tripod .
I would like to turn to my fellow Members and say that the European Parliament has a majority which transcends political and national divisions .
This majority is in favour of a plan for a new European federalism .
We need a federation of projects and a catalysis of energies to take this step forward as is expected of us and which the citizens of Europe expect from you .
So , comrades , friends , fellow Members , I would like to take my leave of you by saying that I truly expect you to be ambitious and audacious .
That is what the citizens expect from you .
Thank you .
Mr President , the word ' federalism ' risks staying devoid of meaning if we do not make a basic choice .
Yes , we do have to draft a European constitution to avoid ending up with a simple free exchange area after enlargement .
To do that , however , we really must understand subsidiarity , which remains the most important principle of federalism .
I will give an example .
Under the Italian constitution we have a special regime of autonomy .
On the way towards a necessary European constitution is it not important to involve the regional political level in some way , especially when it represents a linguistic minority ?
I ask this question knowing full well that the answer is not easy , but it is nevertheless vital for the democratic future of Europe .
Mr President , the representative of Parliament in Nice summed up the result as a catastrophe .
It is impossible to understand how one can cold-bloodedly build a future conflict between large and small countries into the treaty .
It is even more difficult to understand how the Council can refuse to introduce a reference to the rights which all Member States have previously signed up to .
How are citizens to understand that their elected representatives do not wish to confirm the rights which they politically pretend to support ?
A weak treaty may pose a risk to an expanded EU , which has to combine many different legal traditions .
We want to see higher ambitions when it comes to reaching decisions on who is to do what , who is to decide what and how , and on rights and democracy .
The debate with the citizens must focus on the central issues of the future in a more flexible Europe .
A democratic convention is required , not merely a website , to create open debate and open decisions .
The presidency gives the impression of seeking to avoid the key issues of the debate on Europe .
This is tantamount to shirking its responsibility to lead Europe .
Seize the opportunity to contribute to a democratic EU with a democratic European Parliament - which I also hope the presidency will show respect for .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , you used the word strong three times in your speech .
The EU must be a strong force , the Community method must contain strong positions and we need strong institutions .
I agree with you wholeheartedly there .
But actions speak louder than words .
As far as the post-Nice agenda is concerned , what you said means more Europe , not less Europe .
It means more integration , not less integration .
In other words , the proposals which you make will need to be specified and some will need to be reworded .
One often has the impression , when it comes to the separation of powers , that forces are at work which seek to weaken Europe .
It is up to you , I think , to say what we want to do together , what we must do together in the 21st century in order to make Europe strong .
Then the debate on the separation of powers will be a completely different debate from what we sometimes hear now .
Strong Community institutions : this issue also needs to be specified .
The issue here , as far as I am concerned , is the application of parliamentary democracy to policy on Europe .
This does not just mean discussing the role and function of the national parliaments , it also means making the European Parliament even stronger .
We have still not been granted a number of rights which we need when it comes to legislating , setting the budget and controlling the Commission .
If we want strong Community institutions , we need to re-examine the Council and the Commission . The Commission should be a sort of government , not just the Council ' s secretariat , and the Council should then be seen as a committee with the ability to take decisions .
As far as the method is concerned , you said rather cryptically that the convention has advantages and disadvantages .
I should like to know what the disadvantages are and for whom .
I was a member of the Charter convention .
I saw no disadvantages .
I saw only advantages .
I therefore call on you to state in your Gothenburg report that the new method will be a new convention to prepare the Intergovernmental Conference .
One last word on the timetable .
I too think that 2004 is wholly inappropriate .
We can wrap this up by the end of 2003 .
A new Treaty of Rome would then perhaps be the right basis for European elections in 2004 and a good basis for completing enlargement .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , never in my career as an MEP , and I have been a Member since 1979 , has there been a treaty which leaves one with such a bitter taste as this one .
That is hardly surprising , for whoever takes stock of the chaos which the government leaders created in Nice , is not amazed that all eyes are now fixed on post-Nice . That is , after all , the quickest way to make people forget Nice .
One of the problems is that it has now become impossible to explain to any citizen how vote weighting works , or what the outcome of the Commissioners ' rota system is .
Neither is it clear how many MEPs there will be between 2004 and 2009 .
Post-Nice is thus not a normal follow-up of Nice , but a harsh necessity to rectify what has gone wrong as soon as possible .
What needs to be done ?
The democratic hole which was left as a result of the fact that the European Parliament will not be receiving codecision power on all the topics which will soon be decided on by qualified majority , must be filled at the earliest opportunity .
In actual fact , we should already be reaching an interinstitutional agreement on this .
It is disgraceful that power has been removed from the national parliaments and has subsequently not been transferred to the European Parliament .
Secondly , there should be a fair distribution of national and European powers , which must be laid down in a European constitution . The latter should also include the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union .
I happen to share Mrs Lynne ' s opinion that the document is sound .
Thirdly , the current IGC procedure must be replaced by an interinstitutional convention which is capable of preparing these actions .
The damage which Nice has done must be repaired before the next European elections , in other words by 2003 , for we cannot afford to carry this burden into those elections in 2004 .
Finally , Madam President , you mentioned citizens .
But do you realise that in the three-way discussion on this notorious regulation on access to documents , we constantly meet with a Council in full body armour , which does not give an inch and which is causing us the greatest of difficulty ?
Madam President , Mrs Lynne mentioned the word ' strong ' .
There must have been eleven socialist governments in Nice .
Well , they were anything but strong on the day .
Let us not beat about the bush .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I entreat all of you : let us stop talking about the follow-up to Nice and talk instead about the future .
Let us look towards the future .
I would also like to correct an oversight this morning . Before we look to the future let us wind up the past .
Let us invite the Member States to ratify Nice as soon as possible .
This is essential if we want to clear the air for the debate .
As I look towards the future I am convinced about one thing . The leap forward we are expecting will come from public opinion , from the debate , but first and foremost from young people .
It is to them that the Europe of the future belongs .
It is not enough , however , to say : the debate , the debate , the debate .
You are right , Commissioner : we must organise it and structure it .
To guide this debate , I think that at some point we must ask ourselves about the usefulness of a questionnaire .
By the same token , we must use all the available forums for this debate , while being aware that none of them , be it national conferences , consultations with unions , forums of civil societies , will have the power to arrive at a conclusion .
For , pursuant to Article 48 of the Treaty , the conclusion belongs to the Heads of State and Government .
Let us take note of this .
Between these two stages , though , what will revive hope within Europe is nevertheless the adventure of the convention , which is no longer that adventurous .
The experience of the Charter demonstrated this .
I believe it was Mr Poettering who asked a question about a parallel process between the public debate and the convention .
It seems to us that the correct formula is that of a broad , open debate , which will take place as soon as possible . When the convention starts its work , the debate will continue in parallel in order to draw the necessary lessons from the experience of the convention .
And then this Parliament will agree to consult all the wise men on earth and to participate in all the forums .
In the final analysis , however , it is the representatives of democracy who will have to participate in this convention .
One last word , Mr President .
The Council was courageous enough to invent the convention .
We ask it to show the same courage and look to the future with confidence .
Our citizens expect this . Our fellow Member , Claude Desama , has invited us to take part in constructing a new federalism and we should accept this invitation .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , you have already been praised several times during the course of this debate , and rightly so , for your understanding and your sincere appeal for a proper new start in a common Europe .
" The future is at stake " is the way you put the objective of the work of the Swedish Presidency into perspective .
Unfortunately , you went no further than perspectives in your reference to the objectives of Annex 4 to Nice , in calling for us to be closer to our citizens and in your more than cryptic comment that you see both advantages and disadvantages in the convention method .
With all due respect , that does not amount to much . In fact it amounts to far too little if you consider that the Swedish Presidency is already approaching the half-way mark .
I would have welcomed at least a few specifics on the crucial core issues addressed by Michel Barnier .
Do we want a more or a less political Europe ?
How exactly do we envisage fundamental reform of the institutions ?
How should we be organising the process of writing a forward-looking European constitution ?
I would have listened gladly to at least some sort of attempt to reply to one or other of these questions .
Perhaps you will yet do so in your closing address .
May I add another question to those already put to you by my fellow Members ?
What does being closer to our citizens mean from an institutional point of view , i.e. once we get past websites and discussions at the European School ?
Does it mean depriving the European Parliament of power by setting up a second chamber of national parliaments , over which the Council believes it can exert more influence than it can over the European Parliament ?
Some answers please .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , you have a reputation , not without reason , for being extraordinarily skilful , and your presentation has confirmed this .
You have come here and flattered us , spoken of important contributions by the European Parliament in the past , found the relevant debates interesting and exciting and we thank you for your compliments .
But how do they fit in with the facts ? You were in Nice .
What does the real future look like on paper ?
The loser at Nice was the European Parliament .
Instead of at least more transparency , we ended up with less democracy .
We now have a Europe which looks like the late Habsburg empire in the 19th century .
Then , the large landowners had all the votes , now it is the countries . And everything is obscure .
Now you talk of an open attitude to future procedures .
Since I started working here as an elected representative of the people and before that during my work as a journalist , I have always wondered exactly what the people in power are thinking when they talk like you do and when they act like you do in the Council .
What is it you really want ?
What is it you stand for ?
In school I was told that it was Parliament ' s job to control and the government ' s job to react .
Where exactly are you reacting ?
We knew where we stood with Konrad Adenauer , with François Mitterand and even with Helmut Kohl when it came to Europe .
Where do we stand with the Council ?
Why do you not just say that , at the end of the day , you want a seriously democratic and transparent Europe , come what may ?
Do you really find it so hard to shoulder responsibility in front of your voters ?
What is wrong with Sweden ?
We admire your country - I personally am a great fan of your political transparency , but I am fast losing heart when it comes to these crucial issues regarding the future .
If , rather than lead , you merely lead astray , and up the wrong garden path at that , i.e. up the national path which hankers after the past rather than down the glorious path which will take us forward , then you run the risk of going down in history as the gravedigger of Europe , because you could not and would not explain to your citizens that the European Union plays an indispensable role in the age of globalisation and that this European Union is therefore in dire need of radical democratisation and practical application of the principle of subsidiarity .
I trust that Sweden will yet dare to act .
Leave flattery and diplomatic skills behind you and profess your faith in the separation of powers and a European constitution .
I am relying on your ambition .
Mr President , I would like to begin by presenting my thanks for a good debate with many constructive contributions .

I seem to have noticed that Mr Poettering , Mr Barón Crespo , Mr Cox and others who have taken part in the debate are still in favour of a broad political debate on issues of both content and form , and I think this is good .
I would like to comment on some of the contributions and begin with the first speaker , Mr Poettering .
I repeat : Openness and access are a key issue for the Swedish Presidency .
I know that Parliament and the Swedish Presidency have a great deal in common in this respect and I hope that we will be able to help each other to achieve as much openness and access as possible .
Naturally , we also need to carry the Member States with us and agree on this .
Then there is the major question of the next Intergovernmental Conference .
When it comes to the decision itself , according to the Treaty there is no method other than the Intergovernmental Conference .
It is important that we remember this , just as Mrs Berès said just now .
I understand that Parliament is very interested , as I am , in the important discussion on how we will reach a decision - the debate we will have before the decision , how we will prepare for the debate , and the role which might be played by the convention method .
These issues were addressed by the initial speakers .
The discussion in Parliament shows that we must have a broad debate on these matters , but I think it is too early today to reach a definite position as there are both advantages and disadvantages .
The advantages are clear - an open debate and broad participation - but here too questions can be raised .
Who is to be involved - Member States , candidate countries and organisations , and if so , which ?
We cannot reach a final position on this today .
Some have also put forward the disadvantages .
With very many participants , the process can become unwieldy .
Furthermore , the decision-making process itself can be unclear , as the convention submits proposals and the Intergovernmental Conference has to reach decisions .
Even if one advocates a convention , one must also discuss dealing with its disadvantages .
We should therefore discuss this properly and in detail .
The Council has not said yes but nor has the Council objected , and we have definitely not said that we are afraid of a convention .
We have said that we must now be able to discuss both the factual issues surrounding the future of Europe and the methods - including the question of a convention .
Just as Mr Brok and others said , the European Parliament is naturally involved in this entire debate .
You played a part in initiating the debate on the future .
You played a part in the launch and you are also among those participating in the website .
I do not know exactly where Mr Elles has been looking , but I can guarantee that Parliament is represented .
Furthermore , there are lots of contributions , so if Parliament was not represented there today , it can only be an oversight .
This debate is a further example of Parliament ' s being involved , but we would also like to see the view of Parliament as a whole on the debate on the future , and we will get that in May .
Therefore , I think it is important that this also be included as part of the on-going discussion .
Let me now comment on some other issues .
Mr Cox wondered why I said that the Treaties should be simplified without changing the content .
I reply that I was quoting the Nice Decision .
To Mr Barón Crespo I would like to say that it is clear that we must go out into the real world .
I myself have taken the debate to many Swedish schools .
I presume that you others too have also visited schools .
I think it is important that , here too , Parliament is really involved in the debate on content .
What schoolchildren and the general public will ask us will naturally be questions which are very much wider in scope than those we have discussed here today .
I would also like to say to Mr Barón Crespo that of course Parliament was invited to take part in launching the future of Europe right from the start .
To Mrs Frassoni I would like to say that when it comes to the question on civil society , there must unfortunately have been some problem with the translation , for the Swedish Presidency has exhibited a very great interest in civil society .
In my introductory speech , I cited examples of major conferences we are organising in Sweden and in other countries .
Ahead of the summit in Gothenburg we are organising three broad forums arranged by civil society .
We are also working on town twinning to a great extent and are doing a great deal of work at many schools and universities .
I personally have several school classes as reference groups , which I can recommend , by the way .
Mr Bonde brought up the subject of the website and said that only Prime Minister Persson and other high-up figures are allowed to write on it .
I recommend that he go and look at it as there are already many contributions there .
Among other things in my introductory speech , I quoted contributions from Denmark and the UK - opinions of ordinary citizens in both countries .
This is naturally an important debate for the future .
I expect we will return to the discussion of the methods and the convention and how we can best broaden the debate .
But it is also important that we have a broad debate on the factual issues , i.e. on how Europe really will be able to address globalisation and on how Europe can become a strong force on employment , environmental issues and the matters we will be discussing later today .
So when it comes to the future of Europe , let us discuss both methods and substance .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , with thanks to each and every one of you , I would like at this stage to comment briefly on a few specific questions put by a number of you .
As for the rest , I can only confirm on behalf of President Prodi , and on my own personal behalf , that the Commission will continue to work intelligently and in close cooperation with the European Parliament during this rather sensitive period of the debate on the future of Europe , as Mrs Berès said . And that is what counts .
Mrs Lindh has just said a few words about the website , which several of you have mentioned , most notably James Elles and Mrs Malmström .
This site is going through a running-in phase so please show a little understanding .
It was opened barely a week ago . I think all your comments will help us to turn it into a real website for the people .
Furthermore , our idea is to share the management of this site amongst several institutions , including the European Parliament , but I admit that we must push it forwards and perhaps also understand its role better , as it must be used as a platform for the national debates which will soon be organised in each Member State .
That is my first reply , but this site must be improved and the Commission will make a contribution to make this happen .
Mr Seguro asked a question of the President of the Commission and the Commissioner .
Yes , Mr Seguro , we are going to continue to meet with the governments in each of the capitals not only of the Member States but , as Mr Prodi has done , as each of us does , the capitals of the candidate countries too .
This is the role of the President , which he carries out not only with regard to the debate on the future of Europe , but on many other subjects as well .
I would add that we will also continue to meet with national parliaments , which has not been normal practice for the Commission up till now .
In the context of the debates in the run-up to Nice , I personally was concerned to meet with national parliaments and , quite frankly , I do not regret it at all .
Mr Leinen mentioned , as did Mr Dupuis , the concern we expressed through our President that 2004 will be an extremely busy year .
It is the year in which we will table the new post-Berlin agenda .
It is the year in which many accession negotiations will be concluded , if this has not already happened . It is the year of the renewal of the European Parliament and it is also the final year of this Commission .
So the sooner we can move , at the start of 2004 and perhaps , Mr Leinen , why not in Rome at the end of 2003 , the better it will be for everybody , for us and for you , and so necessarily for the European debate itself .
The answer to that , however , is also in the hands of the Heads of State and Government .
I would like to thank each and every one of you , especially the group chairpersons who expressed their desires and their agreement with the ideas or the guidelines of the Commission .
We will continue to work together .
Please allow me to say a final personal word of thanks to Mr Desama at this moving time when he is about to leave this House to take up more local responsibilities in Verviers .
I am sure he will not forget the profession of European faith he has carried out here when he assumes his role of Lord Mayor in the weeks to come .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
Mr President , on a point of order I should like to put on record a matter I raised at the Conference of Presidents .
It relates to the name of the website www.europa.eu.int / futurum .
Could we find a more user-friendly name , such as hello.com , so that people could access it quickly ?
Mr President , I wanted to identify the website that I had visited this morning just before this debate .
I can assure the President-in-Office of the Council that the name of the representative of the European Parliament on 7 March is not mentioned in the English version .
I would be grateful therefore if you could align that with the Swedish version which is presumably up-to-date as you told us this morning .
I admire all the honourable Members with so much time to surf the Net .
Wish that I could do likewise .
Preparatory work for the Stockholm European Council ( 23 / 24 March 2001 )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the preparatory work for the Stockholm European Council on 23 and 24 March 2001 .
I shall now give the floor to the President-in-Office of the Council , Mrs Lindh .
Madam President , we have just discussed the future of Europe .
It is really a new Europe , a new Union , which is in the process of being formed .
The greatest change is naturally expansion - the EU is now forging a path for the historic reunification of Europe .
Furthermore , we have just begun the debate on the future and are asking the question of what kind of Europe we want .
Now , however , we will be discussing the third large process of change , namely the modernisation of the European model , in which the European Council in Stockholm on 23 - 24 March will play a central role .
It is about full employment within the EU .
It is about quality of work and lifelong learning .
It is about social and economic reforms .
Last year in Lisbon , the Union made an historic choice in addressing these questions .
They are vital to the citizens and thus also for the political legitimacy of the Union .
14 million people in Europe are still unemployed - a gigantic waste of financial resources and an insult to human knowledge and ambitions .
Having a job and being able to earn a living creates a feeling of participation , security and dignity , while unemployment leads to uncertainty , exclusion and xenophobia .
The road to full employment and increased competitiveness encompasses financial and social reforms such as increased education and lifelong learning , greater equality and modernised social security , strong welfare and quality at work .
It demands open and functioning markets , a healthy macroeconomic policy and a commercial climate which facilitates investment and the establishment of new businesses , especially within growing areas such as IT and biotechnology .
We need a balance between social and economic reforms .
All these areas are dependent on each other if the Union is to achieve its high targets by 2010 : creating the world ' s leading knowledge-based economy , creating 20 million new jobs and combining competitiveness and greater social cohesion .
The meeting of the European Council in Stockholm is the first in a series of summits this spring in which we will openly and self-critically asses the progress which has been made and make new strides . The work will be carried out both with community law and the new open coordination method .
It is important to focus our measures within the framework of the Lisbon Process , something emphasised by many people in Parliament .
We must not undermine this process by adding far too many new questions .
We do not need any new processes . Instead , we should point out certain prioritised areas .
In Stockholm , we will firstly further reinforce the ambitious employment targets of 70 % of the entire labour force and 60 % of women by 2010 .
We should consider setting up targets for as early as 2005 and add special targets for the employment of the elderly , a group with enormous potential - only 38 % of those aged 55 - 64 are currently in work .
As people are living longer and longer and becoming even healthier , many older people feel unwelcome in the labour market - this situation is slightly absurd .
We will seek to establish a number of important social objectives for equal opportunities , diversity and participation in the workplace .
" Quality of work " - developing quality in working life - is both a welfare issue and the best way of making use of the capacity of employees .
We will seek to confirm the central role of lifelong learning , both for individual development and for European competitiveness , and invite the Commission to also draw up objectives for lifelong learning .
Secondly in Stockholm , we expect that important strides will be made in terms of modernising the European economy .
We will seek to forge ahead with the reform of the financial markets and achieve a common market for financial services by 2005 at the latest and for risk capital by 2003 at the latest .
Achieving this , as Baron Lamfalussy points out in his report , requires a more efficient decision-making process .
We hope that agreement on this will be achieved at the summit .
We also need to continue work on opening up the electricity , gas and postal markets , as well as rail and air traffic .
Opening up product and capital markets is not just an aim in itself .
We are not only doing this for the sake of growth and increased employment , but also because it is good for consumers .
It means lower prices and a wider range and better quality of goods and services .
In this context , external trade policy is also important - free and fair world trade is in the interest of European consumers .
Thirdly in Stockholm , we must address the demographic development of Europe .
Low birth rates and an increasing proportion of elderly people threaten to greatly increase the support burden for those of working age from around 2010 onwards .
We therefore need a wider-ranging overview of pension systems and a discussion of the design of childcare and possibly also health care and care of the elderly .
The social insurance systems must make it easier for people to combine work and family life .
We also need measures for increased participation in the labour market , greater equality and lifelong learning , to address the demographic challenges .
Fourthly in Stockholm , we should facilitate new technology with the aim of creating growth and improving the lives of citizens .
We want to develop the opportunity for creating better drugs with the help of biotechnology , naturally taking moral and ethical dimensions into account .
We want to develop eEurope and combat the digital divide so that IT benefits everyone .
Talking of the previous debate , I can state that it is the Commission which is responsible for the website .
You can therefore contact them with your comments .
Fifthly in Stockholm , we must include the ecological point of view which was lacking in the Lisbon strategy and build a bridge to the summit in Gothenburg .
We would like environmentally-friendly technology to also be seen as an important factor for growth and employment , and we would highlight the importance of the efficient use of resources .
The Councils of Ministers are now investigating how the candidate countries can be linked to this process on all these issues .
I would also like to emphasise the importance of the successful development of Economic and Monetary Union .
In its presidency , Sweden will actively work to ensure that the introduction of euro notes and coins , which is to take place in the currency union in early 2002 , is an unqualified success .
This is in our common interest .
I would also like to state that President Putin of Russia will visit Stockholm in connection with the summit on 23 March for an informal working lunch with the Heads of State and Heads of Government of the EU .
We assume that the discussion will primarily focus on financial and social issues .
As usual , the European Council will also discuss current issues in foreign policy , such as the Middle East , the western Balkans and the Korean peninsula .
Madam President , employment and welfare are the most important issues for the citizens of Europe .
If we fail , we face , besides increasing unemployment , xenophobia and greater divisions in society , a crisis of confidence in the Union .
The Lisbon Process is therefore a prerequisite , not only for sustainable growth , full employment and social cohesion in Europe , but also for confidence in European cooperation .
The European Parliament has constantly been a driving force in all these issues and , through its combination of a popular mandate and Europe-wide responsibility , will also play a central role in the work for the future .
I look forward to hearing your opinions .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by congratulating the presidency on the excellent work it has done in preparing for next week 's summit in Stockholm .
As has been announced , the presidency has even organised a meeting between European Union leaders and President Putin , on similar lines to the meeting planned with President Bush at Gothenburg in June .
This will be an excellent opportunity to review the main aspects of our partnership with Russia and our partnership with the United States as well .
In particular , I hope we will be able to take stock of the progress of Russia 's economic reform programme and improvements in the investment climate that are vital for the success of our energy dialogue and our dialogue on all issues , including matters of citizens ' rights , extremely serious issues that we are to discuss .
The second topic I want to focus briefly on today is the Commission 's ' Spring Report ' .
When I stood before this House just a year ago , it was to present to you the Commission 's contribution to the Lisbon Summit .
What the Commission proposed at Lisbon was a detailed strategy for making Europe dynamic and competitive , while , at the same time , promoting social inclusion and solidarity : a strategy for ensuring that economic progress and social progress in Europe go hand in hand .
The outcome of that summit was very positive : the Member States unanimously adopted almost all the Commission 's proposals .
The strategy adopted at Lisbon is important in two ways .
Firstly , it is an integrated strategy ; far from there being tension between the social and economic agendas , they actually support each other .
Secondly , it sets specific tasks for the different players to carry out within specific time frames .
Responsibilities and targets are therefore clear and we will be able to measure our progress clearly .
The Lisbon strategy is designed for a ten year period , and progress is to be assessed annually at the Spring European Council .
As a basis for this assessment , the Commission will produce an annual progress report ( known as the ' Synthesis Report ' ) , which I shall present to this House every year at about this time .
It will become the Commission 's key instrument for coordinating social and economic policy .
If the Gothenburg European Council agrees , we shall add an environmental dimension , giving Europe an overall strategy for sustainable development .
The synthesis report will outline our successes since Lisbon , but also identify areas where swifter and more determined action is needed over the next twelve months .
Among the initial successes I am particularly pleased with this year are the adoption of the Social Agenda at Nice , the endorsement of a strategy on social exclusion , and our progress in combating discrimination and ensuring equal opportunities .
These successes should give us great satisfaction and this year 's report records them , although it touches only lightly on these particular issues , for we must concentrate on the areas where progress is not satisfactory .
Our report this year highlights ten areas where progress has been unsatisfactory and fresh or greater impetus needs to be given .
Sometimes this is because Member States have been dragging their feet - it has to be said - lacking a sense of urgency or political will , or both . Sometimes it is because circumstances have changed and a new scenario confronts us .
Our report therefore makes very specific recommendations , and at Stockholm I shall make every endeavour to urge the Member States to follow them .
Moreover , these are commitments that these States have made and therefore European leaders need to deliver on them . Two examples are the Community patent and the GALILEO programme .
Let me say just a little more about these two issues , which I consider to be particularly important . Firstly : the Community patent .
There is an urgent need for a single patent that is legally valid throughout the EU , and there should be a single jurisdiction . This would cut business costs , encourage innovation and provide a clear legal framework for settling disputes .
Industry and science are clamouring for it , as it will boost competitiveness and employment - especially in the new sectors we need most .
The Lisbon and Feira European Councils recommended that the Community Patent should be available by the end of 2001 .
I repeat : the Lisbon and Feira Councils called for this .
The Commission tabled its proposal last autumn , but the Council has been unable to reach agreement on it as we saw again just this week at the Internal Market Council and this can only be alarming .
Above all , we cannot continue to hold Councils where , even in cases in which a majority vote is acceptable , unanimity is strived for and the adoption of proposals deferred .
The Member States must act consistently and show a greater sense of responsibility if this project is to succeed .
Secondly : the GALILEO programme .
The Kosovo war showed only too clearly Europe 's total dependence on the American GPS satellite navigation system .
If this is switched off for military reasons , European businesses are forced to suspend many of their operations and there are a number of other examples .
Now then , the GALILEO project offers an alternative that would make Europe self-sufficient in satellite navigation signals for all civilian , military and scientific purposes .
It is an opportunity we simply cannot afford to miss .
It would take only a modest injection of public funds to trigger massive private investment , although I recognise that this private sector participation has yet to be explored in depth , as some governments have been requesting and as , moreover , we undertook to do .
This project , which I see many countries almost do not want to be involved with , could generate more than 100 000 high-level scientific jobs .
I therefore urge this House and the Council to come to an agreement very soon on the next stage of development of this important project .
The Commission , for its part , will display the necessary flexibility as regards the participation of private capital .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would now like to expand on one of the ten priority areas we identified .
I will not go into the whole caboodle , to coin a phrase , just the last point : ' Effective social protection for an ageing population ' .
I have picked this topic because it is particularly close to my heart and because it has huge scope ; because it has far-reaching implications for all our policies and because it will take us from Stockholm to Gothenburg , which means sustainable development ; and because it is an issue that will stay with us for many years to come .
The Lisbon agenda is set against the background of a major challenge : our ageing population .
I am happy to say that Europeans are living longer , but they are also having fewer children and working less .
In the European Union , at present , for every person of 65 or over there are four people of working age .
In 20 years ' time , there will be only three and in 40 years ' time only two potential workers to every pensioner .
These are the actual data , given that those who have not been born cannot be born in the future : these are the current demographic statistics .
This also applies to almost all the candidate countries as well as the Member States .
In other words , a shrinking workforce will have to support a rapidly growing number of non-working people even in the enlarged European Union .
These are stark , statistical facts that we have to take into consideration .
Do we want Europe to remain a fair , caring society , which is our goal ?
Do we want our children and grandchildren to enjoy the kind of social security we have come to expect ?
Then we must modernise our welfare and pension systems , making them sustainable in the long term .
We need a strategy for consolidating Europe 's long-term competitiveness without giving up the social inclusion that characterises our societies .
I want Europe to be not only the most competitive region in the world , but also the region with the highest level of social inclusion .
The post-war era has brought unprecedented prosperity to all the States of European society .
Today , our societies are - on average - the wealthiest in history .
At the same time , well-developed welfare and pension systems have distributed our wealth so as to ensure a minimum of social justice : not the level we had hoped for but still a minimum level of social justice .
However , these systems were built on the criteria of expanding or at least stable populations .
Now that our working population is shrinking , we are facing a potential structural crisis in the distribution of wealth , a crisis that could , in the space of a few decades , severely undermine the European Union 's competitiveness , Economic and Monetary Union and our social model , given that our objective is to preserve a sound social protection model .
We must therefore take action now . We need to develop a long-term policy mix and start to think very hard about what sort of social justice and intergenerational equity we want , and what our political criteria for achieving it should be .
Social protection systems are , of course , a national responsibility , and , I would stress , it is primarily up to the Member States - not the European Union institutions - to bring about the necessary reforms .
There are , however , four key areas where we have to develop appropriate strategies . They are intergenerational equity , distribution of work , social and family policy and immigration .
Although the national governments are free to act autonomously in these matters , we must give thought to their development here .
Firstly : intergenerational equity .
The ageing of our societies is placing a substantial extra financial burden on certain generations .
If no adjustments are made , today 's younger generation will have to pay not only for their parents ' and grandparents ' retirement pensions but also for their own , because by the time they retire the pension system will have become unworkable .
If adjustments are not made to take full account of the demographic factor , parts of today 's adult generation could fall into poverty .
Secondly : the distribution of work .
Not everyone of working age actually works .
Quite apart from the difficulties preventing young people from entering the labour market early enough , there is a trend towards early retirement that shortens people 's working lives by 10 years or more .
This aggravates the long-term strain on the pension systems .
Moreover , as of about 2007 , our workforce could be too small to meet our economic needs .
We shall be facing a labour shortage in the Union .
In future , therefore , all generations will have to work longer .
We need to keep older people active in the economy , at least part time . We must ensure they have the skills needed for types of work that may be new to them .
Therefore - and this is our duty - we shall urge the Member States to invest much more in education and training for young and old alike .
Lifelong learning is essential in order to update people 's skills constantly and enable them to adapt to change .
This policy should help ease labour shortages , improve intergenerational equity and give the citizens a more satisfying old age .
Thirdly : social and family policy : There are far too few women in work .
The employment rate for women is only just over 70 % of the employment rate for men .
In its report for Stockholm , the Commission urges the Member States to make it easier for women to enter or re-enter the labour market .
Women must , of course , be given the same job opportunities , working conditions and pension schemes as men , and we must make it easier for both sexes to reconcile work and family life , especially if we want to encourage people to have children .
In short , we need to take ever better care of our increasingly depleted human resources .
Fourthly and lastly : immigration .
Bringing young people with the right skills into the European Union is another way to increase the size of our workforce .
We have a frontier-free , Europe-wide labour market : we urgently need a Europe-wide immigration policy to match .
The basis for this policy should be the ' shared assessment of the economic and demographic developments within the Union ' which the Tampere European Council called for .
Last November , the Commission issued a communication on this subject , and I hope that this House and the Council will examine it as soon as possible .
Madam President , Minister , ladies and gentlemen , I said just now that pensions and social protection systems are essentially national responsibilities and that it is for the Member States to bring about the necessary reforms .
Nevertheless , the European Union , and the Commission in particular , does have a responsibility in this field .
To conclude my speech , let me therefore outline what the Commission is doing to provide adequate responses to the problems linked to the ageing population .
One of the great successes of Lisbon was that the Member States agreed , for the first time , to coordinate their action on welfare reform , exchanging experiences and best practices .
This process must be enhanced .
They also mandated the High Level Working Party on Social Protection to study the sustainability of social protection and , in particular , of pension systems , on the basis of a Commission communication .
Thus , welfare reform is part of the Lisbon agenda and the Commission is playing its part .
It will make clear the true scale of the demographic problem so that the European public can understand it .
In the first place , our public finance accounting systems do not give a true picture at present .
We need to develop indicators that show the long-term implications of our social spending and tax decisions , in particular with regard to pensions .
Secondly , we need to bring the single market fully into play with regard to pensions .
At present , unlike insurance , pension funds are not covered by a European Union legal framework .
However , the Commission is fully committed to bringing the single market into full play here .
We have already tabled a proposal for a directive and I hope the Council will act swiftly on it .
This directive forms part of our Financial Services Action Plan that the European Council agreed should be implemented within five years .
I urge this House and the Council to speed up their work on this plan .
A properly regulated , pan-European pension fund market will increase the mobility of workers and pensioners and give them better value for money .
At present , pension provision is unnecessarily expensive , and this is a waste we can no longer afford .
Pension schemes must therefore be made fully portable within the European Union .
At Stockholm , Member States will have to sweep away the tax barriers that obstruct the cross-border payment of pension contributions and the cross-border management of pension funds .
We are not talking about a tax revolution here : this is a matter of an extremely sensible adjustment , to which the citizens have every right .
Coordination of national tax systems is essential here , and the Commission will be tabling its proposals .
Thirdly , it is vital that we address the effects of ageing on public finances .
The effects of ageing on our social systems must reinforce our commitment to reducing public debt .
The interest saved must be used to support pensions and healthcare .
This is a matter of social justice , and the Commission 's Synthesis Report will urge the Member States to continue the reforms already under way along these lines .
The citizens need time to make provision for their old age .
Action is required now to prevent social systems from losing public credibility .
Fourthly and lastly , we need to incorporate the long-term sustainability aspect of public finances into Economic and Monetary Union .
The current ' close to balance ' rule in the EMU Stability and Growth Pact has done a great service to the cause of safe pensions .
We must acknowledge this fact and be proud of it , but the long-term sustainability of public finances is not included in the requirements of the Stability and Growth Pact .
Imagine , for example , that a particular Member State is currently running balanced budgets but that its spending programmes will mean increasing deficits and debt within the next ten years .
In a situation of this kind , the European Union can do nothing to induce that country to change course because the European Union does not possess the necessary instruments , nor does it possess the instruments to influence the quality of the adjustments undertaken , yet that country 's chances of long-term success basically depend on their getting the adjustments right today .
This was less important in the run-up to EMU , where action had to be taken in the short to medium term , but the ageing of our population makes long-term action on public finances essential .
What we need , therefore , is a renewed commitment to maintaining stable public finances that can sustain social protection in the longer term .
Indeed , sound public finances must be an integral part of the strategy for sustainable development in Europe .
The Commission will be proposing just such a strategy , and it will be the main subject of the Gothenburg Summit in June .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the subject I have chosen to raise in this House today is a difficult and technical one , but it is crucial for the prosperity of future generations in Europe .
There is not , and there never will be , one single model of social inclusion in Europe .
Each Member State will make its own choice , reflecting its own traditions , culture and the will of its people .
Nevertheless , we have to establish an overall framework , and this can only be done at European Union level .
This House is , of course , the European institution where the democratic debates on the fundamental aspects of our fellow citizens ' future have to take place .
Therefore , ladies and gentlemen , my Commission is ready to fully play its part together with you .
Madam President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , President Prodi , the target the Union set itself a year ago in Lisbon to become the world ' s most competitive and dynamic economic area , which could achieve both sustainable growth and create new and better jobs , and greater social cohesion , hardly lacks ambition .
There may be unanimity regarding the aim ; there are , however , clear political differences when it comes to the choice of remedies and how they are prioritised .
We , the Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , would like to emphasise that the following are some of the most important ways of fulfilling this aim : full implementation of the Single Market , the speedy liberalisation of monopolies , such as the electricity and gas boards and the Post Office , and opening up public procurement to genuine competition , without letting the question of local employment blur the issue .
We would like to stress that employment targets will be achieved by encouraging entrepreneurship , SMEs being the most significant employers .
We would like to stress that excessive regulation , too much faith in the omnipotence of legislation , and burdensome taxation are the worst enemies of employment .
We would also like to emphasise that an innovative and information-based economy , in which everyone is given equal opportunities and individuals are given the right to get ahead and live their lives according to their own goals , means making the European labour markets a lot more flexible .
It is this very lack of flexibility that separates us from the efficient US economy .
Another way of increasing efficiency is to strengthen our educational systems by making them more adaptable to the needs of individuals .
We must have educational establishments maintained by the state , but we also need private ones so that a competition situation may develop , based both on the students and the choice of different educational approaches .
In our opinion , modernising the European social model must be made to move up a gear by making it less dependent on publicly financed collective solutions that aim to maintain social cohesion .
If we want to become the world ' s best economy , we have to ask ourselves a few questions .
Has the US economy grown as a result of restrictions there , over-taxation , legislation introduced with the apparent aim of giving protection , artificially preserving unproductive jobs , restricting competition or seeking to increase federal bureaucracy ?
Not at all ; just the opposite , in fact !
Have Sweden , and Finland too , seen success as IT countries in Europe and achieved peak growth because they have imposed more and more regulation ?
No . It is because for just over a decade both countries have invested in training and research and their conservative governments reduced the hold the state had on the economy .
Has Ireland succeeded through regulation ?
No , it has deregulated and supported external investments by means of tax concessions , doing so well that we even have to give it a telling off for its success .
The remedies for improved employment levels are simple .
They are those I have mentioned , and not the well-intentioned but ineffective remedies of guardianship , control , and planning , which our socialist friends so greatly favour .
In the run-up to the Stockholm meeting Parliament must , however , voice a concern to the Commission and the Council .
The gulf between the targets set and the measures taken to implement them is widening on a daily basis , although there are certainly differences between the various countries .
The Council must achieve results quickly in its continued programme of liberalisation and improving the business climate , especially now that we are clearly headed for a period of uncertainty , with the USA in the lead , as prices on the stock markets fall and confidence weakens in companies and amongst consumers .
If confidence goes , the strong economy goes too , and who will then give us guarantees of better jobs , better education and greater social cohesion ?
The Lisbon process is not the only one which has seen a hiccup in the European machine .
Although the decisions taken at Tampere on a common security area have remained in the background in the debate , their implementation has been just as slow , if not slower , than the Lisbon process .
If we do not effectively prevent crime there cannot even be a real Single Market or Schengen area .
A viable Single Market also requires , to mention just one detail , a viable , effective and safe air traffic system .
At the moment , two countries , Spain and Britain , could torpedo efforts to achieve air safety and increased efficiency by squabbling over the insignificant airport at Gibraltar .
It is hard to believe that the same countries are advising how to solve the Balkan crisis or the situation that has flared up in the Middle East .
I would also like to thank - as Mr Poettering did - Mrs Lindh for her very constructive approach to the Stockholm meeting .
I might even say you are welcome to join our group when your ministerial term has finished , as what you said was so much to our liking .
And now I will switch to the other official language of Finland , and say : Mrs Lindh , actual measures are what we need , and not just talk about objectives .
That is very reassuring , Mr President .
I thought that a flying saucer was just about to take off .
Madam President-in-Office , President of the Commission , in view of the generally illegible resolutions that Parliament is in the habit of adopting , let me formulate a few simple ideas .
First of all a discovery : the European Union is not doing too badly .
Of course , unemployment is still too high , but 2.5 million new jobs have been created .
In 2000 , we saw satisfactory economic growth and Europe became the pole of growth for the global economy .
Inflation is lower in Europe than in the United States . Public deficits have been reduced .
Salary increases have been in line with productivity gains . The internal market and the imminent launch of the euro will protect us even further against external shocks .
Therefore , the US economic slow-down will affect us less than usual because trade exchanges between the fifteen Member States constitute nine tenths of our joint domestic product .
Of course , there are deficits in Europe especially in new technologies , this being less marked for information technologies than for biotechnologies .
In 2000 , European investment in the ICT sector was higher than in the United States , even though some countries are still lagging well behind .
The leading exporting force in the world , in 2000 the European Union achieved one fifth of its exports in the high tech sector .
Not everything is perfect in Europe , of course .
We do not invest enough in education , training and lifelong learning .
There is not enough investment in research .
Our public spending is at the same level as in the United States and the private sector must make more effort .
We can do better in many areas .
Stockholm must give the necessary impetus , particularly in employment and social affairs , as Mrs Lindh has just underlined .
By making the right choices in Stockholm , we will be able to set a virtual circle in motion which will also benefit our partners in the rest of the world .
Making the correct choices is not about choosing unbridled liberalisation and deregulation without regard for our social model and our environment .
Structural reforms still need to be carried out ; corporate and protectionist reflexes still need to be surmounted .
It will not , however , be by demolishing a universal public service that we will obtain a better service and lower prices for consumers .
Deregulation does not mean the lack of regulation .
Deregulation always results in new rules , which do not always benefit consumers , as electricity consumers in California have just discovered .
The liberalisation of the telecommunications sector above all has seen positive results because it took place at the same time as the technology revolution with mobile phones and the Internet .
The new economy has nevertheless experienced problems .
Any new technology is just a tool .
Simply prefixing an e to customary economic terms does not eliminate the long-established rules of supply and demand and of the need for profitability .
The world ' s stock markets are currently paying dearly for the lack of respect shown to elementary economic rules .
The end to irrational exuberance on the financial markets paradoxically offers us the chance to turn our attention to the real economy and to influence the factors which are fundamental for the well-being of our citizens .
Mr President , I will finish by saying , as President Prodi has just said , that the priority at Stockholm must be to invest in people , education , information and research into the infrastructures that we have for improving the quality of life .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , Commissioner , representatives of the Presidency-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , in making an assessment of the observable results during the first year of implementation of the Lisbon agreements , we reach very limited conclusions .
Lisbon established a process to run throughout this decade aimed at turning the European economy into the most competitive , best trained , and most socially balanced economy in the world . However , we note that , at least at the end of this first year , which takes us from Lisbon to Stockholm , there are very few tangible results .
We are not satisfied .
We believe that , although the objectives were clearly established , we have neither made quick enough progress on the process of liberalisation , which should improve competition between markets , nor have we implemented the structural reforms necessary to better equip the infrastructures . Nor have we implemented the instruments necessary to become more competitive and to bring us into line , particularly with the United States , in terms of levels of training in areas in which we have the greatest advantage , that is to say technological development and scientific research .
We believe that we have to proceed much more quickly in these areas and we wish to focus on three fundamental questions which I will try to summarise in my few remaining seconds .
Firstly , structural reforms and liberalisation .
Secondly , incorporation and interest on the part of the private sector in the fields of high quality education and training . Thirdly , a significant reform of the labour market which , on the one hand , will promote the incorporation of workers and the least-favoured groups into the labour market and , on the other , will provide greater and better mobility in employment within the European Union .
Mr President , Minister , President of the Commission , I would just like to make a few brief comments on the Lisbon European Council and on the resolution we have just signed on behalf of the group , without a great deal of enthusiasm it must be said .
Mr Prodi , I should like to address the following comments to you .
It is clear that in Lisbon the European Union set itself a very ambitious objective , that of achieving a competitive economy .
We support this project but we would like to draw your attention to the needs of our citizens .
A genuine project for the 21st century must take on board the real needs of our citizens .
I read in a newspaper yesterday that the mobile telephone market has reached saturation point with approximately 50 to 60 million surplus mobile telephones .
Yet , in the European Union , not every citizen has the possibility of finding decent housing .
Meeting the needs of our citizens is therefore crucial .
In this respect , we also support the idea of environmental indicators and we deplore the fact that we will have to wait until the Barcelona European Council in 2002 before we actually have an integrated strategy .
We wish your communication on sustainable development every success but we would like matters to proceed more quickly .
My second comment is about the instruments .
Liberalising sectors is good but it must go hand in hand with obligations to provide services of general interest .
From this perspective , and while respecting the principle of subsidiarity , we support the idea of the European Union having a framework directive on its obligations to provide public services of general interest , which is not the case at the moment .
I would like to make one final comment on the public finances you mentioned .
I would ask you to pay attention , in the development of public spending , to the fact that there are perfectly legitimate areas of public spending , such as investment and education , which are sine qua non conditions if we want to meet the future challenges of society .
The role of public authorities and public spending is therefore of paramount importance within the context of the Lisbon strategy .
Mr President , the Lisbon decisions were unique . On the one hand , they were characterised by a clearly right-wing financial policy of deregulation and privatisation and , on the other hand , by a left-wing policy of full employment , which thus , for the first time , became an official goal for the EU .
There was talk of a social agenda , social cohesion , combating poverty , lifelong learning for all , etc . , in other words natural elements of left-wing policy .
At that time I was very surprised .
I wondered how it was possible to unite - or balance , as Mrs Lindh said - right-wing and left-wing policy at the same time .
Now , the picture has become clearer , and I see that disagreement on financial policy remains .
Right-wing policy is clearly dominant ahead of the Stockholm Summit .
The focus is on stability policy , liberalisation and deregulation of the internal market .
The social profile is very weak .
The Stockholm Summit was to have employment as its main issue , but there are no proposals for meaningful action to combat the major unemployment which currently affects 14 - 15 million people .
One aim is to encourage women to enter the workplace .
This is good .
Another aim is to increase employment of the older population , raise the retirement age , etc .
However , the proposals are primarily aimed at increasing the level of employment , not at lowering unemployment .
These are two different things .
The 15 million people who are unemployed in Europe today but already count as part of the labour force will not benefit to any great degree from new groups joining that labour force .
My political group considers that this is very serious .
The Swedish Government should naturally also be concerned but , unlike France and Portugal , it has chosen not to create its own profile but instead to implement what the Commission and the large Member States want as loyally as possible .
When , in the past , the Swedish Government was heading the campaign for Sweden to join the EU , it said the goal was not only to retain the Swedish welfare state but also , together with other left-wing forces , to pursue a social welfare policy throughout Europe .
Now , we are heading in the opposite direction .
Right-wing policy is promoted in the EU , and the Swedish welfare policy is at risk .
This is taking place despite the fact that the economy is sound , despite a majority of left-wing governments in the Council and despite a left-wing majority in the Swedish Parliament .
Not even given optimum conditions have we in the last year approached a social Europe .
What will happen if the economic situation deteriorates and the Council gains more right-wing governments ?
Time has run out for the Swedish Presidency .
To conclude , I wonder whether there really is nothing which the Swedish Government could prioritise ahead of the coming employment summit for those who are unemployed here and now .
Mr President , the forthcoming Stockholm Summit will address many of the European Union 's key social and employment problems .
This is very timely , when new information technologies are ensuring that small , medium and large enterprises within the Union will now have to change their administrative structures .
I support the agenda set by the EU leaders at their summit in Lisbon last year .
The Union must continue to implement uniform and rights-led programmes of education relating to new information technologies , so that all citizens of the Union can be properly integrated into the workplace .
This presents us with two challenges .
First , those who are unskilled and lack the necessary training or educational qualifications must be given new opportunities .
I am referring in particular to the young and long-term unemployed still concentrated in certain urban and rural areas of the European Union .
The European Union Social Fund is a key financial mechanism which has been used very effectively , particularly in Objective 1 regions , to provide new training opportunities for the unskilled .
Secondly , it is equally important that the existing workforce is retrained in the skills demanded by new and changing information technologies .
Benefits can accrue for business from the use of the Internet and the related e-commerce opportunities .
Certainly the Commission , Parliament and Member States ' governments have all worked closely together to ensure that the Stockholm Summit will be a success .
I recall that the Nice Council before Christmas set out a number of guidelines for new social policy measures .
EU leaders want to promote more and better jobs and worker mobility , anticipate and manage change in the working environment , combat poverty , exclusion and discrimination , modernise social protection systems and promote equality .
They also want to focus on the external implications of employment and social policies , particularly in relation to the enlargement process .
Parliament has been at the forefront of promoting these measures .
The Union has an unemployment rate of 8 % and the target of full employment is attainable .
Those who say that it is not must not be listened to .
Mr President , in order to crank up the political-social debate on biotechnology , the United Kingdom and the Netherlands have asked for this topic to be added to the agenda of the Stockholm Summit .
These Member States have indicated that the European Commission must think of a strategy which will lead to the European Union rubbing shoulders with the greatest in the global bio-industry and biotechnological research .
However promising the results of biotechnology may be , an ethical boundary remains necessary .
In January 1998 , we held a debate on the Council of Europe ' s Protocol , which included a ban on cloning humans .
I then expressed the fear that countries such as the United Kingdom and the Netherlands , which then refused to sign the protocol , probably did not want the ban to be so stringent .
In December 2000 , the House of Lords in the United Kingdom gave the green light to the therapeutic cloning of human embryos in laboratories .
Although reproductive cloning is not permitted , research carries on .
There is the danger that permitting therapeutic cloning will leave the door open to the discussion on reproductive cloning .
The argument will then be that , at the end of the day , the same technique is already being applied , only for a different purpose .
There is a doctor in Italy who already wants to clone people reproductively , and 60 volunteers have already come forward for this experiment .
I see each new human life as a gift of God .
Every form of human life must be treated with due respect . That is also the only way to protect human dignity .
The use of human embryos as consumer items , in the so-called name of research , is hence something that goes against the grain as far as I ' m concerned .
In the discussion on human genetics , I call on the Council to maintain the ban on therapeutic cloning , as already expressed by the European Parliament in September 2000 .
Mr President , it is almost impossible to discuss this issue in this arena .
I wonder whether Mr Suominen ' s statement regarding ' not words but deeds ' also applies to you ?
What sanctions do you impose on people sabotaging this system ?
Yes , ladies and gentlemen , I asked you to be patient for ten minutes and that was half an hour ago .
Indeed , the problem does not seem to have been resolved .
We have been talking here this morning about high technology and it seems we still have some way to go .
I have asked the appropriate departments to take quick action but I , like you , am impatient for this noise to stop .
Mr President , the Lisbon Process is to create the most dynamic economy in the world .
Open coordination has been chosen as the method , and I would like to share my experiences .
Sweden has taken part in a number of summits and processes .
Ever since the Essen Summit of 1994 , there has been talk of the importance of lowering taxes on work and increasing flexibility .
In practice , Sweden has done the opposite .
Just as with its self-imposed exclusion on the question of the euro , it ignores what has been jointly decided .
Instead , the tax burden is increased and entrepreneurs continue to be hampered .
In Stockholm , we must make comparisons and learn from each other .
So how will that work ?
It is true that there is talk of increased employment but the truth in Sweden is that , despite three years of economic growth , more people remain outside the workforce than was the case in the early 1990s when we experienced the worst recession since the Second World War .
At the same time , real unemployment is hidden by labour market policy and temporary mass training initiatives which do not lead to quality jobs .
Furthermore , the statistics include a frightening rate of sick leave .
If we add latent job-seekers and the under-employed , unemployment in Sweden covers 17 % of the workforce - compared with the official statistic of 5 % .
The Lisbon Document talked a great deal about knowledge .
Despite all the talk of lifelong learning , in terms of knowledge , Sweden risks meltdown as we are failing right from the start .
34 % of young people in upper secondary schools lack satisfactory qualifications in mathematics , Swedish and English .
At the same time , raising quality within education through independent schools and increased competition is being thwarted - exactly contrary to the intentions in Lisbon .
Swedish universities are in crisis .
It is true that Sweden has many people with degrees , but it lacks people with real cutting-edge expertise .
Therefore , the socialists are lowering taxes for rich specialists that have been flown in and raising taxes for permanently resident , poorly-educated Swedes .
Talking and planning is one thing - especially if you can do it in a meeting room somewhere else in Europe - but implementing and changing requires greater conviction .
Power to act is needed now , not least for national structural reforms and increased liberalisation at EU level .
Instead of devoting myself to meaningless compromises and fine words , I intend to continue to criticise the European model , which has so far not been able to create many new jobs but instead sentences far too many people to long-term unemployment , social exclusion , poverty and marginalisation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Europe has a very good chance of achieving the major objective set in Lisbon , i.e. of becoming the most competitive area with full employment .
The economic indicators are good , but this objective will not achieve itself and it will not implement itself .
We must have the courage to set decisive priorities .
Lisbon gave us clear guidelines within which to find the courage to set decisive priorities and move forward using a method of open coordination between the Member States .
These guidelines are clear and unequivocal .
They mean investing in people and in their skills and we have good cause to do so .
On the one hand , we talk of the new opportunities offered by information and communications technologies and of the millions of jobs which they can create .
But on the other hand , fewer than 22 % of our employees are given specific training .
We talk of the opportunities of a new European labour market and mobility for the young generation , but we stop short of creating the right conditions for it in our schools and on our vocational training programmes .
We talk of already having bottlenecks on the specialist job markets , but we seem unable to implement a specific integration policy to help the unemployed - and there are well over 14 million in the European Union - make their own contribution to the working population .
I ask you , Mr President of the Commission , and I ask you , Madam President-in-Office : there has been talk here of the stability pact , which was supposedly a success .
Why are we unable to apply the same rigour , the same clear method of open coordination so as to ensure that every young person on the European labour market has a suitable chance to get started in a new European future ?
That is the brief for Stockholm , that is the brief for the following summit , which is precisely why Stockholm must not degenerate into a one-sided liberalisation summit .
I know that the balance spoken of here is in jeopardy , which is why I call on you , Madam President-in-Office , to summon up the strength and courage in the Swedish Presidency to put the integrated policy of economic reform , social cohesion and job promotion which we welcomed into practice .
This is precisely why we need clear , uncompromising interim objectives , both for the employment process and for the new public budget guidelines .
Mr President , we welcome the Lisbon Summit 's emphasis on dealing with social exclusion .
That emphasis recognises what is already clear .
Despite the gradual increase in economic growth within the Union over the years , there are still millions of people who have not benefited .
Indeed , in some Member States , such as my own , which have tended to follow the American model , the gap between rich and poor has been widening .
We are also seeing significant numbers of working poor , those who have jobs but cannot afford to live on their wages .
There is a still a huge gap between the incomes of men and women , which continues into old age and must be an important issue in the discussion on pensions .
Growth alone is not the solution to social deprivation and it never has been .
Distribution and equality of opportunity are also important , hence the need to include social criteria alongside the economic goals and the use of appropriate indicators to look at the combined effect .
As we have heard , however , Stockholm will not just deal with the Lisbon follow-up .
It will be a first step towards explaining how the European Union is going to deliver on sustainable development .
It is obvious to us that unless we factor the environment into our economic thinking there will no chance of having a sustainable economy .
We have to find an economic path that does not strip the world of its natural resources and produce toxic or greenhouse emissions .
That means we have to look at the quality of the economic growth we seek and not just the amount .
If 3 % growth depends on depleting fish stocks , increasing car travel or cleaning up after crime , it is not the sort of growth that improves the quality of life or quality of the environment for anyone .
It is not sustainable and that is why we have urged the use of appropriate environmental indicators alongside the social and economic ones .
We can then adopt a coherent approach to sustainable development and see if we really are achieving the results we want .
Mr President , the headlong and often uncontrolled development of society and the economy calls for an extra effort at the Stockholm Council .
The crisis in food production , incorporating the collapse of stock-rearing and the distribution , processing and sale of meat is a priority issue , as are consumer anxiety and apprehension about the consequences of eating food contaminated by disease , deterioration or adulteration . There is the ever-increasing scandal of food fraud , and mass distribution has an enormous responsibility for guaranteeing the distribution of food that is safe for consumers to eat and for preventing the systematic destruction of the whole of small and medium-sized distribution - which is an essential factor for local speciality products and preserving jobs .
We are wondering , too , whether Stockholm will mark the birth of the Food Safety Agency , announced long ago and always postponed , and we put forward the city of Parma as the most appropriate candidate for its location .
We are also wondering about safety with regard to the use of wholly or partly genetically modified foods , and about the weight of that problem with regard to baby foods , pharmaceutical products or products on general sale such as vitamins or integrators containing animal gelatines .
Other questions relate to scientific research into BSE , the disposal of tens of thousands of animal carcasses , slaughtered and burned , or slaughtering methods that often fail to show even minimal respect for the animals themselves and the environment ; and again , natural catastrophes , often not so natural , when bridges collapse , houses crumble and rivers burst their banks , destroying men and property because the people who built them were negligent and disregarded the law and the safety of the territory .
The Stockholm Summit should address all those issues along with other factors , such as the on-going unregulated use of the Internet , at least as far as the European Union is concerned . Regulation is needed to guarantee that the network is about freedom and not about abuse and violence , as in sites promoting paedophilia , drug trafficking and so on .
The record companies and the economy have closed Napster down . When will the European governments close down the paedophile sites ?
And last but not least , there is the pollution of the Mediterranean and other seas .
And we wonder if the Stockholm Council will at least take an interest in the slump in the new market and the consequences for consumers .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , my point concerns the liberalisation of postal services , which you too referred to , Madam President-in-Office .
The postal services are one example of just how inefficient Council meetings are .
It was decided in Lisbon to speed up the liberalisation of postal services .
We adopted our position in the European Parliament before the end of the year , in the hope that the Council would adopt its common position by the end of the year .
What happened ?
Not a thing !
The Council did not adopt a common position .
We should in fact admit to ourselves that the Council does not want to adopt a common position .
Germany has decided to extend the post office monopoly because everything has ground to a halt in Europe .
Madam President-in-Office , we call on you to ensure at the Stockholm Summit that the Heads of State and Government instruct their ministers to proceed with the liberalisation of postal services without delay .
Only this will prove that Council meetings make any sense or any headway .
And then you should pass a second resolution , Madam President-in-Office , stating that the Heads of State and Government must evaluate structural policy , post haste .
We must be in a position to reform structural policy in 2003 at the latest , for two reasons .
Firstly , because structural policy is extremely important to labour market policy in numerous countries and , secondly , because we have to tell candidate countries what to expect in the new period if they accede after 2005 / 2006 .
In this respect , Madam President-in-Office , please make sure that the summit passes specific resolutions on the liberalisation of postal services and the evaluation of the structural funds so that we can make headway for the period after 2006 .
Thank you , ladies and gentlemen , for your attention .
Thank you , Mr Jarzembowski .
The debate on this issue is suspended and will be resumed at 3 p.m.

We shall now proceed to the vote .
Mr President , I would like to present the House with a point of order .
Yesterday afternoon , during Questions to the Commission , there was a Question No 91 from the Spanish People ' s Party MEP , Mrs García-Orcoyen .
The last question answered during those Questions to the Commission was Question No 61 .
Today , certain sections of the Spanish press are publishing the ' question ' and the supposed reply from Commissioner Wallström .
This morning , after becoming aware of this information , the Socialist Group made a written request to the Parliamentary services to issue that reply .
At 11.28 this morning we received the following written reply from the services of this House :
' I must inform you that the reply to the said question from Mrs García-Orcoyen , which was communicated to us when Question Time had ended , is awaiting translation .
Once translated and sent officially to the author you will be sent a copy by e-mail .
Signed : João Correa ' .
How is it possible , Mr President , that we MEPs do not have the reply - and nor did the author of the question - when it is already in the hands of the press , not only the supposed reply , but also an explanatory communication of the response from the Spanish People ' s Party , explaining it ?
Mr President , this is the second time in one month that something like this has happened and supposed replies are being leaked to the Spanish media before the MEPs themselves - and , I repeat , even the authors of the questions - have heard the reply .
How can this happen ?
Is it pure chance that on these two occasions the supposed reply supports the positions of the Spanish Government ?
Does the Spanish Government have a mole somewhere in the Commission or in Parliament ?
Mr President , as an MEP , I would ask you for protection for Parliament and respect for MEPs .
As you clearly indicate in your comments , the services of this House were not in touch with the media in any way .
If there has been a leak it has come from the Commission and we will certainly take this matter up with them .
It is unacceptable that the media should receive an answer before the Member who tabled the question receives such an answer .
Mr President , I simply wanted to point out that the Spanish media are very professional and that it therefore does not surprise me that they have this ability to access sources of information .
I always like hearing about people who are good at their job .
VOTE
Mr President , on this important report , I would like to say that the Commission is able to accept Amendments Nos , 3 , 4 , 7 , part of 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 , the second part of 13 , 14 , 16 , part of 17 , part of 18 , part of 19 , 21 , 28 and part of 29 .
We are able to accept Amendments Nos 39 and 40 .
In addition , Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 5 and 23 are acceptable in principle .
However , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission is unable to accept Amendments Nos 6 , the first part of 13 , 15 , 20 , 22 , 24 , 25 , 26 , 27 , 30 , 31 , 32 , 33 , 35 , 36 , 37 , 38 , 42 , 43 , 44 , 45 , 46 , 47 , 48 , 49 , 50 and 51 .
( The President declared the common position approved as amended )
Recommendation for second reading ( A5-0067 / 2001 ) by Mrs Myller , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council directive on national emission ceilings for certain atmospheric pollutants ( 10674 / 1 / 2000 - C5-0563 / 2000 - 1999 / 0067 ( COD ) )
Before the vote :
Mr President , on this report the Commission is able to accept Amendments Nos 2 , 11 and 12 .
We are in principle able to accept part of Amendments Nos 3 , 7 , 8 and 9 .
However , we are unable to accept Amendments Nos 1 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 10 and 13 .
After the vote on Amendment No 13 :
Mr President , I think a mistake was made in the vote a moment ago .
The second part of Amendment No 10 did not receive a majority , which means that there was no need to vote on the second part of Amendment No 13 .
As a result of this , the second part of the Council ' s text remains unchanged .
Mr President , as my colleague , Mr Liikanen , said yesterday , the Commission is able to accept Amendments Nos 1 and 2 .
I am glad to see the Scots getting one hundred percent .
( The President declared the common position adopted as amended )
Report ( A5-0074 / 2001 ) by Mrs Korhola , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on public access to environmental information ( COM ( 2000 ) 402 - C5-0352 / 2000 - 2000 / 0169 ( COD ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0070 / 2000 ) by Mrs Angelilli , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the initiative of the French Republic and the Kingdom of Sweden with a view to the adoption of a Council Decision setting up a European crime prevention network ( 13464 / 2000 - C5-0717 / 2000 - 2000 / 0824 ( CNS ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0073 / 2001 ) by Mr Marinho , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , on the initiative of the Federal Republic of Germany with a view to the adoption of a Council Regulation on cooperation between the courts of the Member States in the taking of evidence in civil and commercial matters ( 11808 / 2000 - C5-0519 / 2000 - 2000 / 0823 ( CNS ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Motion for a resolution ( B5-0174 / 2001 ) by Mr Gargani , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , on the information and communication strategy of the EU
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0078 / 2001 ) by Mr Bösch , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the Commission 's 1999 Annual Report ' Protecting the Communities ' financial interests - the fight against fraud ' ( COM ( 2000 ) 718 - C5-0066 / 2001 - 2001 / 2036 ( COS ) )
On Amendment No 16
Mr President , I simply wish to point out that the text whose amendment we are discussing received a practically unanimous consensus in committee and that , at this moment , this consensus is being broken by the Socialist Group .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0054 / 2001 ) by Mr Wijkman , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy. on the Commission communication to the Council , the European Parliament , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions - Action Plan to Improve Energy Efficiency in the European Community ( COM ( 2000 ) 247 - C5-0567 / 2000 - 2000 / 2265 ( COS ) )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
President .
That concludes the vote .
EXPLANATIONS OF VOTEJackson report ( A5-0041 / 2001 )
Mr President , I voted against the Jackson report on the environmental inspections conciliation .
I voted against it just now as I voted against it during the conciliation , in which I was pleased to participate as a substitute member .
Once again , I ask why on earth we cannot have a directive controlling environmental inspections .
All that means is that our Member States do not want to be controlled in implementing Community environmental standards .
Remember , the war in Iraq began because President Saddam Hussein did not want controls on his own territory .
I would not want Europe to suffer the same fate .
Recommendation for second reading Oomen-Ruijten ( A5-0068 / 2001 )
Mr President , why do you think I voted for the report allowing pensioners and old folk to breath clean air ?
Well , as you know , today is 14 March 2001 , and I heard someone calling me : ' Mr Fatuzzo , Mr Fatuzzo ! '
' Who ' s that ? '
I replied .
' It ' s me , don ' t you recognise me ? '
' Me who ? '
' Me , Carlo Fatuzzo !
I ' m Mr Fatuzzo the man . '
' Ah , and you only remember me once a year ? '
' Yes , I know , every time your birthday comes round I wish you a happy birthday , because today is my birthday ! '
' Okay , thank you , just let me get on with my work , I ' m presenting my explanation of vote . '
' Mr Fatuzzo , your should remember that this is your 57th birthday and that means you are getting close to collecting your pension .
I just wanted to say that I am very pleased that Mr Fatuzzo the MEP is looking after pensioners , because that means he is looking after me as well , Mr Fatuzzo the man , who is getting another year older every year and who is getting close to collecting his pension too . '
Mr President , I think it is quite absurd that the European Parliament deals with certain issues in such a technical way .
We have seen amendments that would be difficult even for an expert to understand , so imagine what they are like for people who are not experts in the field .
Also , with all the will in the world and no matter how hard the amendments are studied , no one without a certain kind of knowledge can possibly understand them properly .
I repeat , it is an absurd , illogical thing which should make those in power - and I certainly do not mean the Members of this Parliament - think about changing things so that technical matters are left to the technical experts and political matters are dealt with by the politicians , because we have codecision on those things , and then other things , more comprehensible and more political , are decided by someone else instead .
The amendments that have been tabled are largely based on correct assumptions in the context of effectively reducing emissions of pollutants and of protecting the environment and public health , which do not justify the derogations put forward by the proposal for a Council common position , because :
desulphurisation processes are not as onerous these days as they once were and tend to bring about considerable reductions . Furthermore , significant progress has been made in this area ;
there is a clear commitment to methods for improving the energy efficiency of combustion plant , using catalytic systems , which contribute not only to reducing carbon compounds but also to reducing other pollutants .
This is why I am voting in favour of this report .
It is down to the European Union to regulate emissions from combustion plants .
The wind does not recognise borders , and pollutants emitted by large combustion plants pass over all the Member States as well as the candidate countries .
The main problem is to be able to fix ambitious limit values which will protect the health of all our citizens while acknowledging the possibilities of the different plants and power stations .
Setting ceilings which are too high would reduce to nothing the efforts envisaged to improve the situation .
Although I voted in favour of amendments which would considerably improve the Council common position , I nevertheless declared my opposition to all the measures which , it was judged , could not be implemented at present .
Although I am in favour of reducing polluting emissions , we must be pragmatic and we must not impose criteria that industry cannot meet at least for the time being .
The credibility of the European Parliament depends on the realistic objectives that Members of Parliament are invited to vote on .
Recommendation for second reading Myller ( A5-0067 / 2001 )
Mr President , as a representative of pensioners and the Pensioners ' Party , I voted for this report , which establishes the national emission ceilings for certain atmospheric pollutants : sulphur dioxide , nitrogen oxides , volatile organic compounds and lastly , Mr President , ammonia , NH3 .
I remembered - and this made me all the more inclined to vote in favour - that , when the Fatuzzo home is being cleaned , like every other home , with various people helping , like wives and daughters , a smell of ammonia always wafts its way to my nostrils .
Ammonia is surely used for cleaning in every household !
So why on earth do we not use this document to ban the use of such a harmful pollutant as ammonia for cleaning our houses ?
This report offers very limited options for effectively reducing emissions of pollutants and for protecting the environment and public health , since the limits that are proposed , which are extremely modest , are a clear compromise in favour of economic interests . The proposals retreat from the values recommended by the World Health Organisation and , consequently , from the need to protect the environment and public health , which the report is supposed to be upholding .
The amendments that have been tabled are not likely to add a great deal to the proposal for a Council common position , since the only benefit they offer is to establish time limits within which the objectives must be achieved .
Nevertheless , both in terms of emission values and of exceptions , this does not represent any major difference to the document that was tabled previously .
The Council ' s compromise proposal is likely to lead to increased emissions of all four air pollutants in the directive .
Throughout the EU , these emissions ceilings are 6 % higher for sulphur dioxide , 10 % higher for nitrogen oxides , 17 % higher for volatile organic compounds and 10 % higher for ammonia .
So far , no analysis has been carried out of the environmental consequences of the Council ' s proposal , nor have the costs and economic benefit been calculated .
However , it is clear that the Council ' s compromise ceiling will not reduce emissions sufficiently for us to be able to achieve the interim environmental objectives by 2010 at the latest .
The Gothenburg Protocol to the Convention on Long-range Transboundary Air Pollution was signed in December 1999 , i.e. six months after the Commission submitted its proposal for national emissions ceilings .
All Member States have signed the protocol .
In some cases , the emissions ceilings in the protocol are lower than those proposed by the Commission .
Consequently , the Council ' s compromise ceiling is , in a few cases , also lower than the Commission ' s proposal and can be seen as anything but ambitious .
The critical loads and levels in relation to exposure to acidifying air pollutants will still be exceeded over large areas throughout the EU , and a large share of the EU population will still be exposed to air pollutants exceeding the air quality guidelines of the World Health Organisation .
Consequently , there is no justification for lowering the level of ambition even further by watering down the text in the way proposed by the Council .
For this reason , we supported the rapporteur ' s line in the vote and voted for Amendment No 10 .
Recommendation for Second Reading Miller ( A5-0055 / 2001 )
Mr President , I voted for Mr Miller ' s report on heating systems for motor vehicles , partly because many lorry drivers and articulated lorry drivers are older people working as long as they possibly can .
Moreover , we have heard the Commission say that , in 2050 , we might have to work until we are 99 in order for there to be enough money to pay people ' s pensions .
Well , I would like that work to be done with breaks , so that older drivers of articulated lorries can have a rest , if only to warm themselves up .
And then another question popped into my head : why not also think about proper heating for people ' s houses in the North of the European Union , so that the old people there do not have to pay more for their heating than those in the South ?
Korhola report ( A5-0074 / 2001 )
Mr President , the charming and beautiful Mrs Korhola , the rapporteur of this document , has drafted a fine report on environmental information , or rather on public access to environmental information , which I voted for because it is right to provide information .
However , I am prompted to wonder when the European Parliament will , at last , approve a directive on public access to social security information , including pensions information .
I believe it is very important for Europeans to have full information on the environment , but I believe it is equally important , if not more so , especially for elderly people , to be informed about pension rights in our countries .
There is still a lot to be done in this sector and I hope that Mrs Korhola will soon produce a report on pensions information in the Member States of the European Union .
In the ten years since Rio , targets have yet to be reached .
The environment is under enormous pressure .
Poverty is increasing throughout the globe .
It is vital that next year 's world summit is successful in strengthening measures which ensure that development is undertaken in a sustained manner that protects existing communities .
The Fifth Environmental Action Programme safeguards people from the adverse effects of air pollution .
The Action Programme 's long-term goal will not be attained easily ; therefore the Commission has rightly decided on a step-by-step approach setting out interim environmental targets for the year 2010 .
I am glad that the report has been amended to include nuclear fuel and energy and financial as well as economic analyses .
It is essential that we include the tracking of nuclear fuel information , and in particular subsidies for nuclear fuel and energy .
Local authorities must also freely give information when requested .
I have recently had representations from constituents in Kilkenny , Ireland , because of the difficulty they have had in getting information with regard to developments in Archer 's field .
I have requested information myself from the local authority and the regional Commissioner but so far without success .
If European money has been used inappropriately to divert a road , and a development is being built on the route of the old road , this would be an absolutely scandalous occurrence and we need an explanation for it .
The new directive incorporates the relevant provisions of the Aarhus Convention , vastly improves on Directive 90 / 313 by limiting the derogations , cuts the deadline for replying to a request to a month and meets the demand for the information requested to be provided in the required format .
It does , of course , take the use of modern information technologies into account but it also needs to take account of the fact that the number of requests will rise .
There are , of course , problems as a result of a lack of organisation , inappropriate staffing of departments , especially at local level , and huge differences in the level of sophistication of information and communication systems .
However , I should like to take this opportunity of pointing out that we MEPs receive numerous complaints about shortcomings and unfinished business in connection with ecological legislation and its transposition into national law .
Take , for example , Directive 92 / 43 ( otherwise known as NATURA ) , which states that the Member States should already have official catalogues of areas in need of protection , as a result of which the Commission is being inundated with a flood of questions concerning interventions in these areas .
With all this unfinished business , it will be hard to apply the new legislation on " environmental information " .
Nonetheless , I shall be voting in favour of the report because it helps in a small way to develop society ' s environmental conscience , which we shall achieve by disseminating the provisions of the directive and the rights which derive from it .
The time when political movements , pressure groups and governments denied the existence of environmental problems is over .
Despite this , new cases of environmental pollution keep appearing and old cases are not being addressed adequately .
Many of the existing environmental problems are the result of secrecy .
Companies keep their production processes secret , and with it , the production of waste substances which end up in the atmosphere , water or soil .
Disclosure could cost them money .
Under pressure from businesses , governments also act mysteriously about their permits and checks .
Files are drafted , but nobody knows what is in them , except for the officials involved .
Under those circumstances , the true risks often remain unknown to those living in the vicinity , workers , environmental activities and those controlling disasters .
Only when something major goes wrong does immense indignation arise and everyone wants to know that went wrong .
Environmental problems can only really be solved when there is disclosure at the highest level .
The Korhola proposal is a step in the right direction and superior to what the Commission proposes , even if it still regrettably provides for exemptions and secrecy at some level .
I wholeheartedly support measures to allow public access to environmental information .
Our citizens across Europe must see that the European Union is transparent , democratic and open .
The directive aims to adapt existing legislation to reflect developments in IT such as the Internet .
Rapid and widespread access to the Net is crucial for giving people access to information on air and water quality .
At a time when consumers are unsure about what exactly they are eating , it is important that they have as much knowledge as possible about the air they are breathing and the water they are drinking .
The internet revolution has transformed the world .
PCs can be found in many households , schools , colleges and offices .
It is high time that as much information as possible is available to our citizens , and environmental information should be at the top of the list .
Many MEPs including myself have set up websites to let constituents know what we are doing and how measures in the European Union affect them .
The dot com world is too important to ignore .
Information and communications technologies are developing at a rapid pace and we must keep up with these changes and ensure information continues to be disseminated efficiently .
Access to information is the very least our citizens deserve and we in the European Parliament must act so that this access is promoted and not denied .
Angelilli report ( A5-0070 / 2001 )
Mr President , last Sunday , I held a meeting for pensioner members of the Pensioners Party in the Loreto district of the city of Bergamo , my home and constituency .
When they heard that I was going to be debating this report on the European crime prevention network in the European Parliament , they all cried out in unison : ' Mr Fatuzzo , you must ask for the introduction of the European policeman , the local European bobby .
We believe crime must be combated here , in our neighbourhoods , with the flesh and blood presence of the policeman , an authority which ensures respect for the law in the city ' s districts . '
That is why I was happy to vote for the report , in the hope that the European policeman will soon be introduced .
Mr President , I have abstained on this report - as I did on the previous one for which I presented an explanation of vote - because Parliament is only called upon to express an opinion on this highly important issue and has no power of decision .
On such a sensitive issue , one the citizens are particularly concerned about , we are simply consultants - well paid , of course , but without any decision-making power .
I feel the time has come to change that . I think Parliament should have full powers of decision on all issues of interest to European citizens , on a par with the Council , at the same level of dignity and competence .
Let me end by wishing Mr Fatuzzo a happy birthday .
No one disputes the fact that we need to take measures to prevent what is called urban crime , child abuse and drug-related crime .
Nor does anyone dispute the causes of this type of crime .
Every modern criminologist agrees that the causes are primarily social : poverty , unemployment , social inequality , the promotion of rampant competition and the quest for maximum profit , which today ' s world order hopes to impose as the ultimate ideal , all foster crime .
Consequently , as long as we have a socio-economic system based on the exploitation of man by man , crime will thrive .
One would have expected to find proposals for measures - mainly social and economic measures - to relieve this situation or , at the very least , to stem the rising crime rate through prevention .
Instead , the French and Swedish initiatives on which the report is based propose creating a network so that Member States can exchange information on measures taken in this area .
Even worse , the report makes a scientifically unacceptable correlation between small-scale crime and organised crime .
Preventing common crime means , first and foremost , taking measures to reduce the social causes of crime or , at the very least , measures which make crime more difficult to commit .
In organised crime , however , the emphasis is on suppression .
This correlation has not come about by chance and proves once again that the real need to combat common crime is being used as a pretext to curtail people ' s rights and freedoms and create an even more authoritarian institutional framework .
And let us not forget that the recent resolutions of the European Parliament on organised crime contain measures which completely restrict any civil or liberal rights in the criminal justice sector .
A Greek bill is currently being debated along precisely these lines ; in it the government has strengthened mechanisms to suppress popular movements on the pretext of " stamping out terrorism and crime " .
For these reasons , the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece will be voting against the report .
In the Commission communication to the Council and Parliament dated 29 November 2000 , on the prevention of crime in the European Union , problems such as crime , delinquency , violence and lack of public spirit are all grouped together .
This is an extremely dangerous approach .
This is not surprising given that the proposal to create a European prevention network is structured not only around public and judicial authorities but also the private sector , with links to Europol , OLAF and the European Drugs Observatory .
The creation of this information exchange network , which purports to be a pilot project and whose priorities are juvenile delinquency , urban crime and drug-related crime , apart from running the risk of the establishment of European files , cannot but contribute to the criminalisation of young people who are already victims of the security policies adopted in the guise of the fight against the feeling of insecurity .
As far as prevention is concerned , no concrete proposal has been formulated other than the award of a European Crime Prevention Prize !
At a time when European policies on employment more often than not condemn young people to unemployment or to insecure employment , and when entire neighbourhoods of towns are places of economic and social exclusion , a genuine policy of prevention must be introduced with social workers and public services .
For all these reasons , I voted against the report .
I fully support the establishment of a European crime prevention network by the last French Presidency and the current Swedish Presidency , which demonstrates the EU 's commitment to combating crime and protecting our citizens .
We must be tough on crime and tough on the causes of crime .
It is not enough for any Member State to work alone in combating crime .
We need to work together with our European neighbours to tackle this issue .
We must develop contact points and crime prevention strategies , and support crime prevention activities at local and national level across the European Union .
It is important that we pay special attention to juvenile , urban and drug-related crime .
These crime-busting measures must be implemented from Blackburn to Barcelona .
Only by working together across Europe can we combat the social evils of crime .
Therefore , our children will be protected whether they are in north-west England or the South of France .
The British Labour Government puts crime at the top of its agenda , and is reducing violent crime and disorder .
The Tories , on the other hand , offer nothing but rising crime and falling investment .
Crime is a major concern for our citizens ; we must ensure it stays our number one priority in Europe .
Thank you for your birthday wishes , Mr President , and my thanks , as well , to Francesco Enrico Speroni .
As regards the report on cooperation between the courts of the Member States in the taking of evidence , I want to say that , yesterday , I was waiting for the lift on the tenth floor of the Tower , when a beautiful young European girl came up to me - confidentiality prevents me from telling you her name , I can only say that it starts with the letter M - and she said : ' Bravo Mr Fatuzzo !
I listen to your explanations of vote with great interest because , although I am young , I too am interested in older people and pensioners .
I have had a problem with the courts , a civil case which has dragged on and on .
So if you vote for the report on cooperation between courts , I will always enjoy listening to you even more . '
Bösch report ( A5-0078 / 2001 )

Mr President , the Bösch report has received the support of Mr Fatuzzo , the representative of the Pensioners ' Party , who is concerned about protecting the Communities ' financial interests and combating fraud .
But I would be glad to see the interests of employees of the European Community protected too , because , from what I heard yesterday , they have very little pensions protection , especially if they have been working in countries outside the European Community .
In my opinion , European civil servants should have the same rights as those who live in any State of the Union .
I therefore hope to be able to vote soon for the protection of the Community ' s social security interests .
Clearing up once and for all the very serious cases of fraud highlighted in 1999 is both a test of the credibility of the European Commission and a test of the efficiency of OLAF .
The Commission will have to convince us and the people of Europe of its determination to see its statements followed up by action in the fight against corruption and fraud .
Our group supports the request of the Committee on Budgetary Control regarding its call for greater operational independence for OLAF and its director , towards the European Commission , in exercising its powers of investigation .
By the same token , to be able to carry out its controlling function , the European Parliament must have access to OLAF reports without any special difficulty and whenever it wants .
We vehemently reject , however , the federalist demand for the speedy appointment of a European prosecutor , as called for in the report by Mr Bösch , even though the most seasoned supporters of a federal system acknowledge , amongst themselves and on the quiet , that it would be wiser to wait for another ten years at least .
As regards Community fraud and judicial matters , it would be preferable and far more judicious to have recourse to Eurojust . This is a structure of intergovernmental cooperation within the Council and is made up of three officers from each of the fifteen Member States of the European Union : one judge , one representative from the Public Prosecutor ' s Office ( prosecutor ) and one police superintendent .
This option would be much more respectful of national wishes .


If we also take into account the very serious cases of fraud which were brought to light in 1999 and which still have to be cleared up , we cannot fail to be astonished by the double standards of a unilateral approach which only highlights certain matters ( such as Fléchard I , which is being used in an attempt to destabilise certain top-ranking civil servants in France and to put the spotlight on Ireland and France by artificially dragging out the issue , or Fléchard II , in which German , Italian and Belgian companies are now involved ) .
( Intervention shortened pursuant to Rule 137 of the Rules of Procedure )
I supported the overall impact of the Bösch report .
It is incumbent on all of us to ensure that we can strengthen the fight against fraud and protect the interests of all taxpayers in Europe .
My only difference with the rapporteur is in relation to paragraphs 7 and 10 , where there is a call for the establishment of a European Public Prosecutor 's Office .
I have had a long-held opposition to the establishment of this office , which has been raised , not only in this context , but also on the question of cross-border criminal proceedings .
I believe that there is no legal basis for this office and due to the different legal systems in the Member States there is no guarantee of the presumption of innocence and also that the probable success of prosecutions would be no quicker or more successful than the present system .
However , despite these concerns , I have voted in favour of the report and I congratulate the rapporteur .
The Santer Commission was forced to resign following suspicions of fraud which I will not go into again .

During the hearings of the present Commissioners , all of them , led by Mr Prodi , promised to reform their departments and to establish a genuine European Anti-Fraud Office which would be independent and would have the necessary resources to carry out its tasks to the best of its ability .
OLAF is now a reality but we must keep going along this excellent path .
We still have to define certain operating procedures and to guarantee the full independence of the Office .
The report presented by Mr Bösch clearly highlights the problems which remain and ways of solving them .
So we insist that the OLAF reports are sent to the competent committee of the European Parliament .
More importantly , however , the report launches an urgent appeal for the establishment of a genuine European Public Prosecutor ' s Office charged with scrutinising every case of fraud perpetrated against the financial interests of the European Communities .
This is an essential element in the necessary fight against fraud which , together with the Commission , we must see through to a successful conclusion in the shortest possible time .
The credibility and the image of the European Union are at stake .
Finally , in his explanatory statement , Mr Bösch floated the idea of inviting the future Belgian Presidency to do everything in its power to ensure that serious progress is made in the establishment of a European Public Prosecutor ' s Office .
I fully subscribe to this idea .
The report by Mr Bösch is ambitious , resolute and realistic .
I therefore voted for this report in the fervent hope that the Belgian Presidency might set the European Union on the path chosen by the European Parliament .
Whilst endorsing the proposals in the resolution on protecting the Communities ' financial interests , we abstained on the paragraphs concerning the appointment of a European Public Prosecutor .
The establishment of a European Public Ministry was not agreed at the Nice European Council and is therefore not mentioned in the new Treaty .
Yet , in order to establish a new authority with judicial powers and to provide it with the necessary authority in all Member States , an indisputable legal basis would have to be created .
As long as this basis does not exist , it is undesirable for the European Parliament to invite the Commission to put forward a proposal in this direction .
This is also true when the powers of the prosecutor are limited to offences committed by members and agents of the institutions of the European Union .
The European Union collects and distributes funding .
It is predictable that such a large-scale and centralised distribution circuit will attract the attention of fraudsters .
If money is doled out , people try to be one of the recipients .
Some businessmen assume that they are entitled to subsidies from a government which is ostensibly overflowing with funding .
That notion is reinforced by stories about enormous unsalable supplies for which there is seemingly no market which have been doing the rounds for decades .
These stockpiles are partly the result of subsidies .
It started 40 years ago with the scrap fraud and continues until this day .
In the case of the strong growth of the flax production in Spain and the subsequent burning of superfluous supplies , even the name of the then Agricultural Minister , now a member of the European Commission , has been quoted in connection with this case .
Only by halting the unnecessary flow of money can such frauds be brought to an end .
National and regional governments can make more accurate assessments and manage that money far more effectively than the European Union , which is too remote from everyone and which gives the impression that it has too much money anyway .
I voted for the Bösch report but I did so with some reluctance as I share along with many of my colleagues doubts about a European Public Prosecutor and its role .
However , as this role has been confined to criminal offences committed against the financial interests of the European Communities by members and employees of EU institutions , then I felt this restricted role is worth supporting .
The location of this office in Luxembourg is sensible due to the proximity of the European Court of Justice .
The widening of the scope of the European Public Prosecutors office will have to be carefully monitored so as not to encroach into the Member States competence .
The Conservative Party is fighting hard to attack fraud within the EU but we cannot support this report because of its references to a European Public Prosecutor , which we believe is an incursion on national sovereignty in the area of criminal justice .
We have therefore abstained on the final vote in order to reflect our support for the fight against fraud within the EU , whilst protecting our position on the European Public Prosecutor .
.
I congratulate my Socialist colleague Mr Bosch for his report which pushes for stronger measures to step up the fight against fraud and makes the zero tolerance principle a reality .
We have come a long way since the fraud and mismanagement report of the Commission which led to its resignation in 1999 , but there is still much work to do .
Not least there is the problem of trafficking in adulterated butter using vegetable and animal fats and even chemical substances , leading to an estimated loss to the EU budget of some EUR 45 million .
There is also the highly irregular matter of the flax case and EU subsidies for flax growing in certain Member States .
I welcome the fact that many Member States have joined the action brought by the Commission in the case against the big American tobacco companies before the European Court of Justice .
Today is UK Non-Smoking Day , and it seems apt to support this case which is intended to combat large-scale tobacco smuggling which causes revenue losses of several billion euros every year to the EU and Member States ' budgets .
Madam President , we must tackle the root causes of maladministration and fraud .
Commissioner Kinnock is leading the way , at the forefront of these reforms in the Commission .
I am sure that Neil Kinnock is precisely the right person to help restore public confidence in the EU institutions and their actions .
We in the European Parliament should support him in his role .
How anyone can endorse or allow fraud is beyond me .
All of us , the EU institutions and the Member States themselves have an important role to play in ensuring that our citizens regain confidence in the European Union .
Wijkman report ( A5-0054 / 2001 )
Mr President , I am prompted to say ' How cold it is ! '
This is the second report in which we take an interest in warming up people in our Community .
Earlier on , we were thinking about warming up the drivers of articulated lorries , and now we have this report - I voted for it - which seeks to improve energy efficiency in the European Community . It also covers all forms of energy saving such as district heating in cities - something I hope for warmly , the right word in the circumstances .
In fact , a lot of energy can be saved with district heating , because a single boiler can heat the homes of ten , twenty , a hundred , a thousand city dwellers .
So , with this system , there could also be more heating in the houses of pensioners , who are often cold because of their modest pensions .
We would hereby point out that the reason we voted in favour of the original text in Mr Wijkman ' s report , A5-0054 / 2001 paragraph 26 ( viii ) , was not because we want to see common , supranational taxes at EU level .
Instead , the reason is because we want the Commission to take account of this issue so that , in the future , we might be able , if need be , to agree upon intergovernmental solutions when it comes to the taxation of fuel .
We are in favour of using a climate tax on a national basis to achieve targets without putting any additional burden on individuals or companies .
This does not mean introducing a European tax ; it is a call for national tax rates in this area to be harmonised .
This should strengthen international competitiveness in the long term .
The economy is based on secure energy supplies .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.12 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Preparatory work for the Stockholm European Council ( 23 / 24 March 2001 ) ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the debate on the Council and Commission statements on the preparatory work for the Stockholm European Council on 23 and 24 March .
Mr President , I would like to begin by welcoming Mrs Lindh to Parliament .
The Lisbon Summit was held about a year ago .
Everyone , including myself , considers that Lisbon was a major success .
The summit linked together a number of policy areas - economic policy , employment and social policy - making them mutually dependent .
We know that both employment and welfare depend on economic growth .
But there is also dependence in the opposite direction : the way in which we design welfare is important for employment and growth .
Social policy is a productive factor .
A year ago the Commission submitted an excellent document ahead of Lisbon .
This time , there is also a document which in some respects is excellent but I do have to criticise the Commission on one point .
I have no objections to the factual content , but I find the document unbalanced .
The speech of President Prodi today was balanced , but the Commission ' s document is far too focused on the economic aspects .
I would have liked to see more attention paid to employment and social policy .
In the same way , I hope that economic policy is not allowed to dominate at the Stockholm Summit .
It is important to address questions such as full employment , employment in general , quality at work - which encompasses the working environment , skills development and influence on the part of employees - lifelong learning , which is incredibly important , and the demographic development which should result in older people also being given the opportunity to develop and to retain their jobs .
Finally , the Stockholm and Gothenburg Summits should also be linked and , in the future , environmental issues should be integrated in this process with economic policy , employment policy and other policy .
It is particularly important to incorporate the ecological issues .
Mr President , I naturally want to thank Mrs Lindh , the President-in-Office of the Council , and President Prodi for their presentation of the agenda they intend to present to the Stockholm Summit .
However , we may be forgiven for presuming to think that it is not so much a question of the excellence of that agenda as of its proper implementation nationally , in other words how the Member States carry through the processes of change , how they reconcile them with quality of life and work , and how they apply the strategy of greater social cohesion .
Because the Commission admits , if only indirectly , that those are the real problems , when it talks about the 14 million who continue to be jobless and wonders whether enough has been done at national level .
Equally , when it condemns the low skill levels of the labour force , one has to wonder whether the national training systems are put together properly , and whether educational reform , where implemented , is consistent with exploitation of the particular features of an area and whether it helps it to achieve greater cohesion , so that opportunity is open to all .
The Commission likewise condemns the existence of poverty and marginalisation in the Union .
It would therefore be appropriate to check , in the area of employment policies , whether local partnership initiatives capable of producing investment in initial stages in order to speed up bureaucratic processes , infrastructure allocations and negotiated labour flexibility are consistent with national employment plans and are actually being implemented .
It would also be appropriate to check , with regard to the same policies , whether the State aid granted , even if increased in the future , is really consistent with the local employment system criterion adopted .
Finally , with regard to the liberalised public services , pending verification of the final benefits to the user , it would be appropriate to consider whether the new jobs are numerically and qualitatively equal to those lost and whether the opening up of the markets involved is at least consistent with the integration of rural , remote , and mountainous areas with urban centres .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , in my short remarks I want to address one of the priorities that President Prodi outlined this morning .
This concerns the right regulatory environment ; colleagues will have copies of the text .
Now it is not surprising that , in the ten pages here , the section on the right regulatory environment is by far the shortest .
The Commission has not even been able to find one page of good things to say about it !
And why , colleagues , is that ?
Because despite all the fine words about having a deregulatory model , about creating jobs , about freeing up business , about - I quote - making the European Union the cheapest and the easiest place to do business , in the year since Lisbon we have seen a catalogue of failure on almost every front .
Take my own country , which claims to be in the lead of the new economy .
Every business organisation and every survey confirms that more and more regulation and red tape has been piled on British business over the last twelve months .
When I go and see companies in my constituency they say to me : " Mr Harbour , we have reached the stage now where politicians are spending more time sending us new regulations about protecting and looking after our existing employees than actually encouraging us to create new jobs " .
I took notes throughout the speech by the President of the Council this morning and the question of deregulation was not mentioned once !
But what did she mention ?
On top of everything that was agreed at Lisbon we are going to have a new ecological dimension to this programme and , far from the virtuous circle that Mr Goebbels was talking about this morning , we have a vicious circle .
Once we actually created new jobs ; we are now looking for new burdens to place on business in the new ecological dimension !
I would just like to mention one point to President Prodi concerning an important conference on the economy two weeks ago , to which he kindly invited me along with other Members .
( He might have invited me in December , by the way , when he invited everybody else but I did get my invitation about two weeks beforehand ) .
I was able to go to a short part of it and , across the European economy , businesses from every country were saying if we are going to achieve the e-economy , do not over-regulate it .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , the meeting of the Stockholm European Council is a very important stage for us as it will reconcile two of our major concerns : a competitive economy and the defence of a social model .
However , it seems to us that the documents which will be submitted to the Stockholm European Council may be excessively numerous and that we may have to make more progress in preparing for these meetings .
A large number of documents is not necessarily the best guarantee of a future strategy .
From this perspective , I would like to recall the proposals made by Parliament for a merger between the Economic and Financial Committee and the Economic Policy Committee .
I think there is food for thought here .
We are gratified moreover by the adoption of a restricted list of structural indicators .
It is the right course to follow for progress to be made at European level .
To simply talk about structural reforms does not mean very much ; we need to know which reforms we are talking about .
And it seems to us that everything that concerns human investment must be of paramount importance .
Structural reforms must be based first and foremost on the notion of human investment .
Faced with an ageing population , which you referred to , Mr Prodi , it seems to us that we neglect at our peril investment in education , in mobility , in languages , in lifelong learning , and in research too , which you mentioned when you spoke just now on patents and Galileo .
President of the Commission , allow me to remind you , however , of the commitments we undertook , especially in Nice , regarding the social agenda .
It seems to us that this is a very important issue on which we must make progress in the European Union , including at the Stockholm European Council .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to congratulate the presidency of the Council and the presidency of the Commission , who have always promoted this initiative , on taking up the Lisbon debate .
This is an extremely important debate because less than a year ago we committed ourselves to nothing less than turning Europe into the most competitive and dynamic area of stability in the world .
Nothing less than that .
However , the 2010 horizon is looking stormy because the reticence of some countries to carry out liberalisation programmes approved by everybody and the resistance of States such as France to losing some of the flagships of its public sector are creating a two-speed Europe , a Europe in which countries which fulfil their collective commitments see their progress threatened by suspiciously aggressive strategies from companies , which are still public , in relation to recently liberalised sectors .
Ladies and gentlemen , a lot is at stake , but above all the legitimacy of the Community institutions is at stake in the eyes of the European citizens , who see the spread of a dangerous dynamic which favours the directors of powerful companies and which yields few results .
That is why I think Stockholm is so important .
Stockholm must mark the beginning of a thorough debate on public participation in key industrial sectors . This debate must take place within the framework of a mutual process of evaluation and learning which will contribute to improving the operation of the single market .
Based on a scoreboard of objective indicators for privatisation , this debate must bring together the different attitudes to the principles of competition , freedom of establishment and free movement of capital . This debate is being demanded by the European citizens who , having accepted competition as an effective method for allocating resources , are seeing their markets subjected to inefficiencies imported from countries which are ideologically allergic to economic reform .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to highlight four social accents which seem to me crucial in the strategy for Stockholm .
First of all , Madam President-in-Office , Stockholm must hold on to the objective of full employment .
That also means that that 3 % growth must remain on the agenda and that hence productive investments must be made , not only in the knowledge society but also in social services and in people .
This must be clearly reflected in the employment guidelines .
I welcome the interim goals but these must also be included in the economic guidelines .
Secondly : full employment , to us , means quality jobs .
And however important coordination methods are , it is important that a clear link is established with the social agenda , social legislation and social agreements in this connection .
I set great store by the fact that you have invited the Commission to formulate objectives for the right to lifelong learning , but it would be equally important , Madam President-in-Office , if the Council were to invite the social partners to at long last reach agreements on that score .
Thirdly : Stockholm must be the summit where quality equals equality .
That means that we should not only talk about labour participation of the elderly , however important that is , but also of women .
Stockholm should therefore focus on improving the quality of the so-called atypical jobs , on reconciling work and family , redistributing the work , a strategy of equal pay for equal work , and child care .
Lastly : Stockholm must first and foremost be a social summit which does not reduce everything to labour market policy , however important that may be , but also maps out courses for the future with regard to social cohesion and solidarity .
I so much hope , Madam President-in-Office , that Stockholm will prove crucial in the strategy of open coordination in terms of social exclusion and social protection , so that the Belgian Presidency can outline clear and ambitious objectives in this strategy .
Mrs Lindh , the texts are , in my opinion , not wholly satisfactory , but I hope that in the time left available to us , the missing pieces of the jigsaw puzzle will fall into place .
Mr President , at least the European Union surpassed itself at the Lisbon Summit .
The Council decided to create the most dynamic economic area in the world .
That was a year ago .
Are we any closer to the plans ?
We have certainly become more competitive , including in new technologies .
The Member States have started on numerous structural reforms .
Unemployment has been reduced to a large - but not by any means full - extent .
Unfortunately , adequate economic and social cohesion between the regions has still not been achieved .
What we expect of the Swedish Presidency is an initiative to develop intelligent instruments for investigating qualitative and quantitative progress .
Benchmarking and gender-specific statistics should give us information which needs to be evaluated every year .
What we certainly do not need is to adopt the Swedish social model for Europe .
What we need are real measures to increase employability and ensure that the younger members of the workforce , women wishing to return to work and the long-term employed are better qualified .
The socially disadvantaged must be better integrated into working life and discrimination in employment and the workplace must be nipped in the bud .
Just how important it is to stop excluding older employees is something which you felt deserved a mention here today , Mr President of the Commission .
We must work and act across the generational divide and we must convince young people that it is worthwhile working together with older people on this project , so that we can create social insurance systems which are fundable , meaning that balanced budgets are needed in the Member States .
All this presupposes the full support of the social partners . Anne Van Lancker is right , however ; we also need agreements between them and NGOs , the representatives of civil society and , of course , the European Parliament .
Mr President , because I only have a minute and a half I will make only one point and that too has to do with social dialogue and the social partners .
Next week in Stockholm , on the eve of the summit , there will also be a summit of the social partners .
It will be taking place in the midst of something of a crisis for social dialogue , because the employers seem set to walk away from attempts to negotiate improved employment rights for workers placed by temporary employment agencies .
That is a very serious issue .
In the framework of Stockholm we need to look very seriously at the importance of the social partners in improving flexibility for our enterprises , whilst at the same time safeguarding workers in or moving between those enterprises .
That is what we are promised in the adaptability pillar of the employment strategy and what should be delivered by the Lisbon process .
But unfortunately the reality in my region and elsewhere in the Union is that workers placed by temporary employment agencies are placed at a severe disadvantage .
They are paying the price of improved flexibility for enterprises .
Employers have to be made to recognise their responsibilities .
If they are determined to walk away from these negotiations , the Commission must make it absolutely clear that it will take immediate legislative action and the Stockholm Summit should make it clear that the Council will do everything it can to expedite the legislative instrument to cover workers placed by temporary employment agencies .
Mr President , when the UK Prime Minister went to Lisbon he quite arrogantly lectured other European leaders about how they should be running their economies .
Not content with trying to control us at home , he is trying to do that in Europe as well .
He came back to the UK saying that Europe is going our way and that he had changed the agenda .
However , as far as I can see , the only way in which Europe is following Mr Blair 's agenda is by piling yet more red tape on business and more regulation , and making Europe an ever more expensive place in which to do business .
Mr Blair 's government introduced about 3500 regulations last year alone - a record increase .
The lessons of Lisbon have not been learned in London or Brussels , because we still see every day in this House more regulation and more red tape being produced .
I challenge both Commissioner Prodi and Mrs Lindh to come up with one example of where a burden on business has been removed or repealed since Lisbon , one example of an EU measure which makes it easier and not more difficult and more expensive to employ people and one example of a proposal for a regulation which has been dropped as being too expensive or disproportionate to the aims sought .
I hope that I will be proved wrong in my assessment of the success rate from Lisbon being very low indeed .
We still have directives on how to climb ladders .
We still have directives on lawnmowers , fluorescent ballast and one on electrical waste which is quite simply going to be a tax on computers .
How is that going to promote the e-economy in Europe ?
Regulation may feel like cost-free political points to politicians , but someone has to pay the bill .
The people who pay the bills are the customers of these companies , who pay them in higher prices and , above all , the people of Europe , who are priced out of jobs .
I call on the Commission and the Council to live up to the fine words of Lisbon with action : remove red tape and , above all , make it easier , not more difficult or expensive to employ people in Europe .
Mr President , if we genuinely want a knowledge-based economy there are preconditions : you need a critical mass of numerate and scientifically trained citizenry in the workplace , expenditure of at least 3 % of GDP on research and development , research infrastructure and networks of expertise and a rapid system of dissemination and exploitation .
These preconditions are generally not met in the EU , despite the Lisbon Declaration .
First , we are very short of engineers and scientists : retraining in science is an essential part of lifelong learning .
Secondly , only two Member States - Sweden , luckily , and Finland - spend more than 3 % of GDP on research and they have the industrial competitiveness which accompanies that expenditure .
Foresight and dissemination will , of course , be helped by the forthcoming Sixth Framework Programme and even more by the creation of the European research area , with its networking of centres of excellence .
Without Member State commitment at Stockholm , the knowledge-based economy simply will not happen .
So I say to Member States : " Over to you at Stockholm .
If you want it to happen , put your money where your mouth is " .
Mr President , it is a pity that the conservative group in the European Parliament prevented Parliament from taking part , even indirectly , in the Council summit in Stockholm by voting against the Bullmann report during the last part-session , thereby reducing us to the present alternative .
The Council summit in Stockholm will have to take decisions on matters relating to education and research .
We need to speed up the rate of development of the electronic learning sector .
Innovations and new multimedia and Internet technologies will give us the tools we need for distance learning both for general education and for training and lifelong learning .
At the Stockholm Summit , we shall need to start systematically monitoring electronic learning , bringing together indicators to control equal access of pupils and non-pupils to information and communications technologies and taking measures to combat geographical , social and cultural inequalities .
On the other hand , lifelong learning is a prime means for the European economy of allowing the human resources which we need for a knowledge society to respond and develop .
We need to bear the social cost of these policies in the conviction that they will bring in maximum returns , for the benefit of the European social and cultural model .
Finally , the European research area must be given form and substance by coordinating activities and policies in the research area and supporting both basic research and pioneering technologies .
We need to increase spending in order to catch up with the USA and we need better , more efficient relations between research and science and public opinion and the citizens of Europe .
Mr President , I would like to start by saying thank you for an excellent debate with many important contributions ahead of the European Council in Stockholm .
Allow me to comment on some of the issues .
Firstly , I would like to say that I agree with Mr Suominen that it is important not only to have words , but also to have action .
For this reason , I believe that an annual assessment and follow-up of the targets is a new and unique process which will hopefully mean that we really become better at ensuring that words are translated into action .
I would like to thank Mr Goebbels for such a positive picture of Europe .
I agree that it is important also to spread the view and picture that things are going well for Europe .
I agree that it is important for us to combine economic and social measures .
That is , in fact , what this whole debate has been about .
Some speakers have talked about economic aspects , others about social aspects .
What will make us able , in fact , to modernise and not just liberalise Europe is our ability to combine economic reforms and social reforms .
Herman Schmid addressed the problem of there being a " right-wing policy " when we talk about economic goals and economic reforms .
I cannot understand this .
Obviously , a strong economy is vital for welfare .
In addition , we have clearly prioritised the fight against unemployment and we emphasise the importance of raising employment targets , which I see as crucial issues for the future of Europe .
I agree with what Mr Andersson , Mrs Van Lancker and Mrs O ' Toole said .
They stressed that , if we are to be competitive , we must also ensure that we focus on education and social issues .
Lifelong learning is an important issue for Europe .
Our citizens must receive sufficient training and so achieve good skills .
We have already talked about the participation of older people in the labour market .
Mrs Van Lancker also mentions the position of women in the labour market .
Mr Andersson mentions environmental technology .
All this is vital if we are to achieve our targets regarding competitiveness .
Mr Harbour complained that I did not address the issue of deregulation .
In my statement , I nonetheless said that we must open up the markets for electricity , gas , post , rail traffic and air traffic and that we must have a common market for financial services by 2005 and a common market for venture capital by 2003 .
If Mr Harbour does not feel that this is important for economic development in Europe , I really do not know what he feels is important .
Thomas Mann addressed the significance of our also evaluating our targets , which I commented on in the introduction .
I agree with this , although we do not perhaps agree entirely on the Swedish social model , but we will no doubt continue to discuss this .
Mr Hughes addressed the important issue of workplaces which do not meet basic requirements regarding labour law , safety , etc .
This applies to matters such as temporary agency work .
This is an important issue which we are mainly discussing on a national basis , but which obviously also has to be discussed with regard to the future .
Particularly when we talk about quality of work and the importance of establishing social targets , I believe we have the opportunity to take up this issue of temporary agency work within the framework of the European Council in Stockholm .
I would like to conclude by thanking you for an excellent debate .
I hope that we will have a good summit in Stockholm .
I am also convinced that Parliament will continue to ensure that there will be action , not just words .
Madam President-in-Office of the Council , a few brief words , because it seems to me that the debate has revealed a very clear line : firm , general agreement on the project to be pursued , the great importance of the path set out at Lisbon , and the need to continue in that direction at Stockholm .
But everyone is also in agreement in warning of the crucial need to accelerate the rate of progress .
We are going too slowly , we have missed opportunities , and so , Madam President , what I ask is that we press on together , at Stockholm , at a rapid pace and with a minimum of anger and tension because , although we are in agreement , all too often commitments made are not put into practice .
So I thank you for your speech and I leave you with that commitment , in the hope of a positive summit .
I have received six motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken on Thursday at 12 noon .
Conflict prevention and crisis management
The next item is the oral questions to the Council and the Commission ( B5-0012 / 2001 ) and ( B5-0013 / 2001 ) by Mr Brok , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on the strengthening of European Union capabilities for conflict prevention and civilian aspects of crisis management , including statements on the situation on the border between the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and Kosovo and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , I appreciate the opportunity afforded by today ' s debate because the triad of conflict prevention , civil crisis management and military capabilities needs to be seen in a wider context , ensuring of course that conflict prevention and civil crisis management are given a high ranking .
All three concepts are interconnected .
Credible civil crisis management and prevention are only possible if all sides are aware of the military capabilities .
On the other hand , developing our potential for conflict prevention and crisis management will ensure that we never need to use military force .
Hence the high ranking .
With the resolutions of Cologne , Helsinki and Feira and the conditions created in Nice , we have a clear brief to forge ahead with the civil aspects of crisis management . This includes developing the capacity to plan and implement policing operations , cooperation with the United Nations and questions of coherence and efficient improvement to Union policy in this area .
In the meantime , we have seen - and we still see time and again - that the present artificial separation of powers - some of which rest with the Commission and some with the High Representative - is damaging us in the long run and the Council should consider if it would be better in the long term for the vice-president of the Commission to have special relations with the Council and take over these matters , and for this to be used as a springboard for bringing greater transparency to these three areas .
The point is , we should really like to know that a check has been run on the extent to which these various capabilities are available in the institutions of the European Union .
We need to do something about improving the European Union ' s information and analysis capacities .
We must be careful not to develop dual structures ; instead we must combine the resources of the Council , the Commission , the Member States and other institutions so that we really can benefit from them .
I do not intend to go into all the details , but I think that it is immensely important in this context for the Commission to take more of an initiative in these areas and play a central role in planning crisis prevention and crisis management , so that we can create the political awareness needed for all these capabilities to be brought under one roof .
We specifically call on the Member States to provide the capacities and resources needed so that the European Union can be quickly deployed in the four areas defined in Feira , although this will depend , among other things , on defining specific objectives in advance , possibly with a timetable , as we did during the discussion on police forces .
The example of Kosovo shows just how badly we need these capabilities ; it also shows that we can act in a coordinated manner under uniform guidance .
Even though the Council , the Commission and the Member States have done a great deal of good over the last two or three years , we still have to admit - more ' s the pity - that we are far too backward in coming forward in certain areas and taking on tasks which we need to tackle directly , which is why we feel it is so important that we make progress here .
In doing so , we shall certainly need proper coordination with organisations such as the UN , the OSCE , the Council of Europe , financial institutions such as the IMF and the World Bank and non-governmental organisations .
I need only remind you of the status quo here and the fact that the old principle still applies to Kosovo : now at last we must find the coordinator for the coordinators .
A great deal still needs to be done here and I think that , given the problems , especially for individuals , we really must overcome the difficulties , power struggles and vanities between the institutions and develop European capabilities which enable us to foster and contribute to peace and freedom , both within and on the edge of the European Union .
Mr President , Mr Brok , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to thank Mr Brok for addressing this vital issue .
I would like to take this opportunity to give a general answer on the way the Swedish Presidency approaches preventive work within the Union .
" All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights . "
This is the opening of the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights - the cornerstone of our work for individual freedom , safety and dignity .
As we know , war and armed conflict destroy all fundamental principles .
Instead , the law of the strong rules through firepower and oppression .
The 20th century was the century of war with the world wars and wars in the Middle East and the Balkans .
Each time alarm bells rang , but the international community often reacted too late .
Now we can show that we are learning from the past .
By actively focusing on preventing armed conflict , we can help make this century different .
The EU has a key role to play in this regard .
Let me quote what Mr Hume said in Parliament when he was awarded the Nobel peace prize : " Let us not forget that European Union is the best example , as we have learned , in the history of the world of conflict resolution . "
Today , conflict prevention is also a central element of the developing Common European Security and Defence Policy .
The ESDP is based on three pillars : military crisis management , civil crisis management and conflict prevention .
These are closely linked .
At the same time , prevention is different to military and civil crisis management in that it is not about reacting to a crisis that has already flared up , but about promoting in good time the fundamental values on which we all agree : that children should be able to go to school instead of to war and that democracy must be established at all levels .
The EU has an extremely large number of instruments which can be used to prevent armed conflict and manage crises .
We must use these in a more considered and coherent way , both in the field and in Brussels .
These issues must involve the whole Union and all institutions .
We already know that the EU can make important interventions .
Our unarmed monitors in Presevo and the police mission in Albania are just two examples .
Experience from the Balkans has clearly shown that conflict prevention must be based on long-term involvement .
The basic causes of armed conflict must be removed .
Therefore , development work has a key role .
The decision of the Commission and the Development Council to integrate prevention into development work is central and must now be turned into practical guidelines for projects and programmes .
It is a matter of strengthening human rights and democracy in the long term and of the way crisis management and humanitarian aid gives way to development work .
The Commission ' s upcoming communication on conflict prevention , on human rights and democracy and on humanitarian aid , reconstruction and development will , therefore , be significant .
We must also identify potential conflicts at an earlier stage .
One example is the way water issues are often a source of conflict nowadays .
However , we can see a telling example right next to us of the way the EU can mean that resources of common interest can create partnership and development .
The river running through Strasbourg used to be a poisoned watercourse , a barrier .
Now it is a common waterway and source of fish .
The EU must also develop sustainable and effective partnerships with other important players .
The UN is our most important partner .
We are trying to establish close long-term cooperation at all levels between the EU and the UN .
Similarly , we are strengthening relations with the OSCE .
In Africa , we are seeking partnership with the sub-regional organisations SADC , IGAD and ECOWAS , which also work on conflict prevention and crisis management , in order to help them build up their capabilities and support local processes .
ECOWAS ' small arms moratorium is a good example .
We are also setting up a joint expert group for conflict prevention with Canada and developing contacts with the G8 group .
Partnership with others naturally has to be driven by real needs and comparative benefits .
When I recently visited the Southern Caucasus with Mr Patten and Dr Solana , it was an obvious occasion to build on the OSCE ' s and the European Council ' s knowledge of , and presence in , the area .
Now , we are discussing how the EU can work with the OSCE to develop monitoring of the border with the Northern Caucasus .
The Troika ' s visit to the Caucasus in February and to Israel and Gaza in the past two days is another example of the EU ' s role in conflict prevention .
I would also like to point out that relations with civil society and NGOs are crucial if we are to succeed .
There has been a request for a Council declaration on the situation in Northern FYROM , and I would like to take this up as an example of the way the EU can work :
For several years , we have taken measures to try to prevent conflict through unarmed monitors , aid for political and economic reforms and for central and local institutions , the 1998 Trade and Cooperation Agreement and the Stabilisation and Association Agreement which is expected to be signed shortly .
On 22 February came the first reports that an armed Albanian group had entered Northern FYROM .
Their purpose was unclear , but there was clear resistance to ratification of the border agreement recently signed between FYROM and FRY .
In order to prevent increased violence , the EU and the presidency representatives in Skopje established a close dialogue with FYROM ' s government .
The Troika called a meeting of the leading Albanian parties and urged them to vote for ratification of the border agreement , which the majority did .
Following the gun battles , explosion of mines and exchanges of fire , the EU has condemned the violent attacks and urged all parties - particularly representatives of the Albanian minority in FYROM - to distance themselves from the violent actions .
We have said that it is important to have closer cooperation and have also welcomed the cooperation between KFOR , UNMIK and the FYROM authorities and expressed support for FYROM ' s sovereignty and territorial integrity , while also urging restraint .
The important message to the public has been that FYROM ' s future lies in closer ties with Europe and the EU and that stability and security is a vital condition of this .
The desire of the people of the Balkans for integration and cooperation with Europe means that the EU can play a vital role - including a crucial role in forming opinion .
We have started an important process in carrying out the proposals the Commission and the High Representative presented in their report to the European Council in Nice and will hopefully be able to go on to approve a programme for conflict prevention in Gothenburg in June .
In preparing the programme , we will naturally be carefully studying the proposals from Parliament , including the important Lalumière resolution of last year and the resolution which will be adopted tomorrow .
Let me finally say a few words about other elements of the cooperation surrounding the Common European Security and Defence Policy .
I have not addressed the subject of military capabilities today , but I believe that they have an important role to play .
The knowledge that the EU has military capabilities also plays an important role in preventive work .
With regard to civil crisis management , we have to press on with what the European Council addressed - civilian police , the judicial system , civil administration and rescue services .
We are working hard to turn the target of 5 000 police into reality .
Member States have been asked to state their national contributions .
An initial reconciliation will take place in May .
We are putting a great deal of energy into developing the ability to plan and manage police initiatives and into common standards for equipment , training , etc .
We have also started work on other areas of capability - strengthening the judicial system and civil administration during crises and conflicts , and the Council Working Group for Rescue Services is drawing up concrete targets in its area .
We know that armed conflict damages all vital functions in a society .
Crisis management must therefore include support for everything from the judicial system to refuse collection .
Human rights , international agreements and humanitarian principles must be defended , especially with regard to safe access to help those suffering .
We will therefore also open discussions on areas of capability other than those which we have previously identified , e.g. observers and experts in human rights and disarmament .
Of course , we also have to solve the issues of how we are to achieve effective cooperation between civil and military crisis management .
It is almost always the case that we solve these issues jointly when it comes to practical work in the field .
If it turns out that I have to leave this debate early , I would like to emphasise that this in no way means that I am not interested in hearing the thoughts of all Members of Parliament .
The fact is , I am going to Murmansk to discuss important nuclear safety issues in Northern Russia , and getting to Murmansk is not easy .
I note what the honourable gentleman says about the difficulty of getting to Strasbourg rather than Murmansk but I suppose one difference is that you cannot get to Strasbourg by nuclear submarine .
It is a great privilege for me to follow on from the Minister with whom I have spent a good deal of time on Troika visits in the last few weeks , I guess dealing with conflict prevention , and it is a pleasure to take part in the debate launched by the honourable gentleman .
We last exchanged words in the same general direction in Washington a few days ago .
He has raised an important debate .
Perhaps I can be excused if I can take a few moments more than my allotted five to begin with and shave that off anything I say at the end of the debate .
I will not come back at the end of the debate unless there are specific questions which people wish me to respond to , in which case of course I would be delighted to do so , not least in the Minister 's absence in Murmansk .
As the Minister reminded us , the European Union is not new to the whole field of conflict prevention , crisis management and post-conflict reconstruction .
We recognise that conflict prevention and crisis management are long-term undertakings .
All of our regional cooperation programmes , CARDS , the ALURE Latin America programme , PHARE , MEDA , TACIS and so on , the Cotonou Agreement as well as our pre-accession strategies and stabilisation , association and cooperation agreements with third countries - all of them contain conflict prevent and crisis management provisions .
Rehabilitation programmes such as that in Rwanda after the genocide , economic reconstruction programmes such as that in Kosovo today , bilateral aid programmes built on peace agreements such as those in Guatemala and El Salvador are practical examples of how we are helping every day to prevent conflict and to build peace around the world .
No one disputes that recent history in the Balkans , in Africa and elsewhere has taught us that we need to equip ourselves better to try to prevent the outbreak of violent conflict and to react more effectively when it occurs .
We have taken some important new initiatives in relation to conflict prevention .
Last December the Commission and the High Representative jointly presented a report to the Nice Council with recommendations for improvements .
We focused in particular on developing better methods of analysis , closer coordination within the Union and more effective coordination with our international partners - and this follows a point that my honourable friend made - especially the United Nations and the OSCE .
We are now working with the High Representative to follow up the recommendations of the Nice report .
We are looking at the development of conflict indicators and early warning systems so that we can focus our attention much better on countries or regions in difficulty .
We are also examining how CFSP instruments such as political dialogue can be adapted so that they are more robust , flexible and timely .
The Commission is working with the presidency on the action programme which the presidency , as the Minister made clear , will present at the European Council meeting in June .
The Commission is also preparing a communication on conflict prevention which we will present to the Council in April .
This communication will focus particularly on addressing the root causes of conflict through Community external aid and development instruments .
We will put forward proposals , for example , to build the objectives of peace and democratic stability more clearly into our assistance programmes .
We will place greater emphasis in future on support for the building of stable institutions and the rule of law including , of course , the police and the administration of justice .
We will also ensure through our assistance programmes that we take account of indicators of political exclusion , ethnic , social or regional marginalisation , environmental degradation or other factors which can contribute to violent conflict .
We intend to contribute to international initiatives , for example through the G8 and the OECD , on issues such as international crime , the diamond trade , drug-trafficking and child soldiers .
We have also to exploit to the full other means such as trade policy instruments and trade and cooperation agreements , or our skills on border-management police training , customs assistance missions - which have been such a success in the Balkans - or expertise in migration , social or environmental policy .
I look forward to returning to this Parliament to present the communication once it has been finalised .
But I am acutely conscious that while we are working on these issues , events in the real world are not put on hold .
In southern Serbia and on Kosovo 's borders with Macedonia we have a real-life example of a crisis that needs managing , as the Minister said , and a further conflict that must be prevented .
Let me be clear .
What is happening on these two borders threatens , if it is not tackled firmly and rapidly , to reverse much of the recent , very heartening progress that has been made in the region .
It threatens fresh conflict , fresh instability , just as we were putting those things behind us in the Balkans .
Plainly , the straight military security issues involved are for the Council , and above all for NATO , not for the European Commission .
I know how hard the presidency , the Minister and my colleague , Javier Solana , have been working on these issues , as has NATO .
I very much welcome the cease-fire negotiated on Monday in the Presevo Valley .
I very much hope that it will hold .
However , I have been determined that the Commission should contribute as rapidly and fully as possible to support the wider efforts to tackle this crisis both in southern Serbia and on the FYROM border .
As Parliament may know , we have already announced that we were prepared to provide about EUR 1 million in assistance for southern Serbia , for the Presevo Valley .
We have made available another EUR 900 000 and agreed on 24 projects with deputy prime minister Covic of Serbia and with the local mayor .
The 24 projects are in areas like improvement of water and improvement of schools , which we are prepared to undertake as well .
That raises our immediate assistance to almost EUR 2 million .
I think that is the right way to support deputy prime minister Covic 's commitment to try to resolve these issues through dialogue rather than conflict .
We are also prepared to put some of the EUR 240 million that we are providing for Serbia in reconstruction assistance this year to doing more in the Presevo Valley .
We still have a long way to go in improving our capacity to respond to crises in the short term .
I would characterise the challenges we face under three headings .
First , we have to react more quickly in crisis situations .
The Commission is responding to this challenge .
As Parliament knows we are engaged in a process of the reform of our external aid , which will mean that we are able to deliver assistance more rapidly and more efficiently across the whole range of Community aid programmes .
Last month , on our initiative , the Council also adopted the regulation establishing a rapid-reaction mechanism .
Second , we must be able to deploy appropriate personnel in sufficient numbers , which is a real difficulty and a challenge for all of us .
The rapid-reaction mechanism will give the Commission the possibility to do this and we will shortly start to negotiate framework contracts for this purpose with Member States , international organisations , NGOs and others .
The major problem we face in this area , however , is the lack of suitably qualified and available personnel in the Member States .
It is a problem faced not just by the Union but also by the UN , OSCE and other bodies engaged in international peace missions .
In the Commission 's view , the best way to build up the Union 's capacity in this field is by developing common recruitment standards and training programmes .
The Commission is encouraging Member States to work together and with the UN and OSCE in this area , and is prepared to support such training programmes from Community funds .
Third and last , we have to develop more effective coordination .
In the Commission 's view , effective crisis management does not necessarily require major changes in existing decision-making procedures laid down in the Treaty .
It requires the establishment of improved mechanisms for day-to-day coordination at headquarters level , in the field , and between the field and headquarters .
For its part , the Commission is engaged in reorganising itself internally in order to ensure better coordination of Community instruments in crisis situations .
The Commission has established a conflict prevention and crisis management unit .
Within that unit the Commission intends to establish a crisis management cell , which will coordinate various Community initiatives and provide a focal point for the Council situation centre .
The crisis management cell should be operational by the summer .
Furthermore , in the context of the on-going debate in the Council on crisis management procedures , we have suggested to Council that the coordinating mechanism provided for in the conclusions of the Helsinki European Council should be relaunched .
We are prepared to play our full part in the functioning of this mechanism .
Finally , with regard to both conflict prevention and civilian crisis management , the Commission intends to play , in full association with the work of the Council 's Political and Security Committee , an active role in helping to take forward efforts in this area with the Council .
We want to work with the High Representative , the policy unit and the Council secretariat in this spirit .
We will work closely with Parliament , as well as the Council , on these issues .
We will certainly keep Parliament fully informed .
I very much hope that the communication which we bring forward in April will provide a focus for a debate which gives us the opportunity to bring together in a more creative and constructive way the responsibilities with which the Commission is charged , the responsibilities which we have agreed to share on a Europe-wide level .
We can take initiatives in this field which are not available to others and if we do that constructively we will make a reality of the construction of a common foreign and security policy .
Mr President , Madam Foreign Minister , Commissioner , first I should like to pass on apologises for absence from Doris Pack , our top expert on crisis regions .
She is on her way to Sarajevo and has asked me to stand in for her .
It is true that , once again , we are right up against the concepts of " civil crisis management " and " conflict prevention " in the crisis region , and we pray that we shall not have to deploy the third option , i.e. of putting our military capabilities to the test .
Recent developments in the region have been both positive and extremely negative and I think that we have taken account of both in Parliament ' s compromise resolution which will be put to the vote tomorrow .
On the positive side , I would point out that efforts to keep the peace in Macedonia really have worked over recent years and the Georgievski government has made a special contribution here by including representatives of the Albanian minority in the coalition .
And if you take a closer look , you will see that this is not just a formality and that many important positions in Macedonia have been given to members of the minority .
We have all the more responsibility for stabilising this country and it is good to hear that relative peace has now been restored on the fifth day , including in Tanusevcí , which was temporarily occupied by UCK extremists .
I should like to raise another point in this connection .
Croatia has also made good progress and the Mesiæ government currently in power in Croatia - unlike the previous government - is not under any suspicion of encouraging Croatian extremists in Herzegovina who want to interfere with the successful community in Bosnia-Herzegovina and try to impose their own agenda there .
In this respect , the appeal to the HDZ in Herzegovina is justified , but should be seen in isolation from these trends .
As proof of our trust - and I think as justifiable proof of our trust - towards the new Yugoslavian Government , we had allowed Yugoslav troops to start patrolling the Presevo valley in order to keep UCK extremists there under control and , in return , NATO has also stepped up border controls .
This is , I think , an important point .
But what must we do when we demand that communal representatives in Kosovo and the local authorities fight the extremists ?
I think that it is important to say in this context that we must strengthen the legitimacy of moderate forces in Kosovo and that we strengthen Mr Rugowa - to name a name - by making it possible for elections to be held in Kosovo .
I think that is an important political point .
Otherwise the UCK can maintain off its own bat that they have more influence than they actually do .
If we move in this direction , it will , I think , be a positive development .
Mr President , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , I would first of all like to thank the Swedish Presidency for the explanation of the Council .
It is becoming clear that a civil strategy will be forming a completely fresh component in conflict prevention and foreign policy .
I would like to thank Commissioner Patten who has pointed out very clearly how vital it is that we provide the human resources so as to add substance to civil strategy .
I would like to start on a practical note .
The Group of the Party of European Socialists has added a new point to its amendments on the wide issue of the small arms trade .
This issue will be discussed in the PrepCom which will be taking place in New York between 19 and the end of March .
This meeting will prove to be of overriding importance .
Needless to say , our Member States are closely involved in this matter .
We know that there is a code of conduct , but we also know that we do not always implement those rules consistently .
Europe ' s role in the New York meeting will be of crucial importance .
A number of key points are still missing from the action plan .
We have included these in our amendments which we hope will be adopted tomorrow in a resolution , so that Europe will be sending out a clear message in this respect .
At the beginning of the last century , conflicts claimed as many victims among the military as it does among citizens today .
There are over 100 conflicts , most of which are of a civil nature and are ethnically and regionally coloured .
That fact alone entirely justifies our strategy of conflict prevention , but also forces us to appreciate the complexity of this strategy .
It is no longer a question of diplomacy in the traditional meaning of the word .
There is a whole gamut of mechanisms involved .
It is a long-term task which cannot be carried out by one specific group alone and nobody else . And that has not always been Europe ' s strong point , not now or in the past .
The Group of the Party of European Socialists believes that we are facing a huge challenge in order to achieve a result by means of which Europe will put itself on the map using a fresh approach .
Mr President , as has been mentioned , this important debate is taking place against the background of further crises on the border of Kosovo and Macedonia .
First of all , therefore , I have to stress the on-going need for cooperation between NATO and the European Union .
The Rapid Reaction Force , the rapid reaction mechanism , and the Civil Peace Corps must be complementary to NATO .
Indeed that is stressed in paragraph 8 of the General Affairs Council 's comments on international cooperation .
As has been mentioned by Minister Lindh , soldiers today carry out peace-making Community activities .
The crossover between peace and war activities is now difficult to see .
The European Union must be complementary to NATO .
I urge the Council of Ministers and the Commission to comment on that point .
Tackling the root causes is another problem .
Society is seriously destabilised by organised crime .
Can the Commission and Ministers stress that they will tackle this across borders through Interpol and with mechanisms such as Scotland Yard 's Paedophile Unit ?
Capacity building is another critical point .
When we look at Pristina we see that the hospital is under great stress .
Is it not a necessity for the new AIDCO organisation that the Commission has created , which we welcome , to build up the capacity of the medical and educational professions ?
Local professionals maintain civilian society but under stress , however excellent NGOs may be , surely local professionals , particularly in education and medicine , are vital .
I urge the Commission to support those functions .
Finally , of course , accountability .
I truly believe , and I am sure everyone here does too , that the best of all conflict prevention mechanisms is a fully functioning Parliament .
I urge those present to ensure that this Parliament plays its full part , not just in conflict prevention and crisis management , but in ensuring that the Rapid Reaction Force has an ultimate responsibility to this Parliament as well as to national parliaments , the Council of Ministers and the Commission .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , the cost of peace is decidedly lower than the cost of war .
That underscores the crucial importance of non-military conflict prevention in foreign policy .
The Kosovo crisis showed us that .
Post-war costs rock the EU budget every time .
They are many times higher than what 2000 OSCE observers or a stability programme for the region at the beginning of the 1990s would have cost .
The example of Kosovo also teaches us that civil conflict management must be deployed early on .
It takes time and it is not very spectacular .
Conflict prevention today requires not just political instruments ; it also requires economic instruments , as well as social and ecological measures .
The EU has this potential .
It could play a significant role in preventing and managing conflicts in the world .
It has the biggest internal market , it has economic clout , it can plan economic cooperation .
It has a broad range of historical and cultural experience and has a diplomatic corps at international level , but it is not the biggest conflict preventer in the world because it splits this strength into 15 plus 1 fragmented interests and that is the main problem .
European conflict prevention needs a European centre , a Commission and a ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , our Group welcomes the implementation of the initiative aimed at giving the European Union a greater role in the prevention of conflicts and we look forward with great interest to the communication which Mr Patten has said the Commission will deliver next month .
Now , experience has shown us that there are certain problems to be considered .
To this end , although we agree in general with Mr Brok ' s oral question and we recognise that he has accepted collective work by the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , there is a specific point that concerns us which is just the opposite of what Mrs Nicholson says .
In both recital D and in paragraph 8 it is unfortunate that NATO is mentioned because NATO has been one of the main causes of problems in many places , as we saw in the former Yugoslavia , in Kosovo and in Cyprus when it was invaded by Turkey .
Our support cannot therefore be total .
This oral question also contains an important element : targeting the global economic and social factors which may forewarn us of conflicts .
We should be alert to situations which may arise tomorrow or the day after .
In the Western Sahara there is currently a very explosive situation which the authorities do not want to acknowledge and which should cause us great concern in the European Union .
The same could be said of Israel and Palestine , where a crisis with serious consequences for us could blow up in our faces at any time .
We do not want to behave like the United States of America , which whenever there is a problem - such as in Colombia for example - instead of supporting a negotiated solution , reached through discussion , sends more soldiers , more aircraft and more military force , thereby making the situation worse .
We want Europe to promote stability , peace and a negotiated solution to conflicts .
We therefore believe that , in relation to the conflict now arising between Macedonia and Kosovo , we must first concern ourselves with the complacency with which the Americans in the region have fallen into step with the KLA forces and , on the other hand , we must recognise and support Macedonia ' s efforts to reach a border agreement and condemn terrorism .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the events of the last few hours have been most alarming .
Europe is making great efforts to keep the peace in South East Europe and many individual countries are also doing just as much , in terms of financial assistance and cooperation .

However , peace is unfortunately a long way off ; in fact , corruption is growing ; elections - if there are any - often lack transparency , and emigration from Kosovo , Montenegro and Albania has reached overwhelming proportions , those remaining on the territory being the worst of the criminal population .
The European Union probably ought to devote more attention to making return immigration easier , ensuring that there are active populations in those countries who are genuinely committed to redevelopment and pursuing a process of peace and tranquillity in their homelands .
Therefore , it is not just a problem of military security at the frontiers .
The ethnic minorities are becoming increasingly demanding and violent towards the inhabitants and the peacekeeping forces , thus demonstrating the still very evident fragility of local governments , particularly the Albanian Government , which ought to uphold the rights of the political opposition more firmly , and the fragility of relations with the European Union and with some non-governmental organisations .
We are convinced that the solution to the Balkan crisis must be a political solution , but it must be accompanied by full , transparent affirmation of rights and a genuine will for tangible and intangible reconstruction .
The European Union must commit itself wholly to achieving the aims of peace and stability in the Balkans , but it must be increasingly clear about the fact that genuine financial assistance has to be closely linked to the pursuit of these aims , in the short term and without further tolerance .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I do not agree at all with the comments made by Mrs Lindh , who talks about the ' experience of the Balkans ' .
I think what is happening now in Macedonia is proof that we have seen , heard and learned nothing , or rather , that you have seen , heard and learned nothing .
What is happening now in Macedonia is happening in Macedonia and there is no point in creating alibis for ourselves and in saying , as many do , that the crisis stems from Kosovo , from the transfer of persons , of ex-members of the KLA to Macedonia .
The crisis in Macedonia is a crisis which arose and which spread because of our lack of a serious policy on Macedonia over the last ten years .
My socialist colleagues will remember the insistence with which Mrs Pack and myself came back time and time again to the importance of a project which seemed marginal , which my socialist and communist colleagues regarded with a certain condescension .
I am speaking of the Tetovo University project , which was fundamentally important in terms of reacting to the frustration of the Albanians in Macedonia .
We were looked upon condescendingly as we were looked upon condescendingly fifteen years ago when , in this Parliament , we called for the accession of the then Yugoslavia to the European Community as the only way of avoiding the explosion which did indeed take place several years later .
The question that arises is that of the frustrations of the Albanian population , which are extremely long standing and which did not meet with an initial response until the entry into office of the government of Mr Georgievski .

Throughout the first eight years of Macedonian independence , these frustrations were played on by the Social Democratic government of Mr Crvenkovski , who literally bought a few Albanians , a few quislings , by offering them marginal posts in his government and a few ambassadorial posts here and there .

On the other hand , the government of Mr Georgievski certainly saved Macedonia from an enormous disaster .

Mr Georgievski did this by integrating in his government the party of Mr Xhaferi , whom socialist colleagues regarded as an extremist , though they had to sing another tune when they saw the role played by Mr Xhaferi at the time of the 1999 crisis , when hundreds of thousands of Kosovars were chased out of Kosovo by the regime of the war criminal , Mr Milosevic .
The then Macedonia was about to explode .
That it did not explode was thanks to this ' extremist ' , Mr Xhaferi .
That it still has not exploded is thanks , once again , first and foremost , to Mr Xhaferi and certainly not to our action , to the action of the European Union .
Commissioner Patten has now taken charge of this case .
The question of the university should be resolved .
It is an urgent matter because it concerns 6 000 students who should be able to be transferred to this new official university .
If they are not , they will not have the possibility of gaining equivalent diplomas , and if it is not resolved by the end of the year , we will have 6 000 desperate young people who will subsequently fuel the crisis to which we have contributed so much during the course of the last few years .
This is the situation in Macedonia .
The situation is getting even worse , however , because , in addition to the frustration of the Albanian population , we also have the enormous worry of the Macedonian counterpart .
So the solutions of the past , which may have been progressive , which may have led to the creation of this university , which may have been a gradual process to dismantle the national Slav-Macedonian state to replace it with a federal state , now need to be speeded up . We must propose new solutions to our Macedonian interlocutors which go much further and which can tackle both the frustration of the Albanians and the deep concerns of the Slav-Macedonian population .
As regards conflict prevention in this context , for ten years we have been witnessing absolutely intolerable behaviour on the part of our Greek colleagues .
Instead of looking ahead and trying to convince the Greek population of the need to give an identity to the Macedonian population , both Albanian and Slav-Macedonian , through the name ' Macedonia ' , they have blocked , with insolence to say the least , any process which would enable Macedonians to finally have a republic which is not called FYROM , Madam President-in-Office , but ' Macedonia ' .
It is perhaps high time that , within the Council , an attempt is made to convince the Greek representative so that , finally , this problem can be resolved and so that , finally , the Macedonians can have full entitlement to this name .
This is the situation we find ourselves in .
I think it is urgent that we act , that we move more quickly , and that we restore the confidence of the Macedonian population and the Albanian-speaking population of Macedonia .
Mr President , I see eye to eye with my valued fellow MEP , Mr Dupuis , on a number of counts , but completely disagree on others .
I welcome the fact that two points will be addressed during this meeting , namely the development of the civil capacity to manage conflicts , and the conflicts which affect Macedonia .
For what have we been witnessing in Macedonia for years now ?
That it is indeed a fragile state which is only held together by the wisdom of presidents and government leaders - particularly the present ones - and of a number of political leaders who have managed to establish mutual coalitions and have not set about carving up the state of Macedonia .
As long as ten years ago , the Macedonian Albanians came to us with a list of the regions in which they did not have a majority .
This line of thinking shows that the seed of ethnic cleansing had already been planted .
We must avoid going down that road at all cost .
That is why it is also important that we are doing something about this , mainly by civil means , as is currently happening under the guidance of Mr Patten .
I am also extremely taken with the serious plea by President-in-Office Lindh on this matter .
And we will not only be using the regular means , but really all instruments which must be deployed in a coordinated manner , but particularly those which touch the hearts of the nation , and which can bring about a change in the citizens ' mentality .
For example , Paragraph 7 of our resolution is about better radio and TV reporting .
This topic has been discussed many a time in this Parliament , also during the Bosnian wars , because radio and TV have a huge impact on what people think , and how they view each other .
I believe that it is of utmost importance that this weapon is also being deployed as one of the civil channels , not only via the independent media which exist , but , if necessary , from an independent base in the European Union , so that we can actually influence the population in those regions and put an end to the atrocious ethnic thinking which will be the downfall of the Balkans as a whole .
Mr President , I am delighted at the fact that the Commission ' s actions have already been spelled out clearly .
It is important that these are widely known .
The actions of the Commission in the Presevo Valley are crucial and I hope that Mr Patten will take the necessary action in the other border regions too .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , the questions raised by Mr Brok on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy come at a very opportune moment just three months after the vote on the report on the European Security and Defence Policy , which I had the honour of presenting to Parliament .
It is important to know what the Swedish Presidency of the Council and the Commission have done since then as promises were made , especially regarding the civil aspects of crisis management .
Thank you , Madam President-in-Office , Commissioner , for the information you have already given us . However , I cannot hide my true concern .
Having worked with or in organisations such as the OSCE and the Council of Europe , both of which deal with the prevention of conflicts and the civil management of crises , I know from experience how timidly the Member States support their efforts .
I am not talking simply of the lack of finances .
In this regard , the European Union is fortunate enough to dispose of quite considerable amounts of funding .
It is obviously a question of using them in a coherent and coordinated fashion .
I am thinking above all of the lack of political support .
What can an international organisation do ?
What can the European Union do if the Member States carry out different analyses , have different objectives or do not have any objectives at all and if the Member States hesitate in taking decisions ?
The war in the Balkans offers sometimes tragic examples of all these shortcomings .
I believe , Madam President-in-Office , Commissioner , that Parliament would be pleased to feel that the members of the Council clearly have the will to provide this real political support , which conflict prevention needs if it is not to descend into taking ad hoc actions founded solely on charitable sentiments .
Mr President , conflict prevention has hitherto not been a real priority .
For military interventions , men and supplies are already in prospect , but it appears that we are not quite ready for prevention .
We are looking forward to April .
The key question remains , as Mrs Lalumière remarked earlier , whether the European Union will be sufficiently resolute when it comes to prevention .
In the former Yugoslavia , we were unable to prevent conflict for a long time .
And every now and again , conflict prevention ended in disastrous circumstances .
I would refer to the many African examples , and Rwanda , in particular .
The mandates on the basis of which prevention is organised must be sufficient so as to be one step ahead of the conflict .
They must be able to work proactively and provide for crisis management .
Commissioner , you talk about this entire armed force which will need to be set up .
But our point of departure must first of all be based on a sound understanding of the underlying reasons and of the origin of conflicts .
In many cases , the underdevelopment , neglect or suppression of certain regions , religions , cultures and ethnic minorities lie at the root of the evil .
That is a fertile breeding ground for the illegal arms trade and banditry .
Let us therefore not overlook integrated development cooperation as a means of addressing the deeper causes of conflict .
Mr President , when it comes to conflict prevention and crisis management , the leaders of most Member States and the European Union itself have not chalked up any successes , nor are they able to give many guarantees for the future .
The tragic situation in the Balkans is , I think , proof of this .
We say we are going to improve all this and let us hope that we do .
Today , everything is completely cut and dried .
We do not need any generalisations or insults nor do we need insinuation .
The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia is threatened by a number of state or civil forces which refuse to acknowledge its definitive borders .
It is that simple .
And everything else stems from this , throwing FYROM ' s very existence into doubt .
So , if you want to prevent conflicts and manage the crisis which already exists , you should state very loudly that UN Resolution No 1244 applies to the letter .
Ask KFOR to do its job throughout Kosovo , to control borders , to make arrests and to refer people to the courts , in liaison with the representatives of the UN .
State , even more loudly , that the border agreement signed by Yugoslavia and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia on 24 February is valid and completely legal , that all neighbouring countries must abide by it to the letter and that this is a criterion for our relations with them and for the funds which you so proudly announced and which are totally inadequate .
Mr President , in the short time allocated to me I am not going to go back over some of the points already raised .
However conflict resolution and prevention of conflict do require investment .
Investment not just in terms of theories and studies and knowledge of history but also financial investment to try and ensure that the causes of conflict are recognised .
Some of the causes relating to ethnic and religious origin and so on have already been mentioned .
But there are also economic causes .
The most successful area of conflict prevention with which the European Union has been involved in recent years was in the city of Mostar .
Even though it did not succeed in the end the kind of investment we started to put into Mostar was very successful .
As we look forward now to a new range of conflicts and regional uncertainties , we have to make sure that we have the capacity to respond .
Ireland would be proud to play its part in a European Rapid Reaction Force with a humanitarian and peace-keeping role , but that and NATO must not be the only option .
The resolution and prevention of conflict requires dialogue and opposing parties have to be brought together .
You must make peace with your enemy , not with your friend .
There is a saying that opportunity comes to pass , not to pause .
Too often we miss the opportunity to intervene and prevent conflict .
My final point is that , in our discussions , we must be mindful of the effects of conflict on children and young people .
According to UNICEF reports , over two million children have been killed in the conflicts in the last decade .
There are 300 000 child soldiers around the world and millions and millions of orphans .
More must be done to protect children .
Mr President , my major concern is that the focus of EU action on crisis management is too often - I could say invariably - of a military nature , rather than on the longer-term conflict prevention which my colleagues have spoken about .
I am pleased that the President-in-Office and Commissioner Patten understand the need to put in place measures to anticipate violent conflict and to promote what I would call a culture of prevention .
Troop deployment , as we know , is expensive and very prone to failure .
Of course , we need to be able to react rapidly , but the EU must improve its ability to use all the economic and political levers at its disposal and use them more effectively to tackle the root causes of tension , which the Commissioner mentioned earlier .
Twenty-four of the world 's forty poorest countries are either engaged in some kind of armed conflict or have recently emerged from it .
In Africa , 20 % of the population live in countries affected by armed conflict .
Therefore I have to ask the Commissioner , how it is that the Commission 's policy planning and early-warning units , provided for in the Amsterdam Treaty , have 20 members of staff , 11 of whom are engaged in working in Balkans whereas only one is assigned to the world 's most conflict-prone region , Africa .
I would be very happy if the Commissioner could look into that .
Are there plans to have a more balanced approach in the early-warning unit ?
Secondly , would the Council and Commission not agree that we need urgently to develop common strategies for west Africa , the Horn of Africa , the Great Lakes region and for southern Africa ?
Finally , does the Commission agree that country strategy papers which have been drawn up under the Cotonou Agreement must urgently include an impact study of policies on conflict so that we can be assured that we know what might happen in the 77 countries which are part of the Cotonou Agreement .
Mr President , there is major disquiet within the peace movement that the incredibly rapid build-up of military capabilities will hinder the work on long-term preventive measures , some of which were presented by around forty peace organisations to the Swedish and Belgian Presidencies last year .
One example is the renowned civil peace corps which Parliament has requested a number of times and which is mentioned in paragraph five of this proposal for a resolution .
I have been nagging the Swedish Presidency for a long time to address the issue , as I believe that this should be an important matter for the image of Sweden - Sweden wants to be a country of peace .
I received a negative reply for a relatively long time .
However , I suddenly received a letter from the Council ' s President-in-Office before she set off for Murmansk .
In it , she writes that : ' I hereby promise in writing that we will take up the issue of the peace corps once we have the structures in place ' .
This is perhaps a rather unusual way for a President-in-Office to inform Parliament of something .
Even so , I have to accept it and so predict that something will happen regarding the peace corps .
If not , I trust that my colleagues in Parliament will seriously address the issue .
Mr President , after condemning the hypocrisy of everyone , including in this House , who previously sang the praises of the criminals of the KLA , calling them freedom fighters and giving them all manner of political assistance , and recalling the cynicism of everyone who welcomed the criminal bombing of Yugoslavia by ÍÁÔÏ , followed by the despatch of occupying forces to Kosovo disguised as humanitarian assistance and peacemakers , I should like to remind the House that when you sow a wind you reap a hurricane .
So my question to the Council and the Commission is this : what are they going to do , even now , to get KFOR out , given its fatal role in destabilising the region .
Will they stop supporting the secession of Kosovo from Serbia ?
What are they going to do about the application of Security Council Resolution No 1244 , which makes provision for the KLA to be disarmed and for responsibility for guarding the border between Yugoslavia and FYROM to be given to the Yugoslav army , in application of the recent border agreement between the two countries ?
Does Mr Patten perhaps know why the FYROM government was forced to close the BBC office in Skopje ?
And , finally , what does he intend to do about the disastrous proposal of the so-called national liberation army which recently committed crimes in FYROM in a bid to confederate it ?
Minister , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the best way of evaluating what is needed and what has to be done in order to achieve the objective of crisis management is , without doubt , to watch an actual crisis unfold .
Armed clashes occurred on FYROM territory at the beginning of this month , clearly linked to forces acting outside the country .
What we have in the FYROM is the same phenomenon as in so many other countries - Albania , Kosovo , Cyprus and , to a large extent , Turkey - countries which are inhabited by mixed populations , mixed nations with different languages and religions , but which border on compact , nationally homogenous countries or regions inhabited by the overwhelming majority of the nationalities in question .
In the past , situations such as these have resulted in a familiar , tried and tested process , a tragic process and , from the point of view of the times we live in and from the point of view of what we as the European Union are trying to achieve , an unacceptable process .
This process starts with bloody acts of terrorism against one of the two nationalities , the purpose of which is to prove that it is impossible for them to live side by side under the same state roof .
It is followed by the demand for a geographical division between the communities within a single state and the formation of self-governing minorities , develops into inter-community clashes , a division into separate states and , finally , secession as a separate country .
It is a scenario which we have witnessed numerous times in our region and , as we all know , it is accompanied by bloodshed , ethnic cleansing and the intervention of foreign forces , with both good and bad intentions .
It is a disastrous process for the people and it is a dangerous and costly process for the international community .
Crises such as these are managed primarily by political and diplomatic intervention to bring about the social integration of the disadvantaged minority .
Steps have been taken in this direction in the FYROM .
Tetovo University is a typical example .
In all events , what Mr Dupuis said about Greece was wrong , because at the moment Greece is , if you will , the mainstay of this state and it shall continue to be so .
Mr President , in order to prevent conflicts we must know what causes them , be it economic interests , social unrest , inequality , a dictatorship , repression , the struggle for power or access to natural resources .
Conversely , however , the escalation of conflicts in the countries of the South is a barrier to their prospects for development and creates a vicious circle .
That being the case , the prevention of conflicts cannot be divorced from a policy of sustainable development aimed at a better distribution of wealth and the institution of real democracy at a global level .
I listen to and I approve of the debates , including those held in this Parliament , that advocate dialogue , the participation of civil society , access to education and health for all , the rational use of resources and regional cooperation .
We have to attack the structural costs of the tensions in advance .
What is the point , then , of these declarations accompanied by derisory and diminishing budgets when European states sell arms to the countries at war or support petroleum and mining industries in their over-exploitation of the riches of the South to the detriment of human rights and life itself .
As long as the concern for development does not override financial interests and as long as European states see external conflicts as a way of enriching themselves , the prevention of conflicts will remain a pipe dream .
Mr President , I think that both the Commission and the Council deserve ten out of ten .
Ten out of ten for intentions , ideas and the set of conflict prevention and crisis management measures taken .
However , when it comes to the practical , as we have seen in the Balkans , the results are a disaster , an absolute disaster .
It is enough to make you cry , not just for what is happening in the FYROM , but for Bosnia and the Croatian stand on Herzegovina and its independence , which shows that everything is up for grabs and that good intentions pave the road to hell if they are not reconciled with stable , clear and fair political guidelines .
And this is where the problem arises and this is where I should like to say to Mr Patten : Commissioner , that there is a member here who constantly and dogmatically supports the position of the KLA is , if you will , only natural .
But to applaud his position by talking of constitutional change and converting the FYROM into a federation is , I think , highly dangerous , especially in the present circumstances .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , violation of human rights and discrimination against minorities are the main causes of civil and international conflict and war nowadays , which is why many take the view that applying the right to self-determination without compromise is the only way of combating discrimination against and the repression of minorities .
However , they often overlook the fact that this often creates new minorities which are then subject to the same discriminatory mechanisms and which must again try to become independent and break free from this yoke .
In the Balkans in particular , with its widely scattered mixture of people from different ethnic , religious and linguistic backgrounds , it is impossible to make a clear ethnic division , nor , from my understanding , should we want to do so .
Conflict prevention and crisis management in the Balkans nowadays mainly consists of not taking any unilateral action which might upset the precarious balance of power .
Especially as assassination attempts and terrorist activities are not , of course , designed to bring about a new order , but to create new disorder .
What we have to do is to provide support , especially to all those states - and Macedonia is at the top of the list - which are doing everything they can to integrate minorities into civil society , and this also applies to present-day Yugoslavia and Serbia .
To my mind , conflict prevention and crisis management by the European Union today means sending out clear messages to all extremist ethnic Albanian groups who do not want peace and to the extremist organisations or people - there are not many , but they do exist - attached to the HDZ in the Croatian part of Bosnia-Herzegovina which is unilaterally trying to upset the Dayton agreement - however problematic that may be .
And I also think that we need to send a clear message to Montenegro , so that no unilateral action is taken there , action which may be to celebrate their independence but which jeopardises peace and stability in the region .
Mr President , Representative of the Council , Commissioner , once our debates and our speeches get to the point , we only talk about crisis management .
Crisis prevention is the icing on the cake of all political debates because prevention is better than cure .
We talk about peace , war and security but we do not know what to do .
And this leitmotiv presented by our diplomats , our generals and our politicians is without substance .
I would like to say , Mr President , Commissioner , that the concept of crisis prevention will remain devoid of meaning as long as we do not have the tools and the instruments to implement it .
The key to conflict prevention is anticipation and we will only achieve this if we have specific strategic monitoring supported by genuine geopolitical and social observations instruments which are appropriate for the permanent monitoring of ethnic , linguistic and religious tensions .
Yet , Mr President , Commissioner , the European Parliament , which has done a lot of work on this , voted in favour of two motions for resolution on this subject .
One , in 1996 , called on the Commission to create a Crisis prevention network ( CPN ) to take on the role of strategic monitoring so that the analyses , diagnoses and proposals could be inter-European .
The Commission set this up in 1998 and extended it in 2000 .
I would like to ask the Commissioner if the Commission is satisfied with the work that has been done .
What lessons has it learned ?
What use has it been able to make of these reports ?
I would like to ask the Representative of the Council if the Council knows about this work .
Has it ever , in spite of the Commission ' s bureaucratic oppression , known about this work ?
Has it been of use to you ?
The other resolution was incorporated in 1997 and 1998 in two reports on Africa , one by Mr Martens and the other by me .
This resolution called on the Commission to propose to the ACP countries , on the occasion of the negotiations which were to lead to the Cotonou partnership agreement , that Europe should provide finance and expertise to enable four regional observatories of ethnic , linguistic and religious tension to operate in Africa .
Without such tools of anticipation , which Mrs Lindh spoke of earlier , though she did not actually talk about tools , we manage crises , but we do not see them coming .
The Commission did not act on this suggestion .
Nor did the Council .
The idea , like the need , is still there .
Does the Commission intend to take it up ?
Has the Council buried it ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the debate on conflict prevention and crisis management policy and on the problems in the area of southern Yugoslavia in general is like testing theory and practice all at once .
Of course , when nations are turned into guinea pigs on the basis of the " stick and carrot rather than policy " approach , something is seriously wrong .
Let us at least try out a new starting point , the sole aim of which is conflict prevention .
It will be a long time before those guilty of tragic mistakes in south-eastern Europe in the past are able to unravel , decode and understand the political and social DNA of the Balkans .
Now that the European Union has taken substantial initiatives and general conditions in the area may be said to have improved , no new aggravation and no more armed reckonings should be allowed .
Peace , cooperation , the rule of law and inviolable borders must form the backbone to our policy , along with constant efforts to improve the democratic institutions and standard of living in all these hard-hit regions .
The European Union must assist and strengthen the healthy forces in the area and must keep its distance from those trying to turn the underworld and organised crime into political agencies .
We still have not calculated the huge cost - either to the region or to Europe as a whole - of the mistaken action which at last appears to have come to an end .
Peace and stability in the region would appear to be the primary sine qua non for a political resolution to the extended crisis and it will take a great deal of time and effort before stable , viable , constitutional institutions result .
For the European Union , what a splendid victory .
At last it can emerge wearing a olive wreath , Athena ' s olive wreath of wisdom and peace , rather than the spear and shield of Mars , the ancient god of war .
I should just like to say to Mr Dupuis that , before saying what he did in the House about relations between the FYROM and Greece , he would have done well to talk to the FYROM government .
Then he would have discovered that the European country with which it maintains the best relations is Greece .
This is a fact of life and it makes an excellent contribution to stability in the region .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I will try to answer some of the concrete questions addressed to the Council as briefly as possible .
Baroness Nicholson of Winterbourne addresses the issue of organised crime as a significant cause of conflicts and wonders whether the Council has tried addressing the problem of organised crime in its work on conflict prevention .
Russia ' s President Vladimir Putin and Foreign Minister Igor Ivanov are travelling to Stockholm next week for a meeting with Heads of State and Government along with foreign ministers in conjunction with the European Council . One of the main points of the meeting will be to continue discussions on how we can work with the Russian Government on the on-going fight against organised crime , which can unfortunately be found in many parts of Russia and which constitutes a cause of many of the conflicts we see around Russia ' s borderlands .
I can therefore promise Baroness Nicholson of Winterbourne that the presidency is actively trying to combat organised crime .
Mrs Lalumière addresses an issue which is key to all work on conflict prevention , i.e. how the Union can achieve a greater consensus on foreign policy matters .
Such a consensus is necessary if we are to be able to operate effectively in our work on conflict prevention .
It is the hope of the Council that the common strategies in particular that we have developed for a number of areas of conflict will help to develop such a consensus .
The common strategies have not always worked in the way that the Council and others had hoped .
In its meeting in January this year , the Council ( General Affairs ) approved conclusions , based on a report from the EU High Representative , Dr Javier Solana , containing an undertaking to try to refine this instrument , improve it and make it more concrete .
I hope that this will prove an effective means of achieving what Mrs Lalumière is calling for . I share the honourable Member ' s view fully .
In this context , I would also like to refer to Mrs Kinnock ' s question on the extent to which more common strategies should be developed for other areas , of which several were mentioned .
The general opinion of the Council is that we must start by ensuring that the instrument of common strategies is more effective , before we move on to investigating whether it can be expanded to cover other areas of conflict .
However , we note the proposals and will naturally bear them in mind in our on-going deliberations .
Finally , Mr Rocard asks a number of relevant questions and asks for concrete reactions to the way the Commission has been strengthened in its work on conflict prevention .
I will hand you over to Commissioner Patten to answer this question in more detail .
However , let me point out that one of the primary reasons for the presidency prioritising the development of a programme of measures to prevent conflict is that we see a need within the Union to pool our resources in order to improve efficiency in the area of conflict prevention .
In this work , we will look at the decisions already taken and the embryonic state of the organisational structure in various areas .
Hopefully , we will be able to draw up a common effective programme which makes the Union even better equipped to prevent conflicts around the world .
I would like to respond to four questions which were put during the course of the debate .
I see that two of those who asked me direct questions have not unfortunately been able to stay in order to hear the response , but I am sure that does not mean that they do not think the questions were important .
In any event , I thought the questions were important so I will respond to them and perhaps they will be able to read the answers in the official record .
The first question was about the Tetovo University and I want to make it clear to the honourable Member who raised that question in absentia that I think the university is extremely important .
I am very pleased with the commitment of the government of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia to the establishment of that university .
I am sure that Parliament will be pleased , but not surprised , that the Commission intends to put EUR 5 million of support into that university which has an extremely important role to play in ensuring the development of a successful multi-ethnic community .
In relation to the question of extremism , I agree with the honourable Member who said that we should not support Albanian extremism .
We should all denounce it vigorously .
In that context , I do not myself believe that it is remotely helpful , indeed exactly the reverse , to talk about constitutional change in the FYROM .
We know perfectly well that there is a government in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia which has done an extraordinary job , a very brave job , a very committed job , in moving along the road of economic and political reform .
I commend the efforts that the government has made so far .
That is why we have agreed to start negotiating a stabilisation and association agreement with that government and that is why we completed those negotiations for an agreement before completing them with anybody else .
We should continue to support the government of the FYROM in all its efforts to build a successful pluralist open society in the FYROM .
They have done an excellent job so far and we will continue to support them against the extremist threats with which they have to contend .
Two other questions , first of all the question of country strategy papers and the importance of including ideas of conflict prevention in the country strategy papers .
I thought , and certainly meant to make it clear in my earlier remarks , that this was a question that we intended to address in our communication in April on conflict prevention .
I can assure the honourable Member that we will do that .
It is extremely important .
It represents the sort of development in the preparation of country strategy papers that we have seen with other aid donors and development partners so I hope we can pursue that .
The honourable Member suggested , perhaps in view of our past experience a tad ambitiously , that we should launch ourselves on four new common strategies .
I think we have some lessons to learn on common strategies as both the High Representative and this Commissioner have made clear in public and in private .
But the honourable Member is entirely right to say that we need to look at more coherence in our policies in Africa .
We have to take account of the fact that there is an unholy and unhealthy relationship between developmental problems in Africa and conflict .
Finally , I would like to address the question raised by Mr Rocard , who is , in many respects , the godfather of the conflict prevention network .
That has been and remains a very valuable contribution to our policy armoury , although I think that we have to do rather more in making use of it .
I hope we can in future .
We had an extremely good meeting on the CPN last week with a group of parliamentarians .
Two of his colleagues from the Socialist Group were able to attend that meeting at which there was a good exchange between my officials and the group of parliamentarians .
We have an excellent relationship with the parliamentary advisory group on conflict prevention and will certainly take account of their advice and of the informed advice and wisdom of , as it were , the godfather - I mean that in an entirely benign sense - in our future development of the network and of our policies in this area .
I hope that we can return to this subject in April when the Commission produces its communication on conflict prevention as a whole .
I have received eight motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at 12 noon on Thursday .
Regulation of European securities markets
The next item is the oral questions to the Commission ( B5-0016 / 2001 ) and ( B5-0082 / 2001 ) by Mrs Randzio-Plath , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the final report of the Committee of Wise Men on the Regulation of European Securities Markets .
Mr President , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs showed its appreciation of the report of the Committee of Wise Men by adopting a unanimous resolution .
It is in the interests of the European Union , in the interests of the three institutions , to do something about the fragmentation of the European financial markets and find solutions which take account of the interests of industry , investors and end-users and which , in this age of globalisation , help to stabilise the financial markets .
We therefore feel that quicker , more efficient legislation needs to be passed in this area .
All three institutions have a contribution to make here .
The Wise Men ' s report does not clarify how the players and institutions should interact at the various levels and therefore calls for dialogue between the European institutions , hence our questions to the Commission and the Council , because the European Parliament is not sure how the institutional balance can be guaranteed in the European Union within this sort of proposal .
We have formulated our proposals on this basis and we expect replies from the Council and the Commission .
Indeed , unlike in most Member States or the USA , the Treaty makes no provision for secondary legislation , not least because there is no executive body at Community level to which such powers can be delegated .
And , unlike national parliaments , the European Parliament has no right of initiative .
The comitology procedure proposed by the Council and in the report will certainly need to be supplemented , in order to establish a balance between the institutions , if there is to be a fast-track procedure .
This means that , if a clear correlation between political and technical matters is created within framework legislation , technical implementing powers and powers to adapt to technological progress will need to be decided as quickly as possible and backed up by giving the European Parliament a clear callback right if anyone acts ultra vires or fails to abide by the transparency rule , for example , during the consultation process .
Finally , the Lamfalussy report , like the European Parliament , attaches great importance to an absolutely transparent procedure in precisely this legislative area .
I should like to say that , with good will on the part of the Council and the Commission , this callback right could be included by simply amending the 1999 comitology decision to include the eventuality that , if the European Parliament feels that the Securities Committee has acted ultra vires , this must be rectified either by the Commission ' s submitting a new proposal or by applying the normal codecision procedure in this area .
The European Parliament is calling quite unequivocally for an interinstitutional agreement here which clarifies the fact that the basic principles and the clear distinction between political and technical implementing measures are regulated in the laws on a case-by-case basis .
We are prepared to go along with anything which speeds things up - we can also apply the fast track procedure to the parliamentary codecision procedure - and to guarantee that there is total transparency .
But I call on the Council and the Commission to give us a clear answer here today as to what plans they have for a callback right for the European Parliament or equivalent procedure because this is crucial to our democratic responsibility in the European Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am grateful for this opportunity to develop the Council ' s position regarding the proposals contained in the report from the Committee of Wise Men , chaired by Baron Lamfalussy .
There has already been a lot of informal contact between Parliament and the Council regarding this issue .
I would like to take this opportunity to express the Council ' s great appreciation of the work carried out on this matter by Mrs Randzio-Plath as chairperson of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
It has been invaluable for the Council and the presidency to be able to discuss these issues with you on an on-going basis .
As you no doubt know , the ECOFIN Council discussed the proposals in the Lamfalussy report at its meeting on 12 March 2001 .
The Council welcomed the report , but the discussions will continue .
A new ECOFIN Council meeting will take place immediately before the European Council in Stockholm .
The presidency aims to reach an agreement as soon as possible .
The Council believes that the operation of the financial markets is of considerable significance to increased growth in the economy .
This makes it even more natural to discuss this issue in conjunction with the European Council in Stockholm , one of the aims of which is to modernise the European economy .
It is vital to growth and increased employment that the financial markets be cost-effective in brokering capital between savings and investments , handling payment systems and distributing risk .
At the same time , we must ensure that the markets provide good consumer protection and that they are stable .
The financial markets and the venture capital markets in the EU must be integrated and made more efficient .
The action plans for financial services and venture capital provide a good foundation for achieving these particular targets regarding integration and efficiency .
The focus is on fully implementing the action plan .
In order to keep to the timetable , we must put in the efforts required now .
As we see it , it is therefore necessary for the institutions concerned and the Member States to jointly review the legislative process in the financial area and exploit its opportunities more effectively , so that important and necessary decisions can be taken more quickly .
The Council believes that the Community legislation regulating the securities market must contain a measure of flexibility in order to address development and create a competitive common market which is receptive to new international trends .
The legislative process must be speeded up , but the limits of the Treaty must , of course , be respected .
This can and must be achieved while , at the same time , fully respecting the provisions of the Treaty , the rights of the institutions concerned and the existing balance between them .
The Council largely supports the four levels which the Committee of Wise Men proposes in order to make the regulation process more flexible within the framework of the current Treaty .
I do not wish to comment today on the operational details of the future European Securities Committee .
I would just like to emphasise that , as I have said , the Council and Member States are aware of the need to speed up the legislative process .
The procedures proposed by the Committee of Wise Men for decisions at what are referred to as Level 1 and Level 2 are not actually new .
They are based on existing options , i.e. on the comprehensive legislative procedure and on implementation through comitology .
Therefore , the basic rules and the effects of these with regard to the issues taken up by Mrs Randzio-Plath in her question are familiar .
Mrs Randzio-Plath wonders how the Council proposes to be able to guarantee balance in the codecision procedure and a large degree of openness .
The legal framework with regard to delegating implementation powers is clear in respect of the Treaty , the Council ' s 1999 comitology decision , legal practice in the European Court of Justice and the decisions of the legislature when it delegates implementation powers in each particular case .
In this regard , the Council and the European Parliament already follow established rules .
We are all obliged to follow this legal framework .
The codecision procedure enables us to decide jointly for each individual act what will be delegated to comitology and according to which rules .
Through the new framework decision of 1999 , Parliament is also guaranteed a greater role than ever before , with a large degree of openness also guaranteed .
This new openness benefits , and is important to , the European Parliament , as well as the general public .
The European Parliament is guaranteed always to be kept fully informed about the work of the Securities Committee and to receive all documentation linked to it : agendas , proposals for measures , results of votes , minutes of meetings and attendance lists .
If Parliament believes that the draft measures put forward by the Commission exceed the implementation powers in the basic instrument , the Commission should immediately re-examine these measures , taking into account as far as possible Parliament ' s resolution .
An independent Regulators ' Committee will act as an advisory group to the Commission when drawing up draft implementation measures for the framework principles .
For this system to work properly , all the institutions concerned must act in good faith and respect the fundamental conditions for the strategy at various levels as proposed in the report by the Committee of Wise Men .
Mrs Randzio-Plath further urges me to ensure that the Securities Committee does not intervene to make major changes to or block implementation regulations proposed by the Commission and to provide political assurance with regard to the Council ' s willingness to speed up its procedures .
I must emphasise the basic constitutional difference between the Council as an institution and a committee for comitology , which comprises representatives of the Member States themselves , and not of the Council .
This difference is important and , as everyone knows , forms the basis for the whole structure of the comitology .
I would like to stress that the Securities Committee ' s main task will be to assist the Commission in exercising the powers delegated to it in accordance with the procedure for decisions on comitology .
With regard to the Council , I would like to repeat my previous comment that all institutions concerned will need to act in good faith and respect the fundamental conditions in the report by the Committee of Wise Men .
The structure proposed in the Lamfalussy report respects the codecision procedure and the institutional symmetry set out in the Treaty .
Therefore the Council believes that there is no need for a further institutional framework in this area .
I would also like to say that the ECOFIN Council has a positive attitude towards the idea of establishing an interinstitutional monitoring system to evaluate the development towards an integrated financial market and to identify bottlenecks .
Regular reports could be presented to the European Parliament and the Council as part of this monitoring process .
In addition , the extensive and open review proposed for 2004 will make it possible for us to assess how the system works and remedy any deficiencies .
As I said , on 12 March , the ECOFIN Council welcomed the report and the proposed strategy of four levels and made good progress in setting the general rules for solving institutional and organisational issues which may arise from the strategy .
However , some questions remain regarding relations between the Council , the Commission and the European Parliament in conjunction with particular acts and the establishment of the Regulators ' Committee .
The ECOFIN Council urged continued work on these issues and I hope , as I said in my introduction , that we will be able to reach an overall solution as soon as possible .
Mr President , I wish to begin by saying that the Commission broadly supports the main thrust of the report of the Committee of Wise Men , chaired by Mr Lamfalussy .
In order to achieve the integration of security markets by 2005 , the Commission considers that Community legislation must become more efficient and flexible in order to respond rapidly to developments in financial markets .
EU legislation must also be implemented swiftly and consistently , and enforced more rigorously .
Mrs Randzio-Plath has raised five main points on the Commission 's position on the report .
I should like to try to answer all five , although perhaps in a slightly different order .
First , on accountability and transparency of the process , I recall that the essential elements of an act must , according to the Treaty and the jurisprudence , be defined by the legislators and therefore it will pass through the so-called Level 1 normal codecision procedure .
Implementing measures , however , shall , in accordance with the comitology decision , be delegated to a Level 2 process , as is clear to any person who has read the Lamfalussy report .
The Commission shares the view that it is essential that consumers and industry are fully consulted on all such implementing measures affecting them .
In adopting directives or regulations at Level 1 , the Council and Parliament will jointly define the scope of technical implementing measures by codecision , as has been stated , on a case-by-case basis .
On Level 2 , the Commission is also ready to consult widely with market participants and end-users in an open and transparent way before adopting tactical implementing measures .
The Commission also agrees that the European Securities Regulators ' Committee should carry out a full consultation process on draft implementing measures , with the European Parliament being fully informed .
As regards the Commission ' s right of initiative , I stress that the Commission , in preparing its proposals for Level 2 technical implementing measures , looks forward to benefiting from the technical expertise that the European Union 's regulators will bring - after all they are the experts in these matters .
There can therefore be no question at all of the Commission 's right of initiative being affected by any such advice .
The Commission believes that encouraging European regulators to work in this way will also facilitate over time the convergence of regulatory structures throughout the European Union .
I now come to the third matter raised by Mrs Randzio-Plath : the question of the symmetry of the codecision powers of the two legislative pillars and of the transparency of the Securities Committee .
It seems to the Commission that such a symmetry is guaranteed by the codecision procedure provided for in Article 251 of the EC Treaty .
That procedure gives Parliament the power to decide , together with the Council , on the scope of the technical implementing measures to be adopted at Level 2 .
Parliament must decide , together with the Council , on the difference between the general principles and the implementing measures .
For those measures the 1999 comitology decision - referred to earlier by the representative of the Council - confers on Parliament " the right to be informed by the Commission on a regular basis of the proceedings of the committees involved in committee procedures . "
In conformity with Articles 1 and 2 of the Interinstitutional Agreements on procedures for implementing the 1999 comitology decision , the Commission will send to Parliament all necessary documentation , draft measures and agendas of the European Securities Committee , as the Council representative just mentioned .
The Commission is also prepared to follow the committee 's recommendation that it should take the utmost account of any parliamentary resolution adopted concerning a proposal to the European Securities Committee .
Let me now turn to the question raised about proposals for implementing measures .
If the European Securities Committee were to fail to give a positive opinion to the Commission and the Council were to oppose the measures or Parliament were to express a view that the implementing measures exceeded the delegated powers in a resolution adopted by an absolute majority - the so-called ultra vires case - the Commission would , following the 1999 comitology decision , re-examine its proposal .
In such circumstances the Commission would be prepared , as I mentioned earlier , to take the utmost account of Parliament 's position , as expressed in such a resolution . In those circumstances , and even if the European Securities Committee had already given a positive opinion on the proposed implementing measures , the comitology decision still gives the Commission the possibility of putting forward a legislative proposal on the basis of the Treaty , i.e. through codecision .
The Commission is , however , convinced that all sides will have major incentives to make this system work .
It is willing to work with the Council and Parliament within the scope of the Treaty and of the comitology decision to clarify any outstanding points .
Furthermore , the proposed interinstitutional monitoring committee - on which , of course , this Parliament will be represented - will have a significant role in ensuring all of this .
Finally , on this point , there will be a full review of the whole process in 2004 .
To conclude , and before I answer the questions put by Mrs Randzio-Plath , the Commission 's fundamental objective in the securities field is to create an integrated European financial market through the completion of the financial services action plan , and the sooner the better .
The Commission believes that substantial long-term benefits will flow from that objective .
To deliver it , the Commission considers that Community legislation must become more efficient and flexible in order to respond rapidly to developments in financial markets .
As the Council representative also stressed , legislation must be delivered in a way which is in conformity with the Treaty and with the 1999 comitology decision .
All interested parties will have to be satisfied and have an adequate role within the limits of the Treaty .
I know I shall have the chance at the end of the debate to provide some additional comments , but I should like to reply to some remarks made by Mrs Randzio-Plath .
Indeed the Commission welcomes very much the positive attitude shown by Mrs Randzio-Plath , as chairperson of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , vis-à-vis the report of the Committee of Wise Men under the chairmanship of Mr Lamfalussy .
She said that every effort must be made to speed the process up - and the Commission totally agrees with her opinion - otherwise we shall be adopting yesterday 's measures for tomorrow 's developments .
She also said - and here again we concur - that the procedures must be absolutely transparent , and the report of Mr Lamfalussy and his colleagues is very clear on this .
Once again , there is a monitoring committee on which , as I have said , Parliament will be represented , to monitor this whole process .
If there is insufficient transparency , then no doubt the monitoring committee will make the appropriate observations .
Thirdly , in the case that Parliament should adopt by majority vote the opinion that the Commission has acted ultra vires , then once again the Commission agrees with the Lamfalussy report in saying that it will take utmost account of Parliament 's opinion and act accordingly .
That is an important safeguard for Parliament to see that it is not bypassed by any sleight-of-hand .
So , there again , we can reassure Mrs Randzio-Plath .
Mr President , with your permission , I should like first to make a comment on Parliament ' s order of business .
On the basis of Parliament ' s order of business , on which this and other reports are entered for this morning , I promised to discuss the European economy with voters in my constituency in one hour ' s time .
I should therefore like to apologise in advance for being unable to stay until the end of this debate .
I wish to make a few comments on the Wise Men ' s proposal , but I shall start by thanking Baron Lamfalussy for his highly intelligent and far-reaching report on this subject and then take a position on the first part of this report , i.e. on the question of a fast-track procedure .
The real issue here is that we want to fast track the passage and application of this important legislative package .
And we have here an initial opportunity where the European Parliament has already stated that it is prepared , if at all possible and if the Council meets us half way here , to complete the legislative procedures at first reading .
So if we can agree at first reading , then the European Parliament will be prepared to refrain from tabling any further proposed amendments at second reading .
That goes without saying .

I think it would be a good idea if we were to select two very important pilot projects here , such as the regulations on pension funds , which are crucial , and a simpler issue such as the regulations on prospectuses in the European Union , and use these projects to see exactly what happens here if we shift legislation to a secondary level .
I should like to say a word on the question of whether democracy costs time .
Time and again we hear that Parliament ' s being allowed a possible three readings to deal with a question extends the legislative procedure unnecessarily .
I cannot agree with that .
Think back to the old days of unanimity , when the legislative procedure in the European Union took up to 20 years .
There are quite specific examples of this , such as the product liability directive .
Experience has shown that we are able to complete important legislative procedures in two years with the new codecision procedure .
I think this shows that it is possible to have a democratic procedure which does not take an overly long time .
Now to the second question , i.e. the implementation of legislation in the European Union .
We agree with the Wise Men ' s proposal on most points , unlike the Council , which has reservations .
However , as the European Parliament , we unanimously demand a callback right in cases in which we feel that errors have been made in implementing the legislation .
This too is a unanimous call and will shortly be adopted in the resolution .

Mr President , I would first of all like to thank Mr von Wogau and Chris Huhne who , together with your assistant , ensured that the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs could adopt a resolution unanimously .
Such unanimity within our committee is worth underlining as it is a rare occurrence and should encourage the Commission and the Council to look very closely at the arguments put forward by the European Parliament .
I would next like to thank Alexandre Lamfalussy , who worked patiently and intelligently at the head of the Committee of Wise Men .
He listened to the European Parliament and the vast majority of his proposals were sensible , useful and even necessary to achieve proper regulation of the European securities markets and to create a genuine market in this area .
Be that as it may , the report by Mr Lamfalussy had a mitigated reception , both in the ECOFIN Council and in the European Parliament , to the extent that some of his proposals threatened the interinstitutional balance .
Mrs Randzio-Plath has already spoken about this so I will not go over it again .
I am fully aware of the need to legislate more rapidly , especially in the interest of the development of European financial markets .
The problem lies , above all , in the Securities Committee , which would adopt the Commission ' s proposals according to the Council ' s voting rules .
We are told that these are not decisions relating to technical subjects and Mr Danielsson reminded us of the difference between the Council of Ministers and a regulatory committee .
Why , then , mobilise Secretaries of State for ostensibly technical rules ?
What is more , these Secretaries of State must vote according to Council rules .
Who can explain to me to what extent Secretaries of State , working under the direction of their respective ministries , will be able to legislate more quickly than the ECOFIN Council ?
That does not make much sense and I believe that , if we really want to work faster , we can do so .
Mr von Wogau has pointed out a few ways to achieve this . I will not repeat them .
The Parliament wants a right to recall , which exists in many countries and also in the United States .
It is a safeguard clause in the interest of the markets . I am sure that , if this safeguard clause , this right to recall , existed , Parliament would probably not use it very often .
In any event , it is a guarantee against the anti-democratic practices of a committee which sits behind closed doors and takes decisions without Parliament being able to intervene .
Mr President , I will just take as read my group 's support for the Lamfalussy report and for the reasoning in it .
I want to come to the nub of the issue here before us .
I am not reassured by the assurances of the Council and the Commission that we in Parliament are fully looked after in this process . Of course , we must respect the treaties .
Of course , we must understand the difference between primary law and secondary legislation as referred to in Lamfalussy . And of course , we have as a potential point of departure the June 1999 interinstitutional agreement on comitology .
We stand at a special moment where we can seize an opportunity as institutions together to creatively pursue something that we have failed miserably to do so far .
There is a long list of blockages noted by Lamfalussy and they are primarily the blockages of the Council of Ministers .
There is a long list of failures to implement and they are primarily a responsibility for the Commission as guardian of the Treaty to enforce .
There is no point in going back to the past when we can seize this moment to create a much better future without delay in terms of a single financial market .
Yes , we have rights in the primary legislation .
We have the right , as has been said , to define the scope of the legislation and of the derogated powers to the regulators and securities committees .
But there is a feedback system in this .
Will we give them a millimetre or a metre ?
A metre or a kilometre ?
I will tell you - we will dole it out in accordance with our view of its democratic scrutiny , its balance , its parallelism between the legislative institutions and its accountability .
If you want speed and substance , if you want , Commissioner and Council , the flexibility to give tomorrow 's solutions to tomorrow 's problems , and not to yesterday 's problems , then we need to give these committees a wide latitude but be able to call back , if necessary , on reflection .
No callback - no wide latitude .
We have a big choice to make .
What are we pursuing here ?
It is not simply a closed loop .
In the primary round we get to decide how wide is the secondary discretion and how wide it will be .
It will partly depend on how open and democratic is it and how balanced it is in terms of the two legislative arms of this Union .
Let me turn to the bit of the debate that has not mentioned its name .
Even as the Council sits here and - if I might say even with due deference to all the politeness of the Minister - throws the book at us and says , " There is a treaty ; there is a procedure . We will inform you , we will send you the minutes , but otherwise please go away , " I do not accept that message .
I want to know from the Council as you give us that message why do you or at least some Member States go through the back door and use annexes , attached for other reasons on sensitive issues , to the June 1999 decision and make up new comitology rules for yourselves to jump from qualified majority de facto to simply majority as leverage on the European Commission .
This is not acceptable .
There should be not two rules but one rule , one democracy , one openness .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that we must send a clear warning to the Council and the Commission that the conditions for democratic control over a fundamental issue have not been met .
Moreover , the mandate given to the Wise Men referred to the method , whilst the political debate on the aims and the substance of regulation and political control is still far from over .
To create a European financial market could be a move in the wrong direction because of the finances of unstable and discriminatory markets or an obsession with financial assets .
However , the exercise may turn out to be positive if it is a question of pooling resources to develop a productive system , social cohesion or inter-generation solidarity .
However , who can say that we are actually preparing that ?
It is not the European Parliament that is slowing things down .
The Member States have said yes to a pan-European financial market , but they have not bothered to consider its impact .
They have not developed a strategy and have come up against a great deal of administrative opposition .
The Committee of Wise Men had to propose an extremely complicated procedure which was typically intergovernmental , whilst a method giving powers of initiative to the European Parliament with the establishment of a European regulator who was equipped with a clear mandate would have certainly succeeded in an effective , acceptable and rapid fashion .
So we have a method which is totally inappropriate . This is what we are saying today in unanimity with the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
We want at least a power of recall , which would enable us to control this extremely bureaucratic procedure , which is slipping from our grasp .
We demand that this challenge be brought within reach of public opinion .
Once again , it is a question of democratic choice .
I must inform you that , in accordance with the agenda , the present debate is suspended and will be resumed at 9.00 p.m.
Foot-and-mouth disease
The next item is the statement by the President-in-Office of the Council on foot-and-mouth disease .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , foot-and-mouth disease is a terrible disease .
It is immensely infectious and deadly .
It also causes major financial damage and great suffering .
It is therefore not surprising that this issue is a concern to Parliament now that the first outbreak in many years has been identified within the Union .
On 20 February this year , an outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease was identified in the UK .
On 26 February , the UK informed the Council of Agriculture Ministers of the situation in the country and reported on the measures taken to prevent the disease from spreading .
As you know , in this area the Council has left it to the Commission , based on decisions taken by veterinary surgeons from the Member States , to decide on measures generally taken by the Member States .
In line with this , the Commission has taken decisions which mean the introduction of certain protective measures to prevent the spread of the disease .
The decision means a ban on the export from the UK of live animals , species which are susceptible to foot-and-mouth disease , and milk , meat and other animal products from these species .
On 6 March this year , the Commission took further decisions to ban all transportation of animals which can contract foot-and-mouth disease across the EU and to close down markets and collection centres for animals susceptible to foot-and-mouth disease across the EU .
An exception to this decision allows transportation directly to an abattoir .
At an extraordinary meeting yesterday , the Standing Veterinary Committee was informed that an outbreak had also been identified in north-western France .
Measures have been taken there similar to those taken in the UK .
Naturally , the issue will be addressed at the next Council of Agriculture Ministers early next week .
The EU Veterinary Committee will have its next meeting on 20 March , at which time the situation in the UK and France will be discussed again , along with possible future measures .
The Council regrets the situation in the UK and France and is closely following developments in close contact with the Commission , while at the same time Member States are taking various preventive measures .
The Council has complete confidence in the measures which have been taken in the UK and France and in the way the two countries have dealt with the problem .
An outbreak of so infectious and serious a disease as foot-and-mouth is always extraordinarily painful for everyone affected .
However , it is particularly difficult when the outbreak affects a group already hard hit , comprising breeders , milk and meat producers and , in particular , smallholders .
Mr President , I am glad of this opportunity to up-date Parliament on the latest developments in the outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease in the United Kingdom and now also in France .
You will recall that the first outbreak in the UK was confirmed in the evening of 20 February .
The Commission adopted a safeguard decision the following day , 21 February .
This measure imposed a ban on the export of certain live animals - cattle , sheep and goats - from the UK and restrictions on the export of meat , meat products , milk and milk products and certain animal products .
Since then further measures have been introduced to ban movements of livestock throughout the European Union .
This measure is precautionary and aimed at reducing any potential for the spread of the disease to a minimum .
It must also be viewed in the context of the continued increase in cases in the United Kingdom .
Any expectation that the crisis would end quickly have been disappointed .
Clearly we need to be very concerned at the progress of the outbreak .
Three factors in particular are disturbing .
First , the continuing uncertainty over whether the incidence in the UK will peak , second , the discovery of a case in France which ends our hopes that the outbreak might be confined to the UK and third , the restrictions imposed by third countries , on imports of Community products , many totally unjustified .
I would now like to look at each of these three concerns , beginning with the incidence in the UK .
It is clearly disappointing that expectations that the incidence of the disease would shortly peak have not been realised .
The veterinary experts remain of the view that the restrictions on animal movements will , in time , limit the potential spread of the disease .
This highlights the continued need for vigilance in the UK and for the strictest possible implementation of the measures already in place .
Since the initial decision to ban exports of certain meat and meat products , dairy products and so on , there has been a ban on movements of livestock both in the UK and in other Member States .
While these restrictions are naturally unpopular , they are a small price to pay compared to the consequences of not quickly eradicating this disease .
I would hope that this greater good is not lost sight of in the present crisis .
So , turning to France , I am sure that everybody shares the Commission 's concern at the discovery of the first case of the disease on the European mainland .
As you are no doubt aware , a case of foot-and-mouth disease was confirmed yesterday in north-west France in the Mayenne region .
It was detected in a cattle farm under restrictions imposed preventatively more than a week prior to the confirmation of the outbreak .
The cattle farm is next to a farm to which incubating sheep had been imported from the United Kingdom on 16 February , a few days before the UK outbreak was known about .
The sheep from the UK had been destroyed on 1 March as a preventive measure in accordance with the relevant Commission decision .
The slaughter and destruction of all 114 cattle in the outbreak confirmed yesterday started yesterday evening and this operation is still on-going .
This discovery dashes our hopes that the disease could be confined to the UK .
However , we can take considerable comfort from the very decisive action taken by the French authorities to isolate and destroy livestock potentially exposed to contaminated animals imported from the UK .
The early action to restrict movements of livestock in France should also have reduced the potential spread of the disease .
These measures , wrongly viewed as excessive by some , have proved to be very prudent .
Nonetheless , there is a risk of further outbreaks and the situation will have to be very closely monitored .
The Standing Veterinary Committee took the decision late yesterday evening to ban exports of susceptible animals from France and also to impose restrictions on the movement of animals and certain products from the Mayenne department and the adjoining department of Orne .
Clearly , any further outbreaks would require additional restrictions on the regions concerned , but the prompt action taken by the French authorities will hopefully ensure that there will be no need for more draconian measures .
Turning to third countries. the Commission is deeply disappointed that the very decisive action taken to tackle the current outbreak has not received the recognition it deserves .
Instead of being reassured by this action , third countries have , in many cases , responded with both excessive and , in my view , unnecessary restrictions .
The Commission is consulting urgently with the third countries concerned to establish the basis and rationale for the restrictions .
We shall , of course , be explaining the measures already in place , which make such restrictions unnecessary , and we shall make full use of our bilateral contacts and our WTO trade arrangements to have these restrictions lifted .
I have already been in contact with the US Secretary of Agriculture this afternoon regarding the measures imposed by the United States .
I was reassured by the Secretary that these measures will be reviewed urgently .
We have agreed that our respective veterinary services should cooperate urgently on finding solutions .
We agreed to remain in close contact until a solution is found and I am convinced of her goodwill in that regard .
As an example of the approach followed by the Commission , I would point to the Community approach towards Argentina .
Beef imports have been permitted from Argentina despite its regional problems with foot-and-mouth disease .
This was , of course , subject to very strict controls .
The beef had to be from BSE-free regions , deboned and matured , to eliminate the risk of transmission of the disease .
It was only following the further recent outbreaks , the introduction of vaccination and the self-imposed ban on exports to the United States and Canada that the Commission felt compelled to ban imports of beef from Argentina .
The Commission remains nonetheless committed to a regionalisation approach in which exports can be allowed to resume in safe conditions .
On a more general level , I would once more like to defend the firm action taken by the Commission in dealing with the current outbreak .
It is an essential and very necessary reaction to a highly infectious disease , with potentially huge economic and trade consequences for the entire European Union .
This approach continues to enjoy the strong support of the Member States in the Standing Veterinary Committee and in the Agriculture Council .
I firmly believe that the veterinary authorities , the Member States and the Commission have been working together very closely and effectively .
The approach is also supported by EU farmers , who are very conscious of the grave threat to their livelihood from this disease .
There is still a consensus that vaccination should be a last resort , to be introduced only in the circumstances I outlined before , namely as a preventive step to stop the further spread of the disease pending eradication measures .
I would like to conclude with an assurance that the Commission will continue to put all its resources into eradicating this outbreak as quickly as possible .
I continue to be impressed by the huge commitment of Member States to the rapid and decisive action to restore the entire EU to its previous disease-free status .
Mr President , it is worth putting on record that the only positive aspect of this terrible disease is that is does not affect humans .
There is no consumer risk .
When the crisis is over - and it is a crisis in the UK , there is no other way to describe it - we will have to review the common agricultural policy and the whole single market to assess calmly whether we have , as an economic community , sacrificed our animal health status at the high altar of trade liberalisation .
Foot-and-mouth disease was never just a UK issue and the outbreak in France tragically underlines this , if we needed reminding .
While the spread of this virulent disease has raised legitimate questions about how the UK authorities are handling it , I would like to dissociate myself and my colleagues from the intemperate and highly inappropriate comments made by certain junior ministers in the Irish Government .
Notwithstanding bans on imports of animals and animal products and limited transport bans , Commissioner , I must say that the reaction of the EU collectively appears to be inadequate and slow .
Are you satisfied with the veterinary capability to handle this crisis , particularly in the United Kingdom ?
Are you satisfied that the Standing Veterinary Council is up to the job ?
I am not questioning their individual capabilities , but do their brief and terms of reference now appear adequate in the face of rampant foot-and-mouth disease ?
Could the Commissioner explain to the House why there is such a difference in the veterinary responses of the UK and Ireland ?
Certainly each Member State is responsible in the first instance for its own animal health , but it is clear to me and my colleagues from other Member States that there is no coordinated or consistent veterinary response .
In the UK racing , football matches , conferences continue , despite the fact that there have been well over 200 outbreaks and I have heard of another 28 today .
In the Republic of Ireland , where we have no outbreak , all non-essential gatherings in rural areas have been stopped .
We have brought the Irish community to a standstill .
There is no coordinated logistical policy on movements of animals and most importantly movements of people to and from infected areas and countries through ports and airports .
Standards and requirements differ drastically and we urgently need an EU approach to that .
The EU reaction has been inadequate and slow .
The disease is out of control in Britain and has now spread to continental Europe .
I am amazed that there has been no emergency meeting of the Council of Agriculture Ministers to date and no coordinated response from any of our executive authorities .
I have just listened to the UK National Farmers ' Union address the meeting of our Agriculture and Rural Development Committee and I thank them for attending .
They have explained the situation in England .
I do not support vaccination , tragic as the problem is , since foot-and-mouth disease is not endemic in the EU .
Vaccination is not a 100 % guarantee and there are many different strains , each requiring a different vaccination .
Commissioner , it is your job to convince Member States that all airports , seaports and other entry and exit points in infected areas must be controlled and passengers and vehicles must go through a proper disinfectant routine .
It is time we got our act together and lessons should be learned from the BSE crisis .
We need more details from Argentina .
Despite denials of an outbreak of the last few weeks they have now confirmed that there is one .
I do not think we have all the facts yet , from there or from other countries .
Mr President , Minister and President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , foot-and-mouth disease has arrived in France , in my own department , despite a cordon sanitaire being erected between the United Kingdom and continental Europe and despite draconian measures being taken in my country , most notably the slaughter of 20 000 sheep which arrived from Great Britain just before the decision to impose an embargo to counteract the spread of the disease .
As you can imagine , this known case of foot-and-mouth disease has raised a lot of questions and aroused a lot of fear amongst livestock farmers and rural populations .
I think we can reassure consumers , since this disease cannot be transmitted to humans , but it is more difficult to quell the fears of farmers and operators in the industry who have already had to face the terrible consequences of BSE .
Nonetheless , I too want to express my determination not to succumb to panic .
For almost ten years , there have been very few outbreaks and the outbreaks in 1993 in Italy and 1996 and 2000 in Greece appear to have been rapidly brought under control .
In the current situation , and in the light of experience , it would appear fitting to get rid of the contaminated animals .
This seems to be the most effective way of giving us hope that the source of the virus can be wiped out .
At the same time , we must support the industry in this time of crisis and compensate farmers adequately so that we do not wipe out a profession as well as herds .
It is also necessary to place the fight against this virus on an international level , as it is moving around the globe .
It is in Asia , in India , in Latin America and Argentina .
It is in Europe ; hence my questions .
How did this virus get to Europe from Asia ?
Has the story of the on-board meals of an airline company been adequately explained ?
What international prevention strategies can be put in place given , on the one hand , the extreme mobility of the virus and , on the other , the importance of passenger and goods traffic across the globe ?
What use are international guarantees if States cover up by not making declarations or by submitting inadequate declarations to the International Office of Epizootic Diseases ?
Mr President , Minister and President-in-Office , Commissioner , we really need you to explain these various aspects to us .
Thank you very much .
Mr President , at this moment in time , I find it difficult to criticise the attitude which the Commission or Member States have adopted since the initial foot-and-mouth outbreak in the United Kingdom .
I think they have all been alert and that that all possible precautionary measures were taken . Nevertheless , I wonder whether that was enough .
I paid a visit to the United States not so long ago .
Each time I enter that country , I am always struck by the fact that I have to state whether I have been on a farm over the previous three weeks and whether I am bringing foodstuffs with me .
All this to check whether any contagious diseases are being imported into the United States .
This does not happen in Europe .
Would this not be the right time to ask ourselves whether this is not a necessary course of action here too ?
With all those jumbo jets arriving at our airports every day , the risk of infection from wherever in the world is enormous .
The debate whether or not to vaccinate is once again upon us .
Could the Commission spell out the economic implications of vaccinating and what benefits non-vaccination brings ?
It is true that we have had no problems for the past nine years , but I think that the public must be convinced of the need for this policy .
We must know how much it will cost .
This Parliament has increased the budget line for " SOS countryside " over the past six years .
Last year , the Commission refused to implement this budget line .
It pays for a telephone line which can be used by any farmer across the European Union .
Why does the Commission not implement this budget line and why is there an inclination to shelve it again this year ?
This is about a clear-cut wish from Parliament and I think that it is extremely well-timed .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , you have just given the entire history of a situation of generalised panic and - the truth must be stated - you have demonstrated to us the negative effects of globalisation .
Now we see that states are banning trade in meat amongst each other .
This proves that this crisis is , first and foremost , of a commercial nature .
Let us stop seeing it as a health crisis .
Let us stop mixing up the issues .
Now , we no longer talk about another crisis which is also moving around the globe : that of BSE .
Commissioner , what has happened to the tests ?
What has happened to the controls on meat and bone meal ?
These are questions which must be tackled alongside this crisis .
Secondly , you are corrupting the precautionary principle .
I am telling you this very politely as an ecologist .
We are killing and burning animals on a massive scale , even though foot-and-mouth disease is not dangerous to humans .
What is more , healthy animals can recover from foot-and-mouth disease .
But it is not worthwhile commercially .
So get things into perspective and propose valid solutions .
Yes , you are slaughtering animals .
Perhaps in the short term , and to get out of this crisis , it might be necessary to envisage a system which does not totally rule out vaccination in very restricted zones .
The priority is to get out of the crisis .
But once the crisis has passed , apply the precautionary principle and tackle the causes rather than the consequences .
As you said at another time and in another place , you want to tackle the transportation of live animals , for example .
It is not enough !
Eight hours is too long to transport live animals !
A stop must be put to this system .
We must turn our backs on intensive and battery farming .
Adopt long-term measures to put an end to this atrocious form of production and to return to extensive farming .
Mr President , we are facing a problem which is very likely to become explosive .
Although draconian measures have been adopted in the various Member States , we must recognise the risk that the disease will spread .
We are facing an extremely virulent strain and the environmental conditions lead us to fear the worst .
The problem of foot-and-mouth disease can be approached from three angles : the actions which must be taken immediately or in the short term , the establishment of responsibility and the prevention of these problems in the future .
Allow me to make three observations .
Firstly , in the short term , the economic effects of implementing a vaccination campaign would be just as bad as not implementing one and the consequences would be extremely hard to bear .
Now , if we reject vaccination , we would have to respond in a tough manner to the measures adopted by Canada .
The European Union cannot suffer in silence in the face of generalised and unjustified embargoes such as Canada ' s or the deviousness of the United States ' behaviour towards us .
Secondly , Commissioner , is there going to be compensation for farmers as a result of this horrendous crisis ?
Where will the money come from ?
According to my calculations , only EUR 50 million is available in compensation to livestock farmers , after the latest proposed budgetary review , for foot-and-mouth disease and also for BSE .
A third and final observation .
With regard to the prevention of this and other diseases we should consider the repercussions of the quest for competitiveness , resulting from a reduction in aid from the CAP .
We should also consider the risks of Community livestock farming based on the transportation of live animals and high concentrations of animals .
The crisis surrounding us should lead us to draw up a CAP aimed at serving the consumer and the producer rather than commerce .
Therefore , we should direct aid so as to guarantee the viability of farms which present fewer environmental risks and risks to the consumer and which are necessary for maintaining the social fabric of rural life , rather than reducing aid or eliminating it altogether .
Mr President , if uncontrolled , foot-and-mouth disease has the potential to wipe out EU livestock production , culminating in major job losses in the agri-food sector and seriously disrupting normal life .
As the House is aware , the first outbreak of foot-and-mouth was confirmed in Great Britain just a few weeks ago .
Since then it has spread at a frightening rate , resulting in the destruction of thousands of animals .
The financial implications are considerable .
The psychological impact on farmers , not just in Great Britain but also in Ireland , is a matter of great concern .
Let us not underestimate the social consequences of this catastrophe .
We all know that foot-and-mouth is a difficult disease to control , but its implications for European agriculture and the broader European economy require that the most stringent controls be put in place and enforced .
I acknowledge that for the British Government the situation is difficult .
However , there is nothing to be gained at this stage by apportioning blame .
I certainly sympathise with the plight of British farmers .
I believe the scale of the disaster and the rapidity with which it has spread demand not just stronger action by the British authorities but also continuing EU intervention .
I compliment Commissioner Byrne on his measured and positive response to the crisis .
The threat that foot-and-mouth represents to the Community as a whole is a matter that cannot be left to the control measures in individual Member States .
I call on the Commission to appoint a special task force to oversee the implementation and the enforcement of regulations in the countries concerned .
The work and guidance of the Standing Veterinary Committee is , of course , important in this regard .
The House will understand if I highlight the seriousness of the situation for Ireland , where very strict controls already are in place .
I should like to acknowledge the understanding of the public and the level of cooperation between the authorities north and south of the border .
It is ironic that it has taken this dreaded disease to bring home to our people not just the implications for farmers but also the consequences for employment in the food industry , the impact on food exports and the economic threat to tourism and other commercial activities .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , after the BSE epidemic it is the turn of foot-and-mouth disease .
This is not a coincidence , it is a combination of the ideological errors made in European integration .
The first error is the ideology of globalisation , which Mrs Auroi spoke about .
The virus arrived from India ; it could have arrived from Pakistan ; it could have arrived from Zimbabwe .
When everything is allowed to move around freely , even the foot-and-mouth virus moves around freely .
The second error is the race to achieve profitability .
In the name of health precautions , we wanted to have abattoirs which were like laboratories at the Pasteur Institute .
Abattoirs were integrated and animals were sent there from the length and breadth of Britain .
That is how the virus spread throughout the whole of Britain .
The third error is that of immigration .
The 20 000 sheep imported into France , which introduced the British virus , were destined to have their throats slit according to the sacrifice of Abraham as part of the Muslim festival of Aïd el Kebir .
With the carotid from these sheep we got the virus for free !
The fourth error is that of the race for profits .
Vaccination was suppressed in the name of Adam Smith and in the name of profitability .
And in the name of Adam Smith British trains go off the rails , British cows go off the rails and British sheep go off the rails !
So what are we to do in the face of such serious errors ?
Well , the solutions seem to lie in two directions .
The first is that of justice , taking responsibility for compensating innocent farmers .
The second is that of moderation : a sense of moderation for animals , who do not need to be slaughtered as they recover after a few weeks ; a sense of moderation in the media , who are playing a game of Apocalypse Now ; a sense of moderation in terms of health with vaccination , as in Argentina ; and a sense of moderation for the European industrial agricultural model , which should achieve greater moderation and balance .

Mr President , we have to face facts . Foot-and mouth disease , which we thought we had confined to Great Britain , has now reached continental Europe .
The massive abattoirs have changed nothing . We are losing our export markets .
The United States and Canada have just closed their borders , placing our farmers in a very difficult situation .
This scourge affects pig farmers and cattle producers , who have already been greatly weakened by BSE and other diseases .
If the situation were to get worse despite the efforts of the Member States to eradicate this disease , would you undertake to provide vaccines as soon as possible ?
We must also realise that no compensation will totally make up for the financial loss and , above all , the loss of morale .
Our farmers have been ground down and we must help them .
Although the Swedish Prime Minister declared that there was no question of increasing aid , what do you propose to do to support them ?
Europe is built around agriculture and it has to be recognised that , in such a situation , we must call on Member States to manage the crisis , as it did in the case of BSE .
Now , the future and the survival of our farmers depend on the relevance of the decisions which need to be taken and on European solidarity .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , the crisis in European farming is already bad enough , thanks to BSE .
Foot-and-mouth - because it is such a highly infectious disease - is the last straw .
It is hardly surprising that farmers - but not only farmers - are calling for rigorous action to be taken and , with your permission , I should like to ask a few questions about this .
First : do you know the exact extent of the epidemic at the latest count ?
Secondly : farmers are anxious to know if the foot-and-mouth vaccination has been abolished once and for all .
What are you thinking of doing here , given the current circumstances , for stock in general and for particularly valuable animals , such as animals on stud farms ?
Thirdly : transportation is once again centre stage .
Is the transportation of animals and meat within the European Parliament being jointly controlled ?
And if so , how ?
What sanctions are to be applied in the event of infringement ?
Fourthly : all imports of animals and animal products into the Community are a source of concern .
Argentina can supply what customers want : beef which is guaranteed free from BSE .
That is something at least .
But , as you said , they have foot-and-mouth disease .
What specific protection and what safety measures have you introduced here , Commissioner ?
And fifthly : my last point - and it is an important point - concerns the cost of foot-and-mouth .
Who pays what and what funds do you think the EU should provide ?
Is the Commission willing to learn from experience with the BSE crisis and act now , rather than just react as and when it has to in order to contain the foot-and-mouth epidemic ?
For me this means that the Commission itself should take action as well as coordinating national measures .
Mr President , those of us from the United Kingdom extend all our sympathy to the constituents and fellow citizens of Georges Garot after the so far mercifully isolated outbreak in France .
We also acknowledge the worries and concerns about which Mr Hyland and others have spoken of our neighbours in the Republic of Ireland .
Would Commissioner Byrne confirm that the UK did its utmost to provide advance warning to its neighbours when this outbreak was first identified ?
Could he give any scientific opinion , as yet available to him , about the origins of the outbreak at Heddon on the Wall ?
Could he tell us if the movement restrictions throughout the European Union are now being widely obeyed and what penalties or sanctions are available in the case of rogue traders who are disobeying them ?
Would he agree that the spread of the disease has been predominantly through sheep , and therefore by animal contact , rather than wind-blown , and which offers us some hope that although the disease has not yet peaked , it can be contained ?
Finally , would he say that he agrees that the UK 's policy of containment , slaughter and quarantine is still the best way of eliminating this disease , not just in Britain but wherever else it may spread in Europe ?
Mr President , the clearest lessons from this foot-and-mouth epidemic are that we need greater vigilance and a new emphasis on animal health , stricter controls on imports from countries where the disease is endemic on swill-feed plants and livestock farms , on animal transport and contingency plans for disasters such as this .
Our continent 's livestock must never again be put in jeopardy by failures in one country 's Ministry of Agriculture .
Today , however , the task is not to apportion blame but to plan ahead .
When the dust has settled we will find a devastated economic landscape in some of the more remote and vulnerable regions of the European Union , such as my constituency in south-west England .
This is not simply a crisis in farming but a wasteland of failed businesses and job losses in tourism , transport and in other sectors .
The Union can play an important role in helping to rebuild those economies .
I seek the Commissioner 's assurance that the Commission will talk now to the governments of the countries and regions affected about how structural fund and other programmes can be adapted to provide early and effective help .
Mr President , a thorough investigation is certainly required into the implications of the foot-and-mouth outbreak .
Many considerations arise .
Why were infected animals not quarantined at the outset and emergency vaccinations administered instead of adopting a policy of mass slaughter as we have done ?
I would like to ask the Commission where it stands on the policy of mass slaughter and whether we should differentiate between slaughtering for the welfare of the animal and gratuitous mass slaughter to satisfy the market and media interests .
I also call into question once again the transportation of live animals for slaughter over long distances , which increases the risk of the disease spreading .
The closure of small abattoirs again needs to be reviewed .
Transportation of live animals is currently being investigated by the Commission and I eagerly await the Commission 's report on this very important issue and urge the Commission once again to change its policy on the transportation of live animals and to introduce stricter controls .
Consequential loss is not covered when discussing the issue of compensation .
Does the Commission not agree that it is imperative that we look at the whole picture and evaluate the loss to farmers directly and indirectly affected by the foot-and-mouth outbreak as well as the connected industries and tourism ?
How many more disasters do we have to witness in the agricultural industry before Member State governments agree that the reform of the common agricultural policy is urgently needed ?
Mr President , I should like to thank the Commissioner for making sure that EU funding is available to the British Government to help them in this tragedy .
Could the Commissioner tell me whether the British Government has applied for all the EAGGF funding available to them ?
In the past it has not bothered to take this .
Has it taken advantage of this for this current national tragedy ?
Mrs Doyle said that it was a crisis .
Indeed it is a crisis : 225 cases at present , a quarter of a million animals to be slaughtered !
Our minister said on television three days ago that it is under control .
Could the Commission tell me whether it is under control ?
Could I also ask what the EU is doing ?
Has the British Government approached the EU for some sort of consensus on how we stop this spreading across Europe ?
I noticed when I travelled into Europe the other day there were no disinfectant mats , there were no bloodhounds checking whether I had a ham sandwich in my pocket , no questions .
I know that when you travel to other countries you are questioned about what you are carrying .
Has the veterinary advice been coordinated ?
We seem , as Mrs Doyle said , to have a huge variation between Member States across the European Union .
Is it safe to transport infected carcasses across the United Kingdom as we are doing at the moment ?
Finally , has the British Government been particularly lax about stopping imports from countries where the disease is endemic ?
Mr President , I want to thank the Council and Commission for coming in response to Parliament 's decision on Monday to have this debate .
The food industry in Ireland and now in Europe as a whole is reeling under the impact of the foot-and-mouth catastrophe , but it is wrong to demonise any one country for this outbreak .
It is particularly silly for a minister of a state which exports 90 % of its produce to do so .
It could have happened in any one of our countries , given the intensive subsidy-driven nature of European farming , which involves the constant movement of livestock from farm to farm and indeed from country to country .
I am not convinced that partial or reasonable bans on the movement of livestock are an adequate response at this stage in the development of the outbreak .
In practice I would have to say that no country is likely to import animals from any country where the disease has been identified - and indeed who would blame them ?
It has also been repeated that this is not a human health crisis .
Also , the farming sector is not the only victim of this crisis .
Food industry workers , the tourism industry , sporting events and everyday social life are all victims of the efforts to stop the spread of the disease .
While that has been acceptable up to now , we must not dismiss out of hand a review which balances the costs involved in continuing with the current approach and its impact on other key industries and on the freedom of citizens to get on with their lives .
Finally , when the anger and recriminations have died down , we must get to grips with a reform of the common agricultural policy .
European consumers are now more interested in safe food , food that is produced in an environmentally friendly way , and indeed food at affordable prices .
But they are no longer interested in dirt-cheap food , regardless of how it is produced or with hidden unacceptable health risks .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , the disease which is now threatening a borderless Europe may contribute to increasing the citizens ' crisis of confidence in both national and Community institutions .
Health risks to livestock , changes in eating habits and the collapse of the production sector are ample cause for us to take extraordinary decisions .
Measures have economic and political costs and I would like to know from the Council and the Commission which of these costs they are prepared to meet .
Are you prepared to increase aid measures in all the countries of the European Union ?
What do the European institutions think of wide-scale vaccinations ?
What position will you adopt in relation to third countries ?
Are you going to take any steps in relation to the unilateral restrictions being imposed on us by countries such as the United States , Canada , Bulgaria or Saudi Arabia , and in relation to less than rigorous imports from countries which are vaccinating , such as Argentina , Chile , Brazil , etc . , which may put all of our livestock at risk ?
What is going to happen with regard to wild animals , Commissioner ?
What measures are envisaged for wild animals and for zoos , circuses , etc . ?
What will happen if deer , wild boar or goats are affected ?
Lastly , I would like to know whether the European Commission is going to take account of these health crises when presenting its budget for the European emergency veterinary fund , which is so poorly resourced .
A number of different issues were raised .
Perhaps I might deal briefly with those , rather than go through the individual questions , and hope that I touch on all of the issues , particularly the important ones .
First of all , regarding globalisation , it should be stressed that foot-and-mouth disease was prevalent - even endemic - in many Member States in the past when trade was a tiny fraction of present levels .
So to identify trade as being the cause of this is , in my opinion , a simplistic response .
Foot-and-mouth disease is endemic in the developing world .
The EU has a huge trade surplus in food and agricultural products .
So do we wish to surrender the resulting benefits ?
Trade in agricultural products is one of the areas where the developing world has real potential to increase trade .
I am personally asking my own officials to advise me about raising the standards in developing countries so that they are in a position to trade with the European Union .
This is an important issue .
We must not lose sight of that .
Are we to tell these countries that we do not want their products for the reasons that we have discussed here this afternoon ?
The other route is the better one .
Intensive farming is another issue that was raised .
I should repeat that the foot-and-mouth disease is endemic in the developing world .
Conversely , it is extremely rare in the OECD countries : the United States , Canada , the European Union , Australia and New Zealand .
That is an important issue to be taken into account .
There farming is at its most intensive .
So , once again , to identify the debate as being one that focuses on intensive and extensive farming is also , in my opinion , an inadequate response to a complex issue .
Intensive farming has a lot to answer for but it is simplistic to see this as the cause of the current outbreak .
Transport was another issue that was raised .
It is a Commission policy and priority to reduce the incidence of long-distance live animal transport .
A number of you asked the question " Is this under control ? " .
The restrictions on animal movement will minimise the risk of transmission of the disease .
This will , in turn , eventually ensure that the outbreak is brought under control .
It remains to be seen , however , how long this will take .
A lot depends on the amount of trade that took place before we first knew about this outbreak .
We will have to wait for the passage of incubation periods before we get a better picture of the situation .
Many measures advocated by Members such as restrictions on sporting events , for example , are simply outside the competence of the Commission and outside the Treaties .
With regard to controls , I should also emphasise that it is likely that this outbreak commenced in the United Kingdom as a result of illegal activity .
I must stress this .
A number of people have asked why the Commission does not bring forward more proposals .
That is always the standard response when something happens .
The legislation is there .
It was a breach of the legislation which caused this illegal activity to spark off this particular infection in the UK .
I should also emphasise that it is the responsibility of Member States to seek to properly enforce the legislation relating to this and other matters .
I can only draw your attention to the discussions we have had here before in relation to questions surrounding BSE .
Controls and enforcement are important .
We must not lose sight of that .
I hope I have dealt with most of the issues you have raised .
Thank you very much , Mr Byrne , for replying so concisely .
You have stood by your word .
The debate is closed .
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is Question Time ( B5-0018 / 01 ) . We will examine questions to the Council .
As the author is not present - although apologies have been received for this absence - Question No 1 lapses .
Question No 2 by ( H-0141 / 01 ) :
Subject : Bringing the citizens of Europe closer to the decision makers What progress has the Council Presidency made with my suggestion , which it seemed to welcome at its meeting with committee chairmen in Brussels earlier this month , for the President-in-Office to make an EU-wide television broadcast at the end of each six-month presidency and report to the citizens of Europe on the progress made ?
I would like to thank the honourable Member for addressing such an important issue as bridging the gap between citizens and decision makers .
At the European Council in Nice , Member States once again repeated their aim to bring the Union and its institutions closer to their citizens .
The presidency agrees with the honourable Member that the citizens of the EU should be informed about progress in the future development of the European Union .
The importance of really reaching out to our citizens cannot be stressed enough .
The difficulties at European level are largely the same as the difficulties we encounter at national level .
However , we cannot allow ourselves to be discouraged by this .
We are working hard , and will continue to do so , to find suitable methods for improving communication with the citizens of Europe .
In this work , it is important that people receive on-going information in order to be able to assess connections and the whole picture .
I would like to remind you of the possibility of holding public Council debates .
One of the Swedish Presidency ' s first priorities was to draw up a list of public debates which covers as much of the Council ' s operations as possible .
In addition , the Council , like the other institutions and the Member States , is organising regular seminars and conferences and producing easily accessible printed material on the Union ' s development .
The honourable Member has a more specific proposal which we discussed at a meeting with the committee chairpersons in January , but the presidency itself is unable to arrange such a matter .
However , a debate is planned when the Swedish Prime Minister attends the European Parliament ' s plenary session in July in order , as is tradition , to report on the result of the European Council in Gothenburg and on what the presidency country achieved during the period as a whole .
Debates from the European Parliament plenary sessions are regularly broadcast live by satellite across Europe .
What remains is to ensure that the broadcasts reach the widest possible audience .
In other words - no , but it was a very nicely wrapped-up reply .
Mr President-in-Office , you and I agree on the goals of trying to inform the European public , not just in Brussels but everywhere , of what we are doing .
I suggest that you should try - or get your staff to try - to sell the idea to television companies .
Although your Prime Minister will make a wonderful speech here in the plenary in July , reporting on the presidency , a speech in this chamber is not the same as a comfortable talk to the peoples of Europe .
If you think of the way that President Clinton did it , it is not the same thing .
I really do urge you - the publications , the seminars , the debates that you organise in Brussels are not the way to reach 300 million people the length and breadth of Europe .
A nice TV chat by the Swedish Prime Minister would be a very good beginning and it is not good enough just to do it in this chamber .
It is easy to agree in principle with Mr Newton Dunn ' s wish that coordinated messages on what is happening in the Union be disseminated as widely as possible .
However it is currently the case , I am glad to say , that we have free and independent media in Europe .
I am a little doubtful if even a government as energetic as the Swedish one can convince independent TV channels , for example , to embrace the undoubtedly excellent ideas which Mr Newton Dunn proposes .
I also think that , to a certain extent , the Member underestimates Parliament ' s opportunities as a political arena to reach out with a message .
I hope that , together , we will be able to work to disseminate good , solid and interesting information on what is happening in the Union .
However , we must do so while respecting the fact that it is the independent media which decides what should or should not be broadcast .
Mr President , I had the first question .
Question time should have begun , if the Bureau had organised today ' s debate properly , at quarter past six .
We started half an hour late , at which time I was chairing the meeting of the Joint Parliamentary Committee with Bulgaria , having arranged to be here at quarter past six .
That proved to be impossible and I was one minute late due to the Bureau ' s delay .
If I too must be punished because the Bureau does not keep to the timetable , then so be it .
Mr Alavanos , I am as sorry as you are that your question has lapsed .
The time that the debate begins does not depend on my will .
As all the Members have heard , I have apologised and I regret the situation .
I hope that it does not happen again .
Question No 3 by ( H-0229 / 01 ) :
Subject : Strengthening dialogue with Europe 's citizens Europe 's citizens are very interested in matters relating to the European Union .
This has become obvious to me as a Swede as a result of the informal ministerial meetings held in Sweden , and most recently the meeting in Luleå of ministers responsible for telecommunications and labour market policies .
As democratically elected Members of the European Parliament , we continually meet members of the public in our constituencies .
The Commission 's Dialogue on Europe has enabled it to meet members of the public regularly all over the Member States .
The Council 's role is more complicated .
Where national governments are concerned , EU-related matters have to compete with domestic issues , yet it is the Council that takes the big decisions .
We know how important it is , in order to build confidence in the European Union , for the Council to engage in dialogue with Europe 's citizens on the shape of European policies .
Will the Council therefore explain what it intends to do to strengthen its dialogue with Europe 's citizens on European policies , for instance in connection with ministerial meetings ?
The Council agrees with the honourable Member that dialogue with the citizens of the EU must be improved in accordance with the decision taken by the European Council in Nice in December 2000 .
The declaration to the Final Act of the conference on the future of the EU acknowledges the need to improve and monitor the legitimacy and openness of the Union and its institutions in order to bring them closer to the citizens of the Member States .
As far as the Council ' s meetings are concerned , initiatives are being developed to ensure that the discussions will be more open and transparent .
This will be achieved through public debates which can mean making deliberations open to the media and EU citizens through live broadcasts via internal TV or , unfortunately less commonly , directly via TV stations .
We are also trying to make press conferences and press releases increasingly informative .
Other positive measures to raise the awareness of the public involve creating better access to information via conventional channels and electronically .
In this context , on 19 March 2001 , the Council is expected to decide to make public certain categories of the Council ' s documents .
The aim is to make public as many of the Council ' s documents as possible on the Internet without waiting for a demand from the public .
This decision will enter into force on 1 May 2001 .
So a great deal is being done .
Despite this , the Council will naturally continue its analysis in order to further improve the dialogue with the EU ' s citizens on the Council ' s work .
I would like to thank the Council for that answer .
The decisions taken in the EU are extremely important for us European citizens , as they affect our daily lives .
It is therefore also important , as the Council agrees , that citizens be given increased opportunities to follow and assess the political debates , so that they can then vote .
Voting in elections is the citizens ' opportunity to show what they want Europe ' s development to look like .
We are in complete agreement on this .
With my country , Sweden , holding the presidency , this naturally becomes even more of an issue for me as the Council ' s meetings are held around the country .
I am naturally satisfied with the measures taken by the Council and with the fact that work on analysing ways of increasing openness is to continue .
No doubt , the Internet and electronic means can be used considerably more than they are currently .
Debates can be followed live not only on TV , but via the Internet too .
This is my counsel to the Council .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , dialogue with citizens is one of the main issues for us on a daily basis and I would therefore like to know what the Council intends to do to bring the post-Nice process closer to our citizens .
What we could do is set up our own chat rooms , for example on the Internet , where citizens could use a search engine to locate specific subjects and browse through subjects of personal interest .
I also think it would be a good idea if we provided video streams of debates in Parliament , the Council and the Commission in each language , in order to give citizens an opportunity to become more involved in this dialogue .
Do you think this might be something for the Swedish Presidency to focus on after the Lisbon Summit ?
The honourable Member noted perhaps in this morning 's debate on the future of the Union that one of the many specific measures now being taken to stimulate increased debate is precisely the launch of a web page , which will be managed by the Commission , but to which the Council , the Member States , Parliament and all interested parties can make written contributions .
I do not know whether it is possible to extend the venture by opening a chat room as well , as suggested by Mr Rübig .
I think , however , that it is an interesting idea and I will gladly discuss the feasibility of implementing this in practice with Commission representatives .
Mr President , the President-in-Office mentioned a forthcoming decision about putting some documents of the Council in the public domain on the Internet .
Does the Council intend to respect fully the decision of the Ombudsman whereby , if I understand it correctly , all Council documents have to be made available to the public and not just some ?
Allow me to stress that we are of the opinion - and I am talking now on behalf of the presidency - that the Ombudsman 's recommendations regarding making documents available to the public is a very important step towards the increased openness which this Parliament in particular , has worked hard for .
The decision , which we anticipate it will be possible to take on 19 March , does not go as far as the Ombudsman has proposed , but must be seen as a step in the right direction .
It is the presidency 's sincere hope that it will be possible to take the additional steps required to increase openness as soon as possible .
However , we will not have reached that position by 19 March , which I freely admit .
Question No 4 by ( H-0145 / 01 ) :
Subject : Passports for Swedes travelling within the Nordic region From 25 March 2001 , Sweden and the other Nordic countries will take part in Schengen cooperation .
Current Swedish ID cards do not meet identification requirements under the Schengen provisions .
A new national ID card in Sweden may replace the Swedish passport next year but what happens in the meantime ?
Must Swedish citizens carry their passports after 25 March 2001 when travelling in the Nordic countries until they obtain the new Swedish ID card ?
The Council would like to make Mr Sjöstedt aware of the fact that the Schengen provisions do not regulate the issue of passports and ID cards as far as EU citizens are concerned .
According to the Nordic passport union , which some of us of course defend passionately , citizens in the Nordic countries have the right to travel within the territory of the Nordic countries without having to show their passports .
The agreements on the accession of Denmark , Finland and Sweden to the Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement and the agreements between the Council of the European Union and Iceland and Norway concerning the association of these states in the implementation , application and development of the Schengen acquis contain a provision stating that these agreements must not constitute a barrier to cooperation within the framework of the Nordic passport union to the extent that this does not oppose or obstruct implementation of the agreements .
Moreover , the implementation of the Schengen agreement neither opposes nor obstructs the Nordic passport union .
Once the Nordic countries have joined in the practical Schengen cooperation , the citizens of the Nordic countries will still have the right to travel within the territory of the Nordic countries and spend the night at hotels , camping sites etc. without having to show their passports .
The implementation of the Schengen acquis in the Nordic countries will not therefore entail citizens having to show their passports .
Consequently , Swedish citizens will also be able to travel within the Nordic countries without a passport after 25 March 2001 .
The basis for my question is Article 45 of the Schengen Agreement , which states that anyone who books into a hotel in another Schengen country must produce a means of identification and prove their citizenship , but the only document a Swedish citizen has which shows their citizenship is their passport .
My question is whether there is a formal exemption from Article 45 for Sweden in the Schengen Convention , as there surely needs to be in such cases .
My second question , if there is no such exemption , is whether it is the Union 's authorities who ultimately decide which type of identity documentation is acceptable .
I think I have probably already answered the additional question posed by Mr Sjöstedt .
The somewhat complicated and long-winded reply that I gave is based on a fairly careful analysis of the situation .
The simple conclusion is that there is no need for a passport , so I can only repeat that .
As we see it , it is quite clear that the implementation of the Schengen acquis in the Nordic countries will not entail the requirement to show a passport .
I have a question : do you think that , on the basis of directives 68 / 360 and 74 / 148 of the European Communities and on the basis of the Court judgement in the Vincenzo Micheletti case , a European citizen ' s identity card should or should not state his or her nationality ?
Because if it does not state the nationality , the citizen in question may not be able to stay , as Mr Sjöstedt has said .
This is the question to which I would like a specific answer . Should the nationality be stated , yes or no ?
In certain countries , including Sweden , there is at present no national ID card indicating citizenship .
The government is currently considering introducing such a card on a national scale - as a service to citizens and to a certain extent , of course , also to facilitate travel .
Once again : we consider that the Nordic passport union quite clearly does not entail the requirement for passports for Nordic citizens travelling within the Nordic countries .
I must admit that the presidency 's reply seems in itself to be quite clear .
But , partly via Danish newspapers and partly via the Swedish publication Från Riksdag & Departement , as well as through my membership of the SAS Euro Bonus system , I have received information that passports will have to be carried even after the Schengen agreement takes effect .
Therefore , I have a related question - I assume that what the presidency has said here is correct , i.e. that a passport will not be required :
Is the presidency prepared to ensure that information is widely and effectively disseminated - unfortunately not everyone reads the minutes from the meetings here - stating that passports will not be required at all after the Schengen Agreement takes effect ?
The honourable Member , Mr Gahrton , uses a common debating technique , i.e. putting things in the mouth of the opposition .
I think that I have been quite clear .
I did not claim that passports are not required for travel in general after Sweden 's accession to the Schengen cooperation .
What I was talking about were the rules for internal control between the Nordic countries , and I naturally stand by what I said .
And it is , as I 'm sure Mr Gahrton understands , impossible for me to comment on information in particular newspapers and publications .
It does not fall within the scope of the presidency to do that .
For every important change , like accession to the practical Schengen cooperation , it is , of course , important that authorities and others - primarily the national authorities - inform citizens of the consequences .
I can assure Mr Gahrton that the Swedish Government will do all it can to ensure that citizens are as informed as possible .
This is , however , a discussion which should be pursued outside this Parliament .
As they deal with the same subject , Questions Nos 5 and 6 will be taken together .
Question No 5 by ( H-0147 / 01 ) :
Subject : Integration of environmental aspects into the development sector of the Council 's work What are the Council 's ( development ) plans in regard to the drawing up of a comprehensive and coherent strategy for integrating the environmental dimension into its policies , containing a set of indicators and a timetable for further measures , as requested in the Helsinki conclusions ?
Question No 6 by ( H-0156 / 01 ) :
Subject : The Sustainable Development Strategy of the Council of Ministers At the Helsinki European Council of Heads of State and Government in December 1999 , nine Councils were reminded of the need to prepare comprehensive sustainability integration strategies , including indicators and a timetable for action , in time for the Gothenburg European Council in June 2001 .
Can the President-in-Office of the Council state what progress has been made to date by the nine Councils , what remains to be done to fulfil the Helsinki mandate , how progress on the elaboration of the nine Council strategies will be made public between now and Gothenburg , and on what basis the quality of the nine strategies will be judged ?
One of the cornerstones of the Swedish Presidency is environmental issues .
It is , of course , one of the three ' E 's with which the honourable Members are well acquainted .
The work programme we have presented in the area hopefully reveals the great importance we attach to these issues .
Within the course of its regular and continuous contacts with the European Parliament , the presidency of the Council has , since the Council 's meeting in Cardiff in 1998 , informed the European Parliament of the state of the process of integrating concern for the environment into other relevant areas of Community policy .
As regards the present situation , all the relevant Council constellations will go through previous integration operations reported to the European Council and bring the situation up-to-date in preparation for the Council meeting in Gothenburg in June this year .
This exercise has already started , and Parliament will be informed as soon as possible .
In this connection , it should be remembered that the process of integrating concern for the environment is a complicated undertaking which covers legislative activities within the Community as well as agreements of a more political nature , which , in most cases , are in the form of Council conclusions .
According to the work programme , decisions in the area will be debated in more detail at a number of meetings during the spring : in March as regards fishing , in April for transport and agriculture , in May for energy , industry and development , and in June as regards the internal market .
The conclusions from the Council ( General Affairs ) will also be tabled during the spring .
The conclusions from the ECOFIN Council , which were submitted to the European Council in Nice , are still regarded as valid .
As far as the strategy for the Council ( General Affairs ) is concerned , the Council is awaiting a working document from the Commission which , together with a document from the presidency , will constitute the basis for a Council decision to be adopted in the spring .
More specifically , as regards development issues , at its meeting in May 2000 , the Council urged the Commission to draw up a specific strategy to include , for example , a timetable and result indicators which would enable continuous monitoring to take place .
At present , the Council is awaiting this communication from the Commission , which will serve as the basis for the Council conclusions to be adopted on 31 May 2001 .
The Swedish Presidency 's work programme for development cooperation contains the discussion of a strategy for integrating concern for the environment into development policy .
The aim of this discussion is to draw up the conclusions which are to be adopted at the Council meeting of 31 May 2001 , and this takes account of the requirements of what are known as the Helsinki conclusions .
The presidency will use all of these contributions as the basis for drawing up a coherent strategy which will summarise the results of the environmental integration process , with proposals for how these results will be monitored .
Together with all of the contributions , the document will be tabled at the summit in Gothenburg .
Mr President , I appreciate from the Council ' s answer that fish are to be discussed at a later date , but I should nonetheless like to know how likely it is that the Cardiff integration process will take account of environmental problems in connection with external aspects of other EU policies , such as the damage to the environment resulting from the fisheries agreements with the West African states .
I should also like to hear whether , for the purposes of implementing the Cardiff integration process , it is intended to use any of the resources which the Council has asked the Commission to evaluate , and whether the intention is to increase the budget in order to ensure that implementation does , in fact , go ahead .
I should also like to know whether the idea is to develop more specific integration indicators , to assemble data sources and to make use , in the Council ' s work , of the ad hoc consultation carried out by the Commission when preparing its communication .
And finally , I should like to know how the Council intends to monitor and evaluate the further development of the integration process .
The conclusions in the area of fishing are currently being finalised .
As far as I can remember offhand , the aspects enquired about by the honourable Member are not included in the conclusions .
However , allow me to look into this and come back to you with a more precise reply .
As regards the budget-related aspects of this work , there has been continual upgrading of the resources used for this work since the Cardiff process was started .
I think that it can probably be said that the high ambitions of the Cardiff process have , to a reasonable extent , been reflected in the form of increased resources .
The question of evaluation mechanisms in the integrated strategy is extremely important and relevant .
This is precisely one of the aspects which we want to try to include in the integrated strategy , which is to be presented at the summit in Gothenburg .
I would like to point out that it is not exactly an easy task , but it is the presidency 's firm goal that this integrated strategy for integrating concern for the environment into the work of different sectors will now also include a proper monitoring mechanism so that everyone can monitor this work on a continual basis .
Mr President , putting the principles of sustainability into practice is a difficult task and I think the words of the President-in-Office of the Council are encouraging , but can I ask him to come back to the question I asked ?
Will the documents that will be produced in time for the Gothenburg Council have clear and specific indicators within them by which the future performance of the presidency and indeed of the European Union can be judged , together with a clear and specific timetable for the delivery of certain goals , or are we going to see another set of waffle words which meet the goals of good intentions but cannot actually be measured against practical delivery ?
We have a Swedish environment commissioner : we now have a Swedish Presidency which has a firm commitment to the environment .
We expect great things of you which is why we ask a lot .
I am glad about the high expectations and can promise the honourable Member that we will do our utmost to live up to them .
I repeat that it is the presidency 's ambition to be as precise as possible in this work and to have timetables and clear monitoring mechanisms .
As the honourable Member will surely agree , this is more difficult for some policies than for others .
It is easier in certain areas .
For example , in the energy field it is perfectly clear what the applicable indicators would be .
However , it can be more difficult in other fields , for example , for Council constellations like ECOFIN or General Affairs .
The ambition is , however , to be as precise as possible in order for it to be possible to inspect not only what the Commission and the presidency are currently achieving , but also what future presidencies achieve .
Question No 7 by ( H-0150 / 01 ) :
Subject : Provisional Judicial Cooperation Unit The Council is setting up a Provisional Judicial Cooperation Unit as a first step towards the establishment of the Eurojust unit .
Italy is now considering appointing Giancarlo Caselli , who was the Public Prosecutor for Palermo from January 1993 to June 1999 .
However , the Italian Parliament is still trying to obtain more information on at least 368 journeys which Mr Caselli made in connection with meetings unrelated to official business , and on the costs incurred in connection with those journeys .
With a view to ensuring the credibility of the provisional unit currently being set up , would the Council not agree that before approving the appointments of liaison magistrates made by the Member States it should check the appointees ' credentials , integrity and professional ethics ?
Would it not agree that it will be useful to obtain from the national governments all the information required for a proper assessment to be made of the national appointments ( including any parliamentary initiatives taken in this connection ) , and to consult the European Parliament on a non-binding basis ?
I can answer that very concisely : this is entirely a matter for the Member States , which have the right to appoint national members themselves within the framework of the Council Decision of 14 December 2000 .
Mr President , the Council ' s reply seems to me to be somewhat cavalier .
This is a body of the Council ; it is a body which was created within the Council .
Of course , like more and more things , this could be completely out of the control of Parliament , completely intergovernmental .
But it seems to me , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , that not everybody shares this view , at least in this Parliament .
The European Parliament would at least like to have a power of consultation in this matter and to know what criteria the Council , and not just the Member States , adopts .
As it is a body of the European Union , these criteria are common to all Member States .
What are the criteria for the morality of candidates who will have to occupy this post ?
I feel that this is not a question simply for the Member States ; it is not a question for Sweden or another country ; it is a question which concerns everybody and I would be very happy to have a reply from the Council .
Opinions may differ on whether or not it would be desirable to have common criteria .
However , it just so happens that even with regard to advisory bodies , the appointment of representatives is entirely a matter for the Member States .
It would therefore be a violation of current provisions to try in some way to prevent the Member States from appointing national members themselves .
Question No 8 by ( H-0152 / 01 ) :
Subject : Deletion of references to nationality from identity papers and illegal naturalisation in Greece The findings of the committee of inquiry into the Greek general elections ( 9 April 2000 ) revealed that thousands of people who were not entitled to Greek nationality had become illegally naturalised and that a large number of irregularities had occurred in this connection . Five thousand cases of such illegal activity have already been discovered at the Moscow Consulate involving officials working for the diplomatic service .
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs ordered an official inquiry into the ' Greek naturalisation industry ' , which had been in operation since 1993 . Despite the fact that the acquisition and loss of nationality is the sole responsibility of the Member States , in view of the fact that the Greek Government is seeking the deletion of references to nationality from identity papers contrary to directives 68 / 360 / EEC and 73 / 148 / EEC which specifically require the nationality to be indicated :
Can such measures be regarded as being in accordance with Community legislation and what measures will the Council take in response to infringements thereof , given that they will make it impossible to establish nationality and hence to monitor the illegal entry and movement of third-country nationals within the territory of the Member States ?
What action will be taken by the European Union in response to the illegal granting of citizenship of Member States and , by extension , of Europe and what action can be taken to put an end to this state of affairs ?
Has information been gathered with regard to naturalisation processes in Greece and other Member States and should the approximation of legislation regarding the acquisition of nationality in the EU Member States be considered ?
The acquisition or loss of citizenship in a Member State is the responsibility of the Member States themselves .
Even though there are directives containing certain rules on the content and period of validity of identity cards and passports , these directives clearly state that it is the Member States which issue identity cards and passports to their citizens in accordance with national law .
It is up to each Member State to take the measures it considers appropriate with regard to confiscating these identity cards and passports if it is established later that the holder of the passport or identity card is not entitled to be treated as a citizen of that State .
I can also inform you that the Council has not requested information concerning the naturalisation process in Greece and that neither has the Council the authorisation to adopt a position regarding possible approximation of legislation regarding the acquisition of nationality in the EU Member States .
As has just been explained , this issue falls under the jurisdiction of national governments .
I should like to draw your attention to the reply given to Parliament last month by the Commission , which said that failing to state the nationality on Greek identity cards might be contrary to Community law and constitute an obstacle to the free movement of Greek nationals on the territory of the Member States , because it violated five directives .
I agree with you that , yes , the Member States are responsible , but there are certain rules .
What do you think ?
Was the Commission ' s reply wrong ?
Can nationality be removed from all Greek identity cards and , in more general terms , can the residents of the European Union have identify cards which say nothing , not even European Union , nothing , no nationality whatsoever ?
How will they travel and how will they prove that they belong to a Member State ?
Perhaps you can advise me .
I have no reason to in any way review the reply the Commission might have given earlier regarding this matter .
As President-in-Office of the Council , I can only repeat what I said a moment ago to the honourable Member , namely that this is essentially a matter for the Member States .
Mrs Kinnock has withdrawn Question No 9 .
Question No 10 by ( H-0159 / 01 ) :
Subject : US military presence in Europe Sweden 's defence minister , Björn von Sydow , has said on several occasions recently that the security balance in Europe depends on a continued US military presence .
Does the Council agree with him and does it consider that the US National Missile Defense ( NMD ) programme is good for the security balance in Europe ?
The Council 's position with regard to the United States is expressed in general terms , for example , in the statement made in Bonn on 21 June 1999 .
The Union and the United States stated at that time that , together , they could promote their common values , their common security and their common welfare in a more effective way than either of them could on their own .
This statement also notes that these two entities together constitute a powerful force when it comes to accepting the challenges they are faced with , for example , instability in regions that are important to them both and new transnational threats to their common security .
It was also pointed out that the new transatlantic agenda signed in Madrid in December 1995 has strengthened the opportunities for these entities to manage their tasks in Europe on a more structured basis on both sides of the Atlantic and elsewhere .
With regard to a European security and defence policy , it was noted more specifically in the presidency 's report to the European Council in Nice that NATO , with regard to its Member States , remains the basis for the common defence of its members and will continue to play an important part in crisis management .
It was also pointed out that the development of the common European security and defence policy will contribute to the vitality of the renewed transatlantic connection .
As regards the second part of the honourable Member 's question , several Member States have , as you know , expressed their national opinions regarding the USA 's plans for a national missile defence programme .
A number of Member States have stressed how important it is to maintain global stability and contribute to disarmament and non-proliferation by means of an agreed framework for security . They have also stressed that , in this matter , there is a need for complete and open consultation between the United States and its partner .
America has , in its most recent statements , confirmed its commitment in this respect .
At the conference last year on the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons , the European Union maintained the importance of the Antiballistic Missile Treaty , also known as the ABM Treaty , as one of the pillars of strategic stability .
The European Union also emphasised that it wants to keep this treaty .
Mr President , I did not fully understand the answer to the question about the Council ' s view of the NMD programme .
I understood that there is now a project aimed at eventually developing a common European missile defence system in cooperation with the United States .
Has the Council no position at all on this ?
As far as I understand , the Council is responsible for the Common Foreign and Security Policy , so it is presumably the Council that has to come up with a position on this matter .
And that is something I am still looking for .
As the honourable Member is surely aware , there are a number of contentious issues within the common foreign and security policy .
One of these issues is precisely this question of National Missile Defence .
This is why I called attention to the fact that a number of Member States have made comments regarding this issue , but there is nevertheless no common position on the part of the Union .
Since the time allotted to Questions to the Council has elapsed , Questions Nos 11 to 46 will be replied to in writing .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.20 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m. )

Regulation of European securities markets ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the joint debate on the following oral questions :
B5-0016 / 01 by Mrs Randzio-Plath , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , to the Council , on the final report of the Committee of Wise Men on the regulation of the European securities markets ;
B5-0017 / 01 by Mrs Randzio-Plath , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , to the Commission , on the final report of the Committee of Wise Men on the regulation of the European securities markets .
Mr President , I very much welcome the Lamfalussy report and the opportunity to comment on it , but I would like to start by putting on record my personal thanks to Mr Bolkestein for coming along at this late hour despite the interruption .
I know it is appreciated by all my colleagues .
We are all aware of the benefits of the single market in financial services but I will re-state them because they are so important : cheaper products for consumers , better returns for savers and easier and cheaper finance for business .
Sadly , this remains an aspiration rather than a reality .
One of the main reasons we are failing to achieve such a single market is poor implementation and inconsistent interpretation .
Both of these will be helped by Mr Lamfalussy 's proposals , which are sensible and pragmatic .
We need further assurances and guarantees on transparency and market consultation and on democratic oversight , but I hope we and the other two European Union institutions can find a way to make these proposals work .
This is an important political opportunity which should not be wasted and I am glad to hear that the Commission is taking a pragmatic view on its right of initiative .
As Mr Bolkestein stated in his introduction , he does not have concerns about the role of the regulators ' committee .
We need to see that kind of flexibility from the Council as well and if it is true that the Council is trying to roll back the European Parliament 's limited role in the comitology process under present rules , that is unhelpful and regrettable .
All three institutions will need to show goodwill and make sacrifices and compromises if this arrangement is to work , but it is a prize well worth fighting for because the single market in securities will yield many benefits for the people we are elected to represent .
Mr President , I would like to add my voice to the comments of Mrs Villiers regarding the presence of Commissioner Bolkestein and I believe it is fortunate that , in a debate as brief as this one , we have the Commissioner present so that he can reply to us almost immediately .
I am not speaking as a member of the Committee on Economic Affairs but as a member of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market and I would like to express my agreement with the comments by Mr Cox , Mr Goebbels and Mr Herzog .
In short , we have a legislative problem .
We all agree that Community legislation is very complicated , very ornate and very complex , but the reason why Community legislation is so complicated and ornate is the intergovernmental procedure which is used to adopt regulations and the lack of a genuine Community legislative body which has the capacity to adopt clear regulations .
Therefore , while we agree basically with Mr Lamfalussy and the committee of experts , and with the need for clear and rapid Community legislation , we cannot agree with the solution they propose because that would mean more committees and more of the famous comitology procedure .
In this respect I must remind you of a famous saying that ' a camel is a horse drawn by a committee ' , with many humps , and Community legislation is camel-like .
The comitology procedure currently proposed by the Lamfalussy report would create many more camels and would not create satisfactory legislation .
This type of proposal and the continued insistence on comitology is not therefore the solution .
The solution lies in creating a clear legislative procedure which allows Parliament to effectively exercise its powers .
Otherwise we would simply be allowing the governments to continue playing amongst themselves and drawing Community legislative camels .
Mr President , Commissioner , it must be rather dull to listen to these speeches here at this time of the evening , particularly when we are so unanimously agreed in matters .
There is certainly a lot that is being repeated in these speeches .
I , too , think that the Committee of Wise Men , chaired by Baron Lamfalussy , has done an exceptionally thorough job .
The committee ' s proposals form a coherent whole and also contain some practical and concrete measures to bring the system into effect .
It is generally rare in politics to make such clear proposals and I thank this committee for them .
We members of the European Parliament agree fully with the view that it is necessary to make regulation of the securities markets more efficient and faster .
This is a requirement that we should propose if we want to achieve a genuinely viable European internal market for financial services within the next few years .
We can never achieve the ambitious aims of Lisbon if the reform of one directive on the financial markets is to take ten years , as has tended to be the case with the present system , if we take the UCITS directive as an example .
Parliament alone cannot be blamed for the present system ' s shortcomings , however .
Parliament has taken its role as the EU ' s second legislative body seriously and responsibly .
During this parliamentary term in particular we have shown that there is no conflict between safeguarding Parliament ' s powers of influence and adequate democratic control , on the one hand , and the call for greater speed and efficiency , on the other .
Parliament ' s principal task is to determine what the core political questions are , and not beat around the bush .
For that reason , delegating the responsibility of technical legislation to the committee to be set up is basically not a problem for us .
The bosses do not do the work of the secretaries , and vice versa .
In the codecision procedure Parliament and the Council are the bosses and all the others the secretaries .
This , however , does not weaken the demand Parliament is making in plain terms in the form of the ' callback ' mechanism .
Parliament must have the legally binding right to refer a matter back for further consideration if things are moving in the wrong direction .
Parliament is not the only institution that wants to ensure it is safeguarded in this way ; the Council has also expressed a similar need to safeguard its own position with the help of the ' aerosol clause ' .
This sort of system , which would take the concerns of both Parliament and the Council into account , must also be created on the basis of the Lamfalussy report .
To begin with I should like to answer some of the points that were raised this afternoon .
First of all , Mr von Wogau said that he welcomes the use of regulations and also the fast-track procedure .
I would agree with him in his sentiment .
Certainly regulations and a fast-track procedure would help to speed up legislation .
Mr von Wogau said that perhaps as a pilot project a pension fund could be used to show how quickly these procedures could be used .
Certainly , the Commission would like to see the pension fund directive become a reality as soon as possible .
However , certain articles in the Treaty concerning the internal market mention directives and not regulations .
Naturally we have to stay within the confines of the Treaty , so where the Treaty says " directives " we cannot use regulations .
But I agree with Parliament that regulations are usually - although not always - faster than directives .
Mr Goebbels asked if the new procedures would speed up legislation .
As I have explained , they would .
Also the comitology procedure provides for short deadlines and therefore it would also speed up the whole process .
Mr Goebbels then asked whether the Securities Committee would consist of Secretaries of State .
I am afraid I cannot answer that question .
The Securities Committee has delegates coming from various Member States and it is up to the Member States to decide who represents them on that committee .
So I cannot comment on that .
As I said , Member States will nominate their own representatives .
What is important is that these representatives should show a real European spirit , are prepared to work closely together and are technically competent .
I now come to the matter of transparency , which has been raised by a number of Members of Parliament .
I agree with all those who have emphasised the importance of transparency throughout the legislative process and indeed the report by Mr Lamfalussy and his colleagues makes various references to the need for transparency .
The Commission wholeheartedly endorses that .
Mr Herzog said this is a cumbersome intergovernmental procedure instead of a single European regulator .
The procedures set out in this report are not intergovernmental .
For example , the Securities Committee - which is an important committee in this respect - will not be a Council working group .
It will be a regulatory committee in the sense of the 1999 comitology decision ; it will be chaired by the Commission .
So it is not an intergovernmental committee .
The decision of the Lamfalussy committee not to propose a single European regulator at this stage is the result of a full and thorough consultation process .
As the report states , it may be necessary to look at the possibility of a single regulator when the whole procedure is reviewed in 2004 if the process that is currently proposed is not satisfactory , but not before .
Let me now answer a few points that were raised this evening .
I am grateful to Mrs Villiers and Mr Medina Ortega for their kind words , although to me it is only natural that I should be present here when a subject falling within my portfolio is discussed .
Mr Medina Ortega said that the European Union 's legislation is complex , which is true .
Normally there is a government and a parliament .
We have a triangular relationship , the Commission , Parliament and the Council .
That makes it more difficult .
The fact that there are 15 Member States further complicates the procedure .
He said that the whole system for dealing with executive measures under the comitology procedure is like the horse designed by a committee which turns out to be a camel .
Indeed there was a committee , the Lamfalussy committee .
But the whole idea of a comitology procedure is to get the implementing measures through more speedily .
That is a purpose I share .
I must say , however , that the matter of secondary legislation is a very important one .
In many Member States - in Germany and the Netherlands for example - there is a definite procedure for dealing with secondary legislation , which the European Union lacks .
There is no provision in the Treaty for dealing with secondary legislation in this way .
Parliament , the Council and the Commission would be well advised to think about the need for a proper system of dealing with secondary legislation .
Since this whole process will be reviewed in 2004 let us hope that at the same time we can look into the matter of secondary legislation .
Then if we manage to work out a clear plan it can be taken up in the Intergovernmental Conference which will hopefully start in 2004 .
The Commission is grateful for the support Mrs Kauppi has given to the report of the Lamfalussy committee .
There is no difference of opinion .
She want speedier legislation .
She is right .
The Commission wants it , Mrs Randzio-Plath wants it , everybody wants it .
She gave the example of USITs , which it look a long time to agree upon .
Fortunately , agreement has now been reached but I would agree with Mrs Kauppi that it has taken a very long time .
Central to this whole discussion is the possibility of having a callback mechanism as Parliament has requested .
I do not have to explain what it is ; everybody knows .
The Commission firmly believes that we ought to find a solution within the Treaty - which means Articles 202 and 211 - and that we should stay within the confines of the comitology decision of June 1999 .
Therefore we cannot see our way to granting Parliament a callback possibility .
Having said that , I would ask Parliament to remember what is on the table .
Firstly , the Commission will take full account of a resolution approved by Parliament .
Secondly , as Mr Cox said this afternoon , it is Parliament - and the Council - that decide on the scope of levels in implementing measures .
If the directive contains broad principles and executive measures and Parliament does not agree that a certain executive measure should be called that and relegated to level 2 , then Parliament should say so and amend the directive to say that a particular implementing measure should be elevated to the status of a general principle and therefore be dealt with under level 1 .
So it is in Parliament 's own hands to decide on the distinction between general principles and executive measures .
That is the second point .
Thirdly , if Parliament thought the Commission was abusing the system , what do you think would happen the next time the Commission made a proposal concerning a certain directive ?
Parliament would surely then be in a position to say " Look , you fooled us the last time , now we are going to be extremely strict with you " .
So Parliament can be certain that the next time it is dealing with a directive under this whole plan it can tighten the screws .
The Commission knows that .
So why should the Commission frustrate the wishes of Parliament by doing something that is not really proper ?
That is the third point .
Fourthly , in the year 2004 there will be a review of the whole process and this - my fifth point - will be steered by the Monitoring Committee , an interinstitutional committee on which Parliament will be represented .
The Monitoring Committee will not keep silent if it thinks that the procedures are being abused and the Commission is allowing itself too much latitude .
My sixth point is Parliament can pass a resolution saying that the Commission is ultra vires , that it is going beyond what is consistent with the law .
Again , the Commission would take full account of that opinion and reconsider the whole proposal .
These six measures should allay the fear , which I understand but which is not justified , that the Commission would disregard Parliament 's opinion .
The Commission cannot and will not do so .
Therefore , I do not think there are any grounds for wanting a callback possibility .
I can find no provision for it in the Treaty or in the 1999 comitology procedure .
Lastly , two Members of Parliament have mentioned something they think has happened in the Council , namely that the Council wants to have a stronger position for itself than is consistent with a balanced relationship between the three institutions .
I cannot speak for the Council .
The Council proceedings are not open and therefore it is very difficult to comment .
But if there should be any attempt to lower the bar of a qualified majority vote to a simple majority vote , that would meet with the strongest objections from the Commission .
After all , a single majority vote is almost never mentioned in the Treaty .
We know what unanimous votes are and we know what qualified majority votes are .
Simple majority votes are perhaps used for procedural matters , but not for anything of substance .
So the Commission will firmly oppose any moves towards lowering the decision-making system from a qualified majority vote to a simple majority vote .
As I said , I cannot speak for the Council and it is only with great reluctance that I am commenting on something that may or may not be true .
Mr President , Commissioner , you have referred to numerous possibilities and impossibilities .
As rapporteur and committee chair , I should like to revert to the question which you did not answer and which is of crucial importance to our committee . I refer to the callback right .
No one wants to change the Treaty just now .
The point is , can we find a solution within the framework of the 1999 comitology decision ?
Why not supplement Article 6 and give Parliament a guarantee which secures its callback right , Commissioner , if the Commission or the other institutions do not act as the European Parliament would wish ?
I think that this would show willing on the part of the institutions and would prove that we live in a European democracy .
Mr President , may I express the gratitude of the Commission for Mrs Randzio-Plath 's remarks .
I reiterate that the Commission is basing itself on two particular articles in the Treaty and on the comitology decision .
When I look not so much at Article 6 but at Article 5 and Article 8 of the comitology decision , I am sorry , but I see no room for a callback procedure .
Mrs Randzio-Plath referred this afternoon to a callback procedure or equivalent measure , or words to that effect .
The Commission is here to try to find a balance and if Mrs Randzio-Plath is willing to come forward with a new suggestion , the Commission will , of course , listen to it but once again it must be within the framework of the comitology decision .
If Mrs Randzio-Plath or any other Member of this Parliament then says it is time we changed the comitology decision , I am out of my depth .
It is not within my remit tonight to pronounce on the possibility of changing the comitology decision , although if we are considering the question of secondary legislation , we might also consider comitology .
However that is a big step and I do not think I can make any comment on changes to this delicate and complicated interinstitutional balance tonight .
Once again , if Mrs Randzio-Plath wants to put forward a new proposal which we might not have considered , we will certainly look at it and try to be positive in our reply , always provided that it is within the confines of the comitology decision ,
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
I have received one motion for a resolution tabled pursuant to Rule 42 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
European economy
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0082 / 2001 ) by Mr von Wogau , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the state of the European economy , report preparatory to the Commission recommendation on the broad economic policy guidelines [ 2001 / 2008 ( INI ) ] .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , mention has already been made of the fact that the rapporteur , Karl von Wogau , is unable to be here .
He himself explained why during his intervention on the Lamfalussy report .
Because the order of business was changed at such short notice , he was unable to change his appointments so that he could be here in person .
I should like to point out that the Lamfalussy report and this economic report were originally scheduled for the beginning of the day and that the rapporteur arranged this evening ' s discussion with voters in his constituency some time ago .
May I apologise on his behalf once again .
I shall endeavour to do my best under the circumstances . There are a number of points which I wish to address .
First , this is the last year before euro notes and coins are introduced .
The internal market of the European Union will then become a real European home market , at least for the members of the euro zone .
Twelve Member States will belong to this European home market , in which individuals and companies will all share a common currency .
It is therefore right and proper that we should carry out a careful analysis of the European economy in this context .
This has now already begun : the forecasts for the current year and the analysis of the status quo are basically optimistic , although they do of course contain a number of risk factors , which I shall come to in a moment .
One positive factor which deserves a mention in any critique or proposed improvement is the relatively high rate of growth in our Gross Domestic Product .
Another positive factor is that the rate of unemployment is falling and we have created 2.5 million new jobs in the European Union over recent years .
Yet another positive factor is the improvement in public finances - and the concomitant reduction in the rate of inflation - and long-term price stability .
So much for the pros .
However , there are two factors which need to be mentioned which could give cause for concern : the first is the present economic climate in the United States .
Growth in the United States is slowing down and , given the impact of strong growth in the USA on European trade , this may undermine the EU economy although , on the positive side , we are becoming increasingly immune to economic developments in America and this represents a positive balance and positive justification for our measures .
The second factor is the slowdown in the European economy .
According to forecasts , the average rate of growth will be 2.8 % .
I should therefore like to state quite unequivocally that we need to call on the Member States again today to do more to translate the will to engage in reform into practice and to implement sustainable structural measures .
We must be critical of the fact that consolidation efforts have come to a standstill in numerous countries .
I would just point out that we should be even more critical of consolidation efforts in that the majority of countries have still not met their self-imposed targets in the stability and growth package despite the boom in the economy .
The second area which we need to touch on is the fact that we must congratulate the ECB because its " steady hand " policy has proven to be the right policy .
The ECB should continue on this stability-oriented course and should also implement its own European stability-oriented policy .
We also have a few demands .
The rate of inflation must be kept below 2 % in the second half of the year . The telecommunications , mail , energy and railway sectors must be liberalised quickly and in a balanced manner .
We need to step up efforts in education and training .
We need a more flexible labour market and we need structural reforms of the markets for goods , services , capital and labour to be speeded up .
Mr President , allow me to close by saying that the main request in Karl von Wogau ' s report is contained in the reference to the common principles which derive from our social market economy principles , i.e. freedom and democracy , competition , price stability and sustainable growth , subsidiarity , solidarity and private property and the responsibility not only of the employer towards the employee but of both towards the future , and hence for ensuring that the social market economy evolves into an eco-social market economy .
Mr President , just under nine months to go and we shall witness the birth of what is expected to be a sturdy euro , a euro that will see the light of the world of real payment transactions .
Our citizens will finally hold it in their hands .
It has all the right talents : the economic clout of 12 of the 15 Member States of the EU , low rates of inflation , falling national debts and historically low interest rates .
It will be well protected by the European Central Bank in Frankfurt am Main - which knows all there is to know about stability , and really has done what Othmar Karas said , i.e. operated a " steady-hand " policy , which is now paying off .
Anyone who has managed to withstand the pessimism , the years of being underrated like the euro has , is worth investing in .
The situation in the euro zone , with over 2.5 million new jobs in three years is good , although caution is needed in the face of the slowdown in the United States .
Growth and investment forecasts are being revised downwards everywhere .
There is the threat of weakening exports and increasing problems in funding social security systems .
The euphoria over the new economy has fallen into the abyss along with the fall in share prices .
Today it would appear that the old economy is not so old after all .
We must take strategic precautions : economic policy , monetary policy and social policy must be coordinated .
We must improve the framework conditions for innovative start ups .
We must make it easier to invest in information and communications technologies .
Now more than ever , the Member States need to get on and reform their education and training plans , which should be geared to the challenges of these new technologies and the increasing need for mobility .
Higher qualifications improve employability , especially in the knowledge society which we keep on talking about .
We also need to secure permanent and effective social protection , and this can only be done if those in political power put funding right at the top of their agenda .
The social partners ' agenda needs to include maintaining jobs for older people , creating more jobs and giving employees a share in company profits .
The social market economy , which Karl von Wogau frequently refers to , is reflected in his excellent report .
We in the PPE-DE Group agreed with him unanimously .
It includes liberalisation and solidarity , competition and equal opportunities and environmentally-friendly growth .
The social market economy is more than just an economic model .
This social model will be the basis for the new European home market which Karl von Wogau has been forecasting , and that does have a future .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am somewhat surprised to hear that the euro will be born in nine months .
I rather thought that the euro had already been born and thank goodness it has , because just imagine what would have happened between the European economies if the European currencies were still competing with each other now that the American economy has gone into decline .
But that is by the by .
As the rapporteur said , the year 2000 was a good year for the European economy , from the point of view of the rate of growth , from the point of view of price stability and from the point of view of employment .
Of course , nothing is perfect in this imperfect world and , as the rapporteur points out , the rate of inflation is set to exceed 2 % , the stability criteria set by the European Bank , for the second year running , but not to a sufficiently serious extent to give us particular cause for concern .
From our point of view , we would have considered it more worthwhile to stress that , although certain progress has been and is still being made , unemployment is still at 8 % , which is unacceptably high in a social market economy , the principles of which the rapporteur feels - and I agree with him - should guide our policy .
In this respect , I am surprised that , in listing the features of a social market economy , the rapporteur does not include full employment in his list , despite the fact that he comes from a country in which cooperation between companies and employees is , I think , the most advanced or one of the most advanced in Europe and does the German economy and German society proud .
As far as we are concerned , full employment should be the be all and end all of a modern economy .
Not , as you might assume , for ideological reasons , although of course ideological reasons are not easily dismissed , but for reasons of competitiveness .
An economy does not become competitive merely by achieving low costs or by having leading edge technology .
Competitiveness is judged by whether it makes full use of its wealth-creating resources in comparison with other economies .
Unless it does , it will not manage to become competitive , which is precisely why full employment - and not just full employment but increasing the ratio between the adult population and the work force by 60 % for women and 70 % for men - is not just a social , it is primarily an economic demand , and why it is at the epicentre of the policy which was announced by the Council summit in Lisbon and which will be reiterated , I hope , at the coming Council summit in Stockholm .
We should take every opportunity to remind ourselves and the citizens of Europe that our Union has engaged in a huge economic venture in order to gain its rightful place at the economic vanguard of the world .
This venture is based on the triad of a knowledge economy , full employment and renovation of the social state .
These three factors form a unit , each feeds the other and they express the exact link between social solidarity and economic competitiveness .
Just as there is no such thing as efficient solidarity without competitiveness , competitiveness will collapse if it is not built on social solidarity .
Our rapporteur insists on the technological aspects of economic superiority .
We believe that equal weight must be given to social aspects such as equal opportunities , a fair distribution of income and closing the gap between the rich and the poor .
And if we too had made an effort to impose self-control on the markets at worldwide level , at least to the extent to which we are able to exert an influence , we would perhaps not now have reached a point at which we are threatened by the imminent economic crisis in the United States .
I do not know what happened to close Wall Street . At lunchtime it was still in free fall and it is threatening to drag us down into a slump with it .
We must protect ourselves from the extremes of a non-social economy .
If we want a social economy , we must give it real meaning , based on solidarity and the fight against speculation ; words alone will get us nowhere .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , firstly I would like to congratulate Mr von Wogau , on behalf of the Liberal Group and on my own behalf , and offer our support for his report on an issue which , although it is very important - the broad economic policy guidelines - is nevertheless a substitute for what we would like to see .
We have always argued that , in the Europe of the euro , there should be a genuine and well-defined leadership for economic and monetary policy .
It is well known that , at the moment , it is produced by means of negotiations between ECOFIN and the Commission , with the intervention of Parliament .
The broad guidelines are clearly a fundamental element , but - I repeat - it is still in our view a substitute for what should be a genuine economic and monetary policy at European Union level with the opportunity to act in a more direct manner .
Of the different aspects dealt with in Mr von Wogau ' s report , I would like to highlight three , which , from our liberal perspective , are particularly important .
The first is to push ahead with the process of liberalisation in sectors such as telecommunications , postal services , railways , etc . , sectors which still hinder the possibility of achieving higher levels of competitiveness and a single market which functions better .
This process would also , as Mr Bolkestein correctly pointed out , lead to better functioning of the single market and the disappearance of barriers within it .
This better functioning - as Parliament approved in my report on structural reforms and liberalisation - would in particular guarantee a profound reform of the labour markets , an essential element , firstly , in better adapting to the economic and social needs of European society and , secondly , in achieving what we need , that is , higher levels of productivity in order to be competitive on an international level .
Mr President , it is true that the European economy appears to have grown quite solidly over recent years .
The main reason is the boost in exports to the US dollar area as a result of the current economic climate there and the weak euro .
So the basic principle reads : a weak euro is good for an export-oriented economy and hence good for Europe .
It is true that , at over 2 % , the rate of inflation in Europe does not meet the stability criteria for the introduction of the euro , mainly as a result of higher oil prices , which are traded in dollars .
So then the basic principle reads : a weak euro is bad for the European economy .
This illustrates the absurdity of reducing economic policy measures to fiscal policy .
It is true that the number of unemployed has fallen over recent years .
But it is also true that unemployment in Objective 1 regions has not fallen , because they do not tend to have an export-oriented economy .
So we have no convergence , just continuing divergence , i.e. a deepening social divide .
It is true that investments have increased over recent years .
But it is also true that most were rationalisation and non-expansion investments and that public investment in infrastructure has fallen .
What has all this to do with a forward-looking economic policy ?
The report does not contain a single proposal on strengthening domestic demand , on the specific issue of small and medium-sized enterprises , on strengthening regional economic cycles , on European tax harmonisation , on implementing the Lisbon employment summit , mentioning instead simply liberalisation , privatisation , falling social standards and the abolition of public-funded health and pension funds .
The von Wogau report must be rejected .
Mr President , the European economy is still doing well .
But we must admit that we did in fact expect more .
Less pleasing is the fact that the inflation rate has again crossed the 2 % threshold and investments have fallen from 5.3 % to 4.9 % of Gross Domestic Product .
We must therefore continue to ensure that priority European objectives - promoting small and medium-sized businesses , cutting red tape , reducing overly high tax rates - are implemented consistently .
But we must also back and reform our education systems so that the lack of expertise threatening us does not in fact become a reality .
Finally , the only economic development which can be described as a success is one which manages to reduce the excessively high unemployment rate in Europe .
Mr President , Commissioner , the Commission ' s report on the state of the Union economy in 2000 and , in part , the von Wogau report itself , do not fail to underline how the halting progress of the euro has been , even in the perception of the financial markets , attributable at least in part to the absence of sufficiently coordinated action by the eurozone governments to promote a policy of economic growth and development in the field of employment .
Nor can the Central Bank take all the blame for not including the stimulus of growth and the pursuit of full employment amongst its priorities in setting interest rates , in addition to the containment of inflation .
It is now becoming clear how urgent it is to bring into being a genuine form of closer cooperation between the twelve countries of the eurozone , so as to make a qualitative leap in the coordination of financial , economic and social policies , and overcome - as was called for at the Lisbon Summit - a rigidly sectoral approach which , ultimately , confines social policies to a role of mere assistance .
That might also be the way to establish a coordinated presence of the monetary Union as such in institutional decision-making forums like the International Monetary Fund or the World Bank and , in addition , the relations of the eurozone with third countries , in particular with the producer countries of raw materials and energy sources .
For example , a long-term agreement with oil producers with a controlled price in euro would be not only possible but desirable .
Mr President , we are not having a very lively debate .
Why ?
The impression we are giving is that the European Union is very passive .
There are the movements of the global market , there is the policy of the United States , and we are looking on .
With regard to these events we are far from having an economic policy .
We do not have a doctrine of public economy in Europe and we are therefore a bit closeted here , I would say , in the Ministry of Words .
Allow me to make three observations .
Firstly , the analysis of economic conditions presented by the Central Bank and by the Commission could , in fact , be summed up more or less by a slowdown in the global space , even though , for us , the growth indicators are good for the next few months , that is for the coming 18 months , and do not encourage us to budge .
We are lamentably lacking initiatives to consolidate the potential and perhaps real growth of the European Union .
For my part , I would lay great stress on the need for public and private investments and on the accumulated delays in the matter of research and training .
Instead of that , the report unfortunately takes up the anti-inflationist obsession we also find in the discourse of the Central Bank , and the failure of the Galileo project would be disastrous .
Secondly , we have said that the social policy was necessary to consolidate growth .
In the words of Emilio Gabaglio , the impression is that we are witnessing a sort of derailment between Lisbon and Stockholm .
We should give concrete expression to our desire to develop knowledge and skills in the European Union in the form of a spectacular initiative .
Thirdly , we talk about an acceleration of balanced liberalisation .
The debate between competition and service of general interest has only just started .
I am convinced that the internal market will not come to fruition unless we impose obligations to provide services of general interest at the Community level .
Here too , we lack initiatives .
I hope that the next few months will prove me wrong .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mr von Wogau for his report , Mr Karas for his presentation and all of you for your speeches .
This year , for the first time , the procedures for debating the broad economic policy guidelines have been modified as a result of the Lisbon procedure and you have had the opportunity to introduce a Parliamentary position on this debate which should , in principle , help us to define that economic policy which you - Mr Trentin , amongst others - have referred to and to which we are not attaching sufficient importance .
We in the Commission agree with the fundamental principles contained in the report , both paragraph one and paragraph two , relating to the social market economy and an economy based on a democratic model , price stability , sustainable growth , subsidiarity , solidarity etc . , which are objectives we share fully .
I also agree with the point some of you have made in relation to the importance of this moment in time , since we are now less than 300 days away from the introduction of the euro .
However , as always , I must repeat that we often confuse the introduction of notes and coins on 1 January next year with the introduction of the euro which took place on 1 January 1999 , and which has already brought us clear benefits and positive results , as some of you have pointed out .
Amongst these positive results is the healthy economic situation the European Union currently enjoys .
We must not rest on our laurels , because this healthy economic situation nevertheless masks certain deficiencies , certain problems caused by external factors , a certain lack of ambition in considering budgets and , above all , there are certain risks caused , in particular , by the development of economies such as the US economy .
In relation to this specific point , however , I would like to insist that the euro is also protecting us from the process of slowdown , which is affecting economies outside the European Union .
The Commission ' s position , which is still relatively optimistic in relation to the process of growth in Europe during 2001 , is based on the fact that currently we in Europe still clearly have an historic level of confidence in consumers and producers , employment is still clearly improving and inflation has reached its ceiling . In this context , we believe that the obligation of those responsible for economic policy is , above all , to maintain short-term economic expansion .
Therefore , according to our view of the issue , we insist that we need to continue to maintain a budgetary policy aimed at balancing public finances . We also believe that wage policy must be compatible with non-inflationist growth and the creation of employment and that monetary policy must remain committed to price stability .
There is no doubt that monetary policy would benefit from a coherent tax policy and greater liberalisation of the markets .
Some of you have also raised the concern that employment is the fundamental issue .
This is patently a key point .
We therefore also insist - as we have done in our presentations of reports for Stockholm - on the increase in the Union ' s growth potential .
In our report on the 2000 review of the Union ' s economy , the Commission studied the impact of expenditure and production in information and communication technologies and the advantages they could provide in relation to the possible increase in our growth potential .
Clearly , the structural reforms to which Mr Gasòliba referred are a fundamental point , but we must also focus on other shortcomings .
Firstly , in Lisbon we focussed on the knowledge economy as a key and fundamental element .
If we wish to make progress in this respect we must also create the right conditions for private-sector investment in research and development and in the new technologies .
We also have to improve research and , at the same time , increase professional training for the new technologies .
Structural reforms are regularly mentioned .
There is no doubt that we have made progress and that is clear from the report on the implementation of this year ' s broad economic policy guidelines , but we must not view this progress as completely satisfactory .
The Commission still insists on the need to continue making progress on these issues and , as you know , the Commission just yesterday presented new proposals to move ahead on the liberalisation of the energy market .
We are aware that we have to seek a balance between liberalisation and regulation in order to achieve the best possible economic results from this process .
We also agree that we have to make progress on the whole issue of creating more efficient and more integrated financial markets .
You have just held a debate with Mr Bolkestein on the need to implement the procedures originating from the so-called Lamfalussy committee .
There is no doubt that this is a step towards speeding up the processes of liberalising the financial services , but we believe that this is not sufficient and we also have to continue to make progress in relation to risk capital and the improvement of risk capital in Europe .
The labour market must be another of our main concerns if we wish to make progress on employment .
A better combination of fiscal reforms and supply systems will certainly have a positive influence on the behaviour of the working population , as it must also help to create a better balance between wages and productivity on a local level , improve employment in certain areas and will also have a positive influence on certain factors such as the mobility of labour or better work organisation .
Another concern , which we do not believe is sufficiently highlighted in this report , concerns the problems of the long-term sustainability of public finances .
The problems relating to the ageing of the population are going to be one of the key issues and in order to deal with them we are clearly going to have to take measures on public debt and measures for improving the labour market , by achieving a greater level of activity , a greater level of employment , in particular of women and older workers , which can also help to counter some of these effects , as will reforms of the current social security systems which are coherent with employment and sustainability of the model .
I would like to thank all of you for your speeches , your comments and your positive contributions to the report , which we will take into account when it comes to drawing up our proposed broad economic policy guidelines for next year .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Swaps arrangements and forward rate agreements
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0071 / 2001 ) by Mrs Kauppi , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation amending Council Regulation ( EC ) No 2223 / 96 on the reclassification of settlements under swaps arrangements and under forward rate agreements [ COM ( 1999 ) 749 - C5-0018 / 2000 - 2000 / 0019 ( COD ) ] .
Mr President , as you can see , this is not exactly a hotly debated issue in Parliament today .
When I was given this report in January 2000 I thought it might be quite easy .
Unfortunately it was not .
As soon as we started the discussion in Parliament we heard from the Commission and Council representatives that there might still be some problems in the Council concerning this mainly technical initiative .
After listening to the Council 's worries I decided to table some amendments to the Commission proposal in order to reach a wide consensus at first reading .
I hope these amendments are supported tomorrow by the other political groups .
This proposed regulation deals with the reclassification of settlements under swaps arrangements and under forward rate agreements .
It enables reliable comparison of government deficits within the framework of excessive deficit procedure .
It is of great importance that information on the Member States ' accounts is comparable .
Comparison of this information is one of the prerequisites for economic coordination in the Union .
The differing statistics on unemployment are one of the best-known examples .
Different ways of compiling , calculating and documenting data on real unemployment renders comparisons between Member States difficult .
It also renders cooperation difficult .
The possibility of reliable comparison of statistical information on the accounts also increases the transparency of our public administrations .
Transparency is all we demand in Parliament .
We have a saying in Finland which describes three different levels of lying .
The different levels are : lies , big lies and statistics .
I hope that we in the European Parliament can prevent this from applying to statistical information within the Union .
The Commission proposal initially gave rise to concerns in the Council working group .
The majority of the delegations expressed reservations about the proposed reclassification as it could lead to changes in the level of government deficit within the framework of the excessive deficit procedure .
The proposed change would result in the effects of swaps and forward rate agreements issued by the national debt managers being excluded from the calculation of net borrowing or net lending by the public sector .
I essentially agree with the Commission proposal , as amended along the lines suggested by the national statistical experts and the Council working group .
The ECB has also approved this system of two definitions , even if they would prefer legal acts with only one definition for important statistical indicators .
Excluding swaps and forward rate agreements from the deficit calculations under the excessive deficit procedure would indeed place an unnecessary constraint on the market activities of the national debt managers .
Swaps , forward rate agreements and other financial derivatives may , in some cases , reduce the cost of government borrowing and are , as such , useful tools for debt management .
I introduced separate treatment for swaps and forward rate agreements , thus paving the way for a first reading agreement on this dossier .
My personal view is that I would not like to take this dossier to second reading or to speak on this issue again in this Chamber .
I hope this issue will be swiftly dealt with , not only in the sitting tomorrow , but subsequently in the Council .
The technical nature of this issue should make this possible .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to thank Mrs Kauppi for her work and for her explanation .
I understand that this is a very technical and complex piece of work but I would say that , ultimately , what we are dealing with is a relatively straightforward matter : changes have been made , as Mrs Kauppi explained very clearly , to the accounting criteria for the swaps arrangements and forward rate agreements .
On paper , there are arguments for and against these changes , but the introduction of the new concept and the changes made to SEC 95 in order to enable us to adapt to the criteria that are widely accepted today definitely posed a problem with regard to the system for calculating public deficits .
They also altered the figures that we had hitherto taken into consideration , which produced an imbalanced approach and those responsible for managing the public debt of the Member States have suggested that we continue with the previous system for excessive public debt .
The Commission feels that this is an acceptable approach because the alternative would be to modify the previous system .
We are not talking about deliberate , statistical lies .
We are simply talking about applying different criteria to different objectives .
In our view , the matter does not present major difficulties and will even provide greater coherence .
In the long term , we will certainly have to find a way to harmonise these two concepts , but we think that at the moment , the best approach is to maintain the criteria for excessive public deficits as they are currently applied .
In this respect , I can also inform you that the amendments tabled by the rapporteur are perfectly acceptable to the Commission .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
EU election assistance and observation
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0060 / 2001 ) by Mr Fava , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on the Commission communication on EU Election Assistance and Observation [ COM ( 2000 ) 191 - C5 ­ 0259 / 2000 - 2000 / 2137 ( COS ) ] .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , it goes without saying that we associate ourselves with the guiding spirit behind the Commission ' s communication on election assistance and observation , namely the principle that encouraging genuine democracies is not only an ethical imperative but also a condition of sustainable development and lasting peace , a specific mandate of the Union in application of the Treaties , and the foundation of our foreign policy .
I would like to add that it is also something else : it is a commitment that is not formal , but is difficult , which cannot be relegated just to declarations of principle but which must be built through consistent , practical political acts .
That is therefore the role of the European Union and the European Parliament in election assistance and observation , given that free elections are a necessary precondition for democracy .
Two 1999 Council Regulations represent the legal basis for transforming our role into a substantial commitment .
In what way ?
A consistent political strategy is necessary .
So far , we have chalked up eight years of totally generous election assistance and observation , often with excellent results : I refer to Zimbabwe and Russia .
However , it has been a matter of occasional interventions , so we are very much in favour of the Commission ' s communication , which provides us with a coherent political strategy .
Another necessary step is to extend that strategy to every stage of the intervention in the observation which precedes and accompanies the elections , because the democratic process is not exhausted on polling day .
It involves establishing the proper connections between electoral support and development aid policies , a structured relationship with the international organisations , the NGOs and civil society , not using the mechanisms of the delegation , which we have often settled for , but rather the mechanisms of genuine political cooperation .
Our report has sought to make contributions in a number of areas , first and foremost on the role of Parliament .
Under no circumstances - especially not in this specific case - can Parliament be regarded as a mere notary , called upon to ratify an electoral process or the quality of an electoral process .
Our legitimacy and our function are political in nature and our presence in the Union ' s observation missions - our proper political role - can represent added value for the European Union .
So it is useful for the European Parliament to be present at every stage , including the stages preceding election observation in the strict sense , and it is desirable - where the right conditions exist - to have the European Union mission led by a Member of Parliament .
What is more , our record is excellent : our former colleague , Mr Schori , led the mission in Zimbabwe .
Moreover , political role and visibility are being won in the field , and I see them as a resource not only for Parliament but for the European Union as a whole .
Another fundamental point is the need for institutional coordination between the European Parliament , the Commission and the Council .
We advocate a permanent consultation mechanism , regarding this as preferable to an interinstitutional agreement which would be more cumbersome and require very demanding inputs of time and management and implementation methods .
Taking up the suggestions of certain Members , we advocate a half-yearly timetable allowing constant monitoring of what is happening , given the very violent accelerations political history records these days .
We advocate the creation of an adequately staffed election department within the Commission , and one of our amendments calls specifically for numbers equal to the task facing the Commission .
In our opinion , a greater and different kind of flexibility in the European Union ' s commitment criteria is needed .
First , elections and regional elections may not be sufficient parameters for recognising when it is appropriate to intervene .
We are participating in the election observation in Peru and that is certainly not the first election .
Flexibility is definitely needed in the evaluation standards . The two words ' free and fair ' do not cover everything Parliament and the European Union should focus on in their election observation activities .
This is not rigidity ; it is rigour , and a necessary rigour , because what has primarily been lacking over the last few years has been rigour in choices and approaches .
Moreover , strategy consists of rules and objectives .
In conclusion , we feel - as does the Commission - that democracy is a process , not a choice made on a single day .
We know that genuine democracy in many countries starts to be built on polling day and goes on from there .
We want to continue to make our resources available , and not just economic resources but the resources of our democratic heritage and our political commitment as well .
Mr President , I will begin by endorsing what my colleague Mr Fava has said .
Throughout our negotiations on this issue we have had very good cooperation .
He has always understood the importance of a strong development perspective since half of all the EU observer missions have been in developing countries .
And the European Union , as a multinational organisation of fifteen developed democracies , clearly has a duty as well as a significant role to play in all the global efforts to promote democratisation , sustainable development and peaceful progress .
I would like to welcome this communication from the Commission which provides the necessary clarity on these issues and a real focus on how the European Union should proceed and probably do these things better in the future .
The main point , as Mr Fava has said , is that simply holding periodic elections is not enough to guarantee democracy in any circumstances .
Elections are not just about a snapshot on a day ; what is at stake is how we cover the whole electoral process .
This is the strong emphasis in the report that we are looking at this evening .
It is essential that any verdict given by the European Union does not inadvertently legitimise , endorse or give any kind of support to any kind of dubious electoral process .
The phrase " free and fair " should be avoided : it is loaded vocabulary which is always ruthlessly targeted by the media in any post-election circumstances .
As the European Union 's representative in Cambodia I was very well aware of how difficult that phraseology was .
It is also very important for us to emphasise the need to support domestic observer teams .
These are the key people in developing countries who understand social , political and cultural issues which we , when we parachute in to observe elections , might not be aware of .
On the Parliament : we recommend that Parliament sets up an election coordinating group able to provide much faster and more efficient responses .
I also would like to ask the Commission what resources , particularly staffing , will be dedicated to the important task of delivering the aims of this very important communication .
Finally , the European Parliament is a central player in the Union 's efforts to cover elections .
Our credibility is at stake here and I welcome the opportunity offered to us by the Commission to define a very clear and shared vision of Europe 's role in the democratic process in countries all over the world .
Mr President , first of all , I should , also on behalf of my group , like to express my appreciation for the Commission communication and for the report and attendant resolution by Mr Fava .
I welcome the fact that the European Commission has screened the EU policy on election assistance and observation and has come up with proposals for a better approach towards this policy , and for updating the same .
Too often , this policy has been referred to as ad hoc and has been associated with last-minute delegations , with little impact and visibility on the part of the Union .
In those cases where impact and visibility did form part of the package , most of the time , it was because the European Parliament had been handed the helm from a delegation - a case in point being the sterling work by Mr Gahler in Zimbabwe and by Mr Cushnahan recently .
That is why the report by Mr Fava is so significant : among other things , it draws on the European Parliament ' s extensive experience , and is receiving a great deal of support from our group , partly for that reason .
All our amendments have already been approved in the Parliamentary Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , and that is why we have not tabled any fresh amendments .
Despite this , I should like to emphasise a number of points in order to bring our position more into focus .
We support the setting up of separate election observation units at the European Commission and Parliament .
Not only should the units focus on the elections themselves , but also the period in the run-up to the elections , because it is often important to know whether candidates and parties are given fair chances before the elections .
I would in this connection refer to the recent re-election of President Museveni in Uganda : it is now no longer a secret that his rivals did not get a fair chance at all to run a campaign .
In fact , it is beyond me why , in Amendment No 1 , the rapporteur and Mrs Kinnock propose to delete the phrase " whereas the election period is a democratic expression of political pluralism and must be organised in accordance with internationally recognised standards " .
I really cannot see the point of this , and we therefore oppose it .
My second point is that observers must be well prepared , so that all participants are aware of the potential problems they could run into in the country they are visiting .
This can , of course , be done by e-mail and internet , but it would be good if preparatory discussions were held in addition .
Furthermore , the delegations should preferably consist of MEPs mainly , and be sufficiently large in order to be able to gain a sound insight into the elections locally .
The members of the delegations must leave for the countries in question in good time in order to observe the electoral preparations .
They should preferably be headed by a prominent MEP or ex-MEP with sufficient clout to be able to stand up to people like President Carter , for it occasionally seems as if he is the only one who matters .
In addition , it is of course useful and necessary for the delegations to establish good working relations with other organisations , such as the Council of Europe and the OSCE .
Finally , the European Union should consider mixed observation delegations , for example involving members of parliament from the ACP countries , especially if ACP countries are at issue .
That can only benefit the strength and credibility of a delegation , and that is what it is all about .
Mr President , I should like to express our appreciation for the Commission and the rapporteur ' s report , and we hope that , thanks to that report , policy in this area will really improve in the short term .
Mr President , first of all , I should like to congratulate Mr Fava on his report , which I believe addresses a key factor in the coherence and visibility of the European Union ' s external action .
I think that electoral observation and support for electoral processes are an extraordinarily important factor for bolstering the European Union ' s action to protect human rights , democratic freedoms , democratic values and the rule of law .
A point that Mr Fava made very well is that we must not isolate the processes of electoral observation from their overall context .
Citizens are required , on certain occasions , to cast their vote , but the process of building democracy is a daily task .
I therefore feel that the European Union ' s action must be directed at ensuring long-term democratic stability in developing countries through the efficient funding of the corresponding programmes , in which the Commission has a crucial role to play .
I should like , Mr President , to focus very briefly on the role that the European Parliament should play in these processes .
I think that paragraph 9 of the motion for a resolution contained in Mr Fava ' s report very rightly emphasises the fact that , ideally , these missions should be chaired by Members of the European Parliament .
There are three basic reasons for this : first of all , the European Parliament can contribute highly relevant experience , knowledge and vision on this matter , since , as Members of the European Parliament , we have all been elected in open and democratic electoral processes in our Member States . Secondly , the European Parliament gives legitimacy to our project of integrating Europe and I think that Parliament is therefore extremely well-qualified to represent the European Union .
I would say it is better placed to do this than the national parliaments .
Thirdly , the European Parliament is ultimately one of the two branches of budgetary authority .
The European Union is the world ' s largest donor of development aid and I think it is therefore appropriate that the European Parliament should have a role to play in this type of process .
I therefore hope , Mr President , that this report by Mr Fava on the Commission communication on EU election assistance and observation missions will contribute to improving the European Union ' s external actions in an effective , visible and coherent way .
Mr President , it is unfortunate that free and fair elections are still not a matter of course in many countries .
Especially in Africa , elections are often accompanied by intimidation , violence , fraud or the elimination of rivals via constitutional reform , as was recently the case in the Côte d ' Ivoire .
The sending of observers is therefore very useful , but can also entail risks .
Observers can be manipulated and played off against each other .
They can be used as alibis to legitimise a regime which has gained power via unlawful means .
We should therefore exercise the greatest caution , both at the time when we decide to send observers and locally during their checking and reporting activities .
There is still too much improvisation going on at the moment .
People are sent out without being properly briefed , knowing the background or talking the official language .
A compulsory brief beforehand is therefore a minimum requirement .
It is also necessary for the different observation teams to work together more closely .
Too often , observers arrive late and leave early .
There is a great deal of manipulation before the elections , by tampering with electoral registers or the banning of meetings of the opposition .
Sometimes , the process disintegrates after the event , when a Head of State refuses to accept the outcome , as was the case in Togo .
A small nucleus of long-term observers may be able to offer a solution here .
All of this is only useful , of course , if something is actually done with the observers ' reports afterwards .
In the past , economic or strategic interests have too often got in the way of the interests of democracy and human rights , unfortunately .
Let us hope that the Commission communication and Mr Fava ' s excellent report will be followed up and will lead to a more coherent and consistent attitude towards undemocratic regimes .
Mr President , Commissioner , I was honoured to be asked by Commissioner Patten to lead the EU electoral observation mission to Sri Lanka .
It was a challenging task and I would like to pay tribute to all the members of the team which I was privileged to lead and work with .
I would also like to acknowledge the great cooperation and support I received from the head of the EU Mission , Mr Ilkka Uusitalo , all the heads of the EU diplomatic mission as well as the government and opposition parties in Sri Lanka and particularly the Elections Commissioner .
Based upon my experiences there , I would like to make a few points in the context of the Fava report and the Commission communication , both of which I warmly welcome .
The credibility of an EU observation mission 's final report will depend to a significant degree on the perceived and actual independence of its work .
It is absolutely imperative that neither the chief electoral observer nor any of the team pursues a political agenda in relation to the country they are observing .
The mission must , at all times , act independently and be seen to do so .
This means that the integrity of the team must never be compromised by actions which could be construed as having a bias towards any political party or grouping or NGO .
Furthermore , while it is important that the observation team should consult local EU diplomatic missions , it must be independent of them and EU missions must not interfere with fellow nationals or the mission as a whole .
I was fortunate that this was my experience in Sri Lanka .
It is also desirable that the composition of the EU team should not only draw upon youthful idealism and enthusiasm but should also have considerable depth and wealth of experience .
One final point I would like to make is that the value of an electoral observation exercise is seriously diminished if there is no follow-up .
If the final report of the observation mission concludes that there were serious flaws in the conduct of the election and makes recommendations as to how they can be prevented in the future , the Council and the Commission must act and both must be prepared to use sanctions in the fields of EU trade policy and donor aid to achieve this .
As Mr Fava said in his excellent introductory speech , democratic elections are the essential foundations for sustainable development , as well as of course for sustainable democracy and pluralism .
The Union supports and intends to continue supporting election processes in countries in transition towards established democracy as a key element in our external relations policy .
The Commission communication on electoral assistance and observation was a response to a request from Parliament and the speeches this evening have indicated that we responded in the right sort of way with the right observations and arguments .
The communication was designed to boost our performance in this whole area .
The case-by-case approach previously followed was , it is generally agreed , no longer acceptable .
Wheels were too often reinvented and roles too often confused .
In the Commission we want to see all three institutions fully engaged in the Union 's support for democratisation , so I very much welcome this report .
It is a useful complement to the communication which highlights the European Parliament 's unique added value as the European Union 's own democratically elected body .
I would like in particular to comment on a few issues raised by the report .
First , a few remarks on coordination and information among the European Union institutions , which I consider to be absolutely essential .
I would certainly welcome the adoption of appropriate arrangements among the European institutions to reinforce our coordination and to better define our roles and responsibilities , including the establishment of a Parliament election coordination group .
Our coordination should begin with a definition of European Union priorities , based on an exchange of views on an election calendar which the Commission now produces .
We cannot and should not observe or support every election .
Human and financial resources are limited and many countries have no need for outside support .
So prioritisation is essential and Parliament should contribute to this .
A regular discussion , perhaps every six months as suggested by the report , would be very welcome .
Before we decide on how and whether to observe a particular election , exploratory needs assessment missions are now the rule .
We will share their findings with other institutions in order to involve Parliament at an early stage , as the report suggests that we should .
Such missions will determine the nature of our observation .
As stressed in the report and the communication , elections are not one-day events .
Observation of the different stages of the electoral process - registration , nomination , polling , counting and appeals - are crucial .
The Commission is not interested in election tourism .
Normally the advanced part of the European Union election mission will start at least five or six weeks before the polling day .
The core mission must be experienced and have appropriate technical expertise .
The involvement of members of this House in electoral observation missions plainly makes considerable sense .
As the Commission notes , MEPs , as elected representatives , have a profound knowledge of all aspects of electoral issues .
The Commission wants to cooperate fully with the Parliament in this respect and to integrate any parliamentary delegation , if it so wishes , into the European Union election observation mission .
It would also be involved in the training , briefing , de-briefing and deployment of observers .
When participating in missions observers are , of course , bound by the European Union code of conduct for electoral observation and the general principle that the European Union must speak with one voice .
So the chief observer must be the only spokesman for the EU election observation mission .
Mrs Kinnock asked how we intended to pursue this work in the Commission .
We are currently finalising a restructuring of tasks between the Europe Aid Cooperation Office , the Directorate-General for Development and my own external relations DG .
The idea is to establish , for each election in which we are involved , an election team comprising all the services concerned .
Once the restructuring is finalised we intend to inform Parliament of the exact sharing of tasks and , of course , we are prepared to provide a list of staff as Mrs Kinnock has asked .
I believe that the recent experiences where Members of this Parliament , for example Mr Schori and Mr Cushnahan , have been appointed chief observer have been extremely successful and should be repeated .
The visibility of European Union action is important .
The best visibility is obtained by running an effective and professional operation .
However , the chief observer should , I would hope , be reasonably media-savvy and politically experienced .
Sustainability is important too .
Support for democracy , as Parliament rightly points out , is a long-term process .
The Commission believes that the recommendations of our missions must be built into development strategies and also into our political dialogue with the country concerned .
For example , the President of Sri Lanka will be visiting President Prodi and myself later this week .
We will urge her to implement the recommendations made by successive observation missions , including the one led by Mr Cushnahan , above all for the establishment of a truly independent elections commissioner .
The aim should be to promote changes and build capacity so that international observation becomes unnecessary .
On coordination with other organisations and the building up of domestic capacities , I would like to stress that the European Union has worked with many international organisations and NGOs on election assistance and observation and we intend to use the same approach in the future .
Parliament 's report deals with a hugely important subject .
The European Union stands above all for democracy and the values enshrined in the rule of law , pluralism and civil liberties .
We all know that democracy and democratisation , on which our development policy is largely based , are about more than just elections .
But properly held and freely conducted elections are a necessary if not sufficient condition for democracy .
So it must be right for this European Union , increasingly and rightly seen as one of the bastions of democracy in the world , to devote much greater effort to promoting free and fair elections in countries where the rights which we are too often inclined to take for granted are still fragile or under threat .
I would like to congratulate Mr Fava once again on his report which offers sensible and valuable advice as to how we can raise our game in this whole area .
We look forward to working very closely with Parliament in carrying this work forward and once again I want to commend those Members of the Parliament who have already played such a distinguished role in trying to ensure that democratisation is a reality in countries all over the world .
Common strategy on Ukraine
The next item is the report ( A5 ­ 0083 / 2001 ) by Mr Väyrynen , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on the Common Strategy of the European Union on Ukraine [ C5 ­ 0208 / 2000 - 2000 / 2116 ( COS ) ] .
Mr President , the European Council accepted the Union ' s strategy on Ukraine in Helsinki in December 1999 .
Now , more than a year later , we can say that the basic premise of the strategy is the right one .
The report that was adopted in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy only features certain proposals connected with the implementation of the strategy and some supplementary proposals .
In my report I have adopted the same general approach as Parliament did with regard to Mr Oostlander ' s report as a basis for the Union ' s policy on Russia .
Thus the report openly criticises Ukraine for its shortcomings regarding the implementation of democracy , human rights , freedom of speech and the market economy .
On the other hand , it recommends that the Union should improve cooperation to help Ukraine solve these problems .
Ukraine , however , is very different from Russia .
It has a major strategic importance both for Russia and the West .
Ukraine is split internally .
The western parts of the country were , for a long time , part of Poland or Austria-Hungary , and there the Russian population is relatively small .
The country ' s central and eastern parts have long been under the influence of Russia and many Russians live there .
The Union must seek to bring about a situation where Ukraine can unify and have balanced relations with Russia , on the one hand , and the West , the European Union and NATO , on the other .
Ukraine now clearly orientates itself towards Europe .
We have to encourage and support the country in this .
I have tried in my report to place Ukraine in a wider pan-European context .
My basic reason for this was the views adopted in Elmar Brok ' s report on enlargement .
Paragraph 56 of the report reiterates the idea of a new European area that would be based on a market economy and free trade , protection of the environment , democracy , human rights and security .
Paragraph 57 calls on the Council to develop a comprehensive pan-European policy for the Union by combining the enlargement process with the bilateral and multilateral external relations of the Union .
It goes on to propose that the EU should make systematic use of both the Council of Europe and the OSCE for preparing the present and future candidate countries for membership and for promoting the goals of the CFSP and integration on the pan-European level .
These paragraphs are , to some extent , open to interpretation .
It is clear that Parliament hopes that a comprehensive pan-European policy will be created for the Union .
But the new European area ' s connection with the proposal that the Union should start using the Council of Europe and the OSCE as a tool of pan-European policy remains open to interpretation .
My own thoughts are that creating a new European area as a separate organisation could easily come into conflict with the fora that already exist .
For that reason , we should first make use of existent organisations and act without prejudice in this regard .
Finally , I would like to thank the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , and , especially , the ' shadow ' rapporteurs for their constructive attitude to the report .
I would like to make one criticism , however . The committee adopted too many amendments , in my opinion .
As rapporteur , I prepared a draft version which already exceeded the set length .
The 21 paragraphs of the draft contained everything that was essential , in my view .
In the vote on the report , however , 37 paragraphs in all were added - many of them against the recommendations of the rapporteur .
I think we should consider together ways of preventing adopted reports from being made too bulky or fragmented in committees and in plenary .
On this basis I am wary of amendments which would only serve to increase the report ' s length .
Mr President , I very much welcome this balanced and thoughtful report .
It is a report which is very well worth reading .
My first visit to Ukraine was back in 1991 , soon after independence , to attend a health conference .
More recently my visits have largely centred on nuclear issues .
Last week I met a group of ten members of the Rada who were in Brussels to learn of our institutional relationships .
In all the contacts that I have made over the years I have been struck by the desire for closer links with the European Union .
Ukraine has not found the transition to a market economy an easy process .
They have yet to bring their regulatory and financial structures closer to our own .
Privatisation goes ahead slowly .
But we should look upon these efforts in positive terms and with understanding .
It is almost impossible to talk about Ukraine without reference to nuclear power .
I believe I am the only Member of this Parliament who has visited Chernobyl , Khmelnitsky and Rivne , the three stations which have featured frequently in our debates .
The latter are the two sites where reactors are now being completed to western safety standards .
But we should recognise that Ukraine also has a coal industry and is pushing ahead to promote energy efficiency and renewable sources .
Our financial support should encompass the whole sector .
Concerning the report of the European Investment Bank , I would include support for tourism and agriculture .
The latter has plummeted in recent years and both can do much to drive the economy forward .
I hope that this report will be strongly supported tomorrow and that the Members of the Rada will see in its adoption an emphatic endorsement of their wish for ever-closer relations with the European Union .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the report on the common strategy of the European Union on Ukraine comes before plenary at a time when it is no longer possible to keep track of the symptoms of crisis in this huge , important country at the crossroads between east and west .
The murder of the journalist Georgiy Gongadze and the subsequent demonstrations , some of which were countered with violence , highlight the inner weaknesses and democratic deficits in this country eleven years after its secession from the Soviet Union .
The rapporteur , whom I should like to thank , is equally conscious of these facts and of Ukraine ' s economic plight , with its high foreign debt and even higher exodus of capital , where large sections of the population live in poverty and wealth is concentrated in a few hands .
That this is a breeding ground for corruption and international organised crime cannot be a matter of indifference to us .
Human trafficking in general and the trade in women in particular and illegal immigration have a spill-over effect on the European Union and need to be effectively combated , with the help of the European Union , especially as , once Poland , Hungary , Slovakia and Romania accede , Ukraine will form the external border of the EU .
The common strategy on Ukraine and the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement with it rightly seek to consolidate democracy , the economy and society and bring Ukraine closer to the EU 's system of values .
What has been done so far still falls short of the mark , despite the funds which the European Union has given Ukraine .
Ukraine itself has set itself the ambitious target of being ready for accession by 2007 .
Even if this sounds more like pie in the sky under the present circumstances , the Väyrynen report points in the right direction by finally giving Ukraine the prospect of accession and by mooting the possibility of a free trade agreement without precluding accession at a later date .
With the enlargement of the EU imminent , everything should also be done in the form of cross-border programmes and assistance with border management in order to avoid erecting new dividing lines in Europe .
This is all the more important in that Ukraine plays a fundamental role in European security , both as a result of its commitment in ex-Yugoslavia and its involvement in the Partnership for Peace , as the Charter on a Distinctive Partnership with NATO proves .
The Ukraine also plays an important role in the network of relations between the EU and Russia and as a regional force for order .
The Väyrynen report shows how we can help Ukraine to help itself and extend our mutual relations .
Mr President , the words I am about to express are intended as a token of my friendship towards the Ukrainian people .
I am aware of my responsibility as Chairman of the Interparliamentary delegation , but I also believe that it is important for us to be critical on occasions .
The EU ' s common strategy with regard to Ukraine is the practical expression of a clear , political stance , namely that Ukraine forms an integral part of our continent , that welfare and stability in Ukraine have a substantial impact on welfare and stability in the rest of Europe , and that , for that reason , the European Union is willing to assume part of the responsibility for the democratic , economic and social development in that country .
That is the good news .
However , let it be clear that the European Union cannot shoulder responsibility for building up the Ukrainian state and helping that country in its socio-economic development on its own , or even take the lead in doing so .
With this common strategy , the European Union and its Member States have demonstrated their willingness to give the necessary technical and financial back-up , provided that the Ukrainian political leaders are willing , and have the courage , to take control of a process of far-reaching reform .
That is a difficult , but not impossible task .
If we are critical , we are so in the interest of Ukraine .
Our demands of that country should be the government ' s own .
Part of the EU ' s responsibility is also to express our concern about the issues which relate to the fundamental human rights and civil rights in that country .
This includes , among other things , the investigation into the murder of journalist Gongadze .
As Delegation Chairman and co-chairman of the EU-Ukraine cooperation committee , I have already called for further investigations , also with regard to the brutal and harsh manner in which demonstrations have been broken up in Ukraine .
Governments are not formed on the streets , but democracy can be killed off on the streets if the right to the freedom of speech is taken away from the population by means of violence .
That is the bad news .
In the capacity of Chairman of the parliamentary cooperation committee , I will presently be joining my colleagues in a trip to Ukraine , in the hope that we , partly on the basis of the report which is being discussed today and adopted tomorrow , will enter into a fruitful discussion on the issues which concern us all and about which we need to be concerned as a group .
Mr President , Commissioner , I too would like to congratulate Mr Väyrynen on his report .
The explosive situation in Ukraine makes this report very much one of its time .
The Union now needs a clear common strategy for its policy on Ukraine .
The report offers a strong foundation for that strategy .
Our group supports its main premises .
There is good reason to criticise the country for its serious shortcomings in the areas of human rights , democracy and freedom of speech , among others .
There are also problems there with the implementation of a market economy .
At the same time , however , we need more effective cooperation with the Union for Ukraine to be able to solve its acute problems .
Secretary General Solana recently reminded us that Union programmes should be focused and prioritised .
The committee , however , has apparently forgotten this instruction and has overburdened the report with numerous amendments , making it unreasonably bulky and fragmented .
This is something the rapporteur also referred to in his speech .
In the plenary we must prune these unnecessary amendments and focus on the essence of the issue .
In addition to ensuring that the human rights situation improves and that the rule of law takes root , the question of energy is something I would like to raise .
The worst safety problem has been eradicated , since Chernobyl was finally shut down .
It must be a condition of the Community ' s financing of energy that proper care is taken of the environment and safety standards conform to western standards .
Ukraine also needs a comprehensive energy plan to which the country ' s government and leaders can commit .
Cooperation and an increase in trade will require extending the trans-European transport networks as far as Ukraine .
At present the plans for , and implementation of , these networks stop at the Ukrainian border .
Mr President , when we talk of the strategy on Ukraine , the question of the finality of the EU resonates in the background and hence the question of whether or not Ukraine , as an important European country , has a chance of one day becoming a member of the European Union .
There are two ways of looking at this .
Either we say no , economic and trade agreements suffice , in which case the EU will only be able to make a minor contribution to stability and will be unable to apply its strict criteria .
Or we give Ukraine the long-term prospect of membership and immediately start applying a comprehensive stability strategy which , first and foremost , strengthens democracy and then leads to social and economic development .
But then Ukraine must not become the atomic dump of Europe !
Mr President , the current political unrest in Ukraine is extremely ill-timed .
It is precisely at this moment that the country is climbing out of an economic trough in a most spectacular manner .
The highly-charged battle surrounding President Kuchma ' s direct involvement in the sinister murder of the journalist Gongadze is threatening to thwart the undeniable reform course of the Yushchenko government .
This on-going scandal is also affecting the European Union .
The clear report by Mr Väyrynen underlines the importance of the EU ' s relations with its future neighbour , Ukraine .
It is in Europe ' s interest to have effective democratic rule in Kiev .
And there is no sign of that yet , claims Mr Väyrynen , and rightly so .
In fact , the political pandemonium surrounding the sinister Gongadze affair has widened the chasm between Ukraine and Europe .
What can , and should , Europe do about this depressing state of affairs ?
Rapporteur Väyrynen provides a realistic solution of granting European aid , as before , for actual Ukrainian reform efforts and consciously keeping the door open to full EU membership for Ukraine .
This option of entry is not least intended as a necessary incentive for the country ' s reformists to persevere in their vision and policy .
Mr President , after the Soviet empire broke up , a Polish diplomat stated that if Ukraine remains independent , Russia has a chance of becoming a normal state .
This profound statement - probably a true Polish wish - is in line with the political desire of the Member States and candidate countries of the European Union .
The Väyrynen report manages to illustrate this in a realistic manner .
Mr President , in Parliament earlier today there was some discussion about the future shape and direction of the European Union post-Nice .
There is much about these plans and ambitions to which some of us might object , but one of the strengths of the European Union at its simplest is its role as a pole of attraction for countries that have not had the benefits of democracy , the rule of law and economic prosperity .
The prospect of European Union affiliation or membership is a great incentive for countries that have lived under communism for many generations to put their political and economic house in order and to resolve long-standing problems with neighbouring states .
In the course of this present decade Poland , Hungary , Slovakia and Romania will become European Union Member States .
They border Ukraine , a country of enormous geopolitical significance , whose very existence is a major factor in the security and stability of Europe , but where recent developments are cause for concern .
It is in all our interests that Ukraine should be helped in its consolidation as an independent , democratic country anchored in the west but with an open , vibrant and friendly relationship with Russia to its east .
In this regard we should not forget that , in addition to its association with the European Union , Ukraine also has a strong partnership with NATO , which has contributed to the sense of security of Ukraine , as well as much-needed military reform .
Mr Väyrynen should be congratulated on an excellent report , even if it is somewhat longer than he had originally intended .
It is so important now for the European Union to improve the focus and implementation of its strategy .
Let me touch very briefly on one very specific aspect : the issue of anti-personnel landmines .
Ukraine signed the Ottawa Convention on the prohibition of the use and stockpiling of anti-personnel mines in 1999 .
It has yet to ratify its accession .
Meanwhile , it has the fifth largest stockpile of APL in the world , with an estimated 10 million weapons .
The Ottawa Convention places an obligation to destroy stocks of APL .
We should expect Ukraine to take action .
I hope the Commission and Council will place emphasis on this aspect in their dealings with Ukraine .
Mr President , first I should like to congratulate the rapporteur on a most balanced report and then , if I may , I should like to comment on a strategic point which particularly concerns me .
Following the political upheaval in central and eastern Europe , association agreements were concluded in a bid to help these countries one day become members of the European Community or Union .
Ukraine was not one of them .
The question of the borders of Europe , which reappeared on the agenda with the fall of the Iron Curtain , has never been seriously discussed here , and hence nor has the fate of Ukraine .
However , the answer to the question of the borders of Europe is that Europe does not end east of Bulgaria because that is where Ukraine lies , and not just Ukraine .
Europe ' s borders cannot be determined unequivocally , which is why the complete enlargement of the European Union is a contradiction in terms .
The current enlargement concept will inevitably bring about new divisive borders in Europe , for example between Poland and Ukraine .
This is a huge problem , which is why we need a new concept .
Since 1989 / 90 , Europe has no longer been politically or geographically divided ; it has become an open continent .
What sort of concept do I mean ?
The principle of exclusivity , whereby a candidate country is either fully assimilated into the EU or is completely excluded should be replaced by the following concept : any country which thinks of itself as either partly or wholly European , such as Ukraine , should be given the opportunity to decide if , and to what extent , it is willing and able to subscribe to European policy .
This would maintain the vision of the founding fathers of a free Europe in the dialectic sense and allow us to focus again on the crux of the matter , as formulated at the time , namely to create peace in freedom for all the nations of Europe .
Mr President , I would like to sincerely thank Finland 's former Minister for Foreign Affairs , Mr Väyrynen , for his admirable work .
On 7 February this year , the Swedish Presidency commented on the general situation in Ukraine and , at that time , highlighted the disappearance of the journalist , Georgiy Gongadze , whose fate touches us all .
Ukraine will soon be a neighbour of the EU .
Mr Väyrynen 's report deals with our immediate neighbours once the EU is enlarged .
We can see a similar development in Ukraine , Moldova and Belarus , with increased political unrest , antidemocratic tendencies , economic recession , increasingly authoritarian regimes and reduced political pluralism .
As the first Vice-Chairman of the European Parliament 's delegation to these three countries , I am concerned about this development .
I have had the opportunity to meet various representatives in the country , for example the young mayor , Natalia Gnatyuk , and the leader of the young people 's movement of the Uniate Greek Catholic Church , Andriy Yaniv .
Their message to us was : do not forget the importance of ethics and religion in our country 's development .
I would like to direct two questions to Commissioner Patten , who is doing an excellent job for the EU as regards foreign policy .
Firstly , I wonder how the Tacis programme and the partnership and cooperation agreement can help to strengthen ethical and moral principles , particularly in the areas of commerce , politics and civil society - something that is necessary in a country like Ukraine .
Secondly , I wonder whether , in light of the fact that both countries are developing in the same direction , it is tenable or reasonable in the long term to treat Ukraine and Belarus as differently as we are at present .
Can we isolate one country , but not the other ?
This is a good report .
I congratulate the rapporteur .
It gives an impressive overview of the situation in Ukraine at a crucial juncture in the country 's history .
The current events there are of deep concern to all of us .
The regrettable violence in recent days and its causes underline the present risks to the political and economic stability that are so important for Ukraine , as our common strategy makes clear .
The situation is particularly worrying , given that Ukraine will share such a long border with the European Union after the first round of enlargement .
Ukraine wants to draw closer to the European Union and its neighbours .
We welcome that .
But , for that to happen , Ukraine must be able to demonstrate its willingness and ability to live up to basic values , European values , values which are also set out in our partnership and cooperation agreement .
That means strengthening the rule of law .
It means making progress in the fight against corruption .
It means adopting market-oriented legislation .
As the report points out , Ukraine has , alas , lost a lot of time , but it is a country with a vast potential in terms of economic and human resources .
With the creation of the government under President Yushchenko things have certainly improved but there is still very much to be done .
Several Members have referred to the Gongadze case .
It has brought to the fore not just the issue of journalistic freedom but of a pluralistic society and the way executive power is exercised in Ukraine .
The House will recall that in early December , shortly after the Kuchma tapes had been presented in Parliament , the European Union expressed its deep concern about the disappearance of Mr Gongadze .
In January , President Prodi had a long conversation on this case with President Kuchma when they met in Berlin .
I am sure Parliament will have seen the statement that the Swedish Presidency released prior to the recent ministerial troika visit to Ukraine .
I was part of that troika delegation . I can assure Parliament that we made our position abundantly clear .
The only way to deal with this issue is complete transparency in the short term and adequate checks and balances in the longer term .
I want to emphasise this evening - it should not be necessary to do so - how strongly we feel about this issue .
The Swedish Presidency has included the European Union 's support for the establishment of a free media in Ukraine in its working programme on the implementation of the common strategy .
It will organise a seminar on independent media in Kiev .
We are also ready to provide technical assistance .
The report rightly stresses the need to promote economic growth and trade in Ukraine , but for this the conditions must be right .
Recent reports drawn up by the European Business Association , the OECD and private bodies concentrate on the overall investment climate .
They make clear how far there still is to go .
In Ukraine the private sector still accounts for less than a quarter of GDP .
An EBRD study two years ago suggested that managers of Ukrainian enterprises spend up to 17 % of their time just trying to find a way through regulatory requirements .
As stated in the excellent report before us , energy sector reform is absolutely crucial for economic stability and growth in Ukraine .
It is also a key condition in the memorandum of understanding of 1995 on the closure of the Chernobyl nuclear plant .
Together with our international partners we are following Ukraine 's progress in reforming the energy sector very closely and we are providing substantial assistance in close cooperation with the Ukrainian authorities .
Gas and electricity market reform is also one of the priority projects in the TACIS Action Programme 2000 .
I am glad that the report finds the main focus of the TACIS Programme for the Ukraine appropriate .
The report has proposed enhanced attention to certain activities .
I can confirm that a number of them are indeed being incorporated into both the TACIS Indicative Programme for 2000 to 2003 and the Ukraine Action Programme 2000 .
This goes for projects concerning institutional , legal and administrative reform as well as assistance for private sector development , economic development , development of NGOs and civil society .
Addressing the social consequences of transition in the health sector and the labour market is another important part of TACIS activities .
So far our cooperation has concentrated mainly on technical assistance in the area of justice and home affairs .
TACIS customs and border-crossing programmes are aimed at improving both operational capacity and the efficiency of customs and border controls to curb criminal activities .
More explicitly directed at combating organised crime is an anti-money laundering feasibility study which supports Ukraine 's efforts to establish the necessary legislation and to create a financial intelligence unit .
For the future , following frequent requests from the Ukrainian side , more attention will be paid to the eastern borders of Ukraine , to control better the influx of illegal migrants who seek to enter the Union illegally .
I say to the honourable gentleman who spoke last in the debate that , as far as the overall purpose of the TACIS programmes is concerned , they do , of course , have to incorporate the ethical considerations , the democratic considerations , the market-oriented considerations to which he quite properly and quite eloquently referred .
We need to recognise and act upon the legitimate concerns in the Ukraine regarding the possible consequences of enlargement .
Overall I remain convinced that these will be largely beneficial to the Ukrainian economy but there will be problems , for example , on the movement of people between the Ukraine and its western neighbours .
We need to take the time to manage these issues so that they do not become a barrier between the enlarged European Union and our Ukrainian partners .
Mr Van Orden referred to the stockpile of anti-personnel landmines in Ukraine .
The point he makes is entirely valid .
It is one which we were recently discussing with our Canadian colleagues at the ministerial meeting between the European Union and Canada and I hope that we can make progress on that extremely important subject in the months and years ahead .
The work that we - the presidency , the Commission and Parliament - have done so far is evidence enough of the seriousness of our engagement in Ukraine .
Despite the considerable internal problems in that country , some progress has undoubtedly been achieved .
The closure of Chernobyl , for example , has marked , I hope , a turning point but we shall still be deeply involved in the follow-up .
In terms of our political agenda we can now focus on other issues : on the rule of law , on democratic checks and balances , on stimulating trade and investment , on setting the framework for cooperation in justice and home affairs and on the relationship between Ukraine and the European Union after enlargement .
This is vital work on which all the European institutions will need to concentrate in the coming years .
I congratulate the honourable Member on his report .
I rather sympathise with his view .
I do not think that it required all the subsequent authorship to which it has been subjected but he showed a good deal of long-suffering charity in his remarks , which is also not surprising .
He has written an excellent report and our relationship with the Ukraine will benefit from his wise advice .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Patten .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Thursday , at 12 noon .
Organisation and management of the Internet - Policy issues 1998 - 2000
The next item is the report ( A5 ­ 0063 / 2001 ) by Mr Carraro , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the Commission communication to the Council and the European Parliament on ' The Organisation and Management of the Internet - International and European Policy Issues 1998-2000 ' [ COM ( 2000 ) 202 - C5 ­ 0263 / 2000 - 2000 / 2140 ( COS ) ] .
Mr President , the report begins by welcoming the Commission ' s communication , seeking , first and foremost , to take full advantage of the last few years ' experience of the Internet , and hence of self-government through ICANN and its bodies .
As well as experience of self-government , there has also been experience of self-regulation , which certainly represents an excellent example of the role the Internet has been able to play in the progress of communications and the world economy over the last few years .
Even the criticism in the original outline of the report , on the need for all five continents to be represented on the governing body or on the ICANN board of directors , no longer applies , because at the very moment the initial draft appeared , the representative of the African continent was taking his seat on the ICANN board .
That is why an amendment has been tabled to paragraph 6 and a split vote is requested on paragraph 7 , as part of it is now superfluous .
The report expresses our full support as regards the role the European Commission can play in terms of organisation and management of the Internet , representing all the Member States of the Union .
However , it also makes the clear recommendation that this should never take the form of interference by political authorities or , worse still , by the Commission and the European Union bureaucracies in the Internet ' s governing and operational bodies , precisely because its positive experience of self-government and self-regulation must be fully respected .
Rather , the Commission is called upon to work alongside the US Government .
In recent years , the US Department of Commerce has given substantial backing and encouragement to the process of ICANN ' s progressive independence from the US Government .
We therefore urge the Commission to cooperate with these positive tactics by the US Government in order to carry this process of independence and autonomy of the Internet and its governing bodies right through to a conclusion .
The key problem facing Europe , which must , of course , be dealt with by the competent party , is how to close the gap behind the United States in this sector and other more advanced parts of the world .
We therefore fully support the proposal to create the EU domain in the sector and we recommend homogeneous standards at European level on registration , protection of domain names and action to combat fraud , cybersquatting , and so on .
A homogeneous European market is no small aspiration , even for the Internet , but I think it is one of the essential conditions to guarantee development and attract investment , including investment in infrastructure which is still in deficit on the continent of Europe .
In fact , we can only have a market large enough to be competitive with North America if we have a homogeneous market .
Finally - the last point made in the report - the process of telecommunications liberalisation needs to be accelerated and completed because that is obviously closely linked to the future and the progress of the Internet on the continent of Europe .
I do not think it is necessary to say anything further on that because the Commission and Parliament have done a great deal of work in that direction in the last few months . I not only want to acknowledge the excellent work Commissioner Liikanen is carrying out in this field .
I also want to express total faith and confidence in his and the Commission ' s will to bring the process to a conclusion with consistency and determination , because it will constitute another decisive thrust not only for the development of telecommunications on the continent of Europe but also for the organisation , operational stability and development of the Internet in our Member States .
- Mr President , I would like to congratulate and indeed thank Massimo Carraro very much for an excellent report .
It gets to the heart of the matter .
It is very well analysed and I would also like to thank him on behalf of colleagues on my committee for being very open to us .
We worked very closely together and I hope he feels that our committee added value to his own efforts .
I wanted to focus on a number of key issues from the point of view of the Legal Affairs Committee .
This whole issue of governance of what is becoming a crucial international resource is something that is of particular importance .
We are at a very important transitional stage where the European Union needs to play a crucial balancing role in moving the system of Internet governance from one that has been traditionally dominated by interests in the United States to becoming a truly global organisation .
The United States Government has played an important and benign role because the initial Internet developers and technologists came from a United States background .
This report quite rightly draws attention to the very crucial role that the European Union has to play in achieving this transition .
The other important issue is the role of public authorities .
Clearly there is an important role for public authorities but it must not become overbearing .
International governance of the Internet owes its success so far to the fact that it is not based on complex international treaties .
It has been the responsibility of a series of groups of experts .
It is very much governed by the individuals and users who are operating the system .
We should leave it that way but of course monitor it and make sure it works for the benefit of all the citizens that use it .
Alongside that , the other crucial issue for the Legal Affairs Committee is the question of domain name registrations .
This whole area is evolving very rapidly and with the development of the Internet , simple commodities like names , text , strings and characters have become very valuable .
There needs to be a body of governance which is based on competition law , to make sure that allocation is carried out in a free way and ensure that world international copyright laws protect the legitimate rights of citizens who own those names to overcome the problem which has been picturesquely described as cyber-squatting .
In conclusion , I would say that this is a very important report in an area which will become increasingly important to all of us .
Those of us that use the Internet everyday take the basic plumbing behind it for granted .
But we should not do that .
We have to take a real interest in a commodity - a utility - that is going to be increasingly vital to all of us .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today ' s headlines read " Death.com " !
The new dotcom industry is in a real state of crisis and yet the markets have taken to it most enthusiastically .
Data volumes are currently doubling every three months , meaning that , in theory at least , there are two conflicting currents .
On the one hand the crash in share prices and a spate of bankruptcies in the industry and , on the other hand , a huge demand for and a huge fascination with this industry , which is extremely widely used .
Domain names have also proved to be valuable commodities .
The first stock exchanges are being set up on which you can trade , auction and sell your own domain name , which is why the question of intellectual property arises here : what is being done about licensing ?
Will it be possible in future to grant compulsory licences if , for example , a compulsory link can simply be set up on one well-known web page to another web page ?
How will we settle disputes if it comes - and it will come - to intercontinental disputes ?
Will the WIPO alone have jurisdiction here or is this already a matter for the WTO ?
I think that questions of abuse and questions of criminality need to be looked at primarily in an international context .
We need consumer confidence in electronic commerce and that can only be achieved with fair and proper registration .
In the final analysis , we can also signal acceptance of EU laws by creating an EU domain and this , in turn , will have enormous repercussions on e-commerce .
Mr President , I would like to thank my colleague , Mr Carraro , for this competently prepared and timely report .
This ICANN manoeuvres the Internet ' s information channels and determines who has the use of addresses and how they might achieve this .
Whole countries can fall foul of the organisation ' s tyranny and be cut off from information if they do not agree to play the game .
Companies ' profits can dive if a letter or dot is put in the wrong place .
The organisation ' s power now extends to copyright and consumer matters , and that power is growing all the time .
But the organisation is supervised by no one and responsible to no one .
This is a peculiar combination !
Recently there was a vote to increase the Board of Directors to nineteen members .
Of the three billion of those entitled to vote in the network vote , just seventy-six thousand did .
It is a strange game !
This is an incredibly undemocratic system in an incredibly important role .
The Commission has quite rightly taken action , and so it must .
But we need something more .
ICANN cannot be the administrative organ of the networked world or its nerve centre without having any responsibility , led by a random group of people . Surely somebody must be responsible for something .
I would nevertheless like to thank the Commission and Mr Liikanen , who has worked hard to produce an excellent document for the Stockholm Summit at this serious point in time , which Mr Carraro , among others , referred to .
It is an important contribution , and it will give hope to the IT sector in its proposal for measures that would make it easier for companies to function , increase employment and , as a result , boost European competitiveness .
Mr President , Commissioner , Parliament has reason today to be rather self-critical .
As early as 11 April 2000 , the Commission submitted its communication on Internet policy 1998 - 2000 and we know that the ICANN meeting in Melbourne was concluded yesterday .
Mr Paasilinna , the Commissioner and I have had the privilege of being able to read newspapers which have reported something of what has supposedly taken place in Melbourne .
If you log on to ICANN 's own home page , you find only scanty details of what has actually happened .
Has the putting of the domain names .bytes , .info and .pro into use been delayed ?
Is it true that a Norwegian company has got the top domain name ?
How are the negotiations going for the EU regarding our own top domain name ?
Many such questions remain unanswered , and it is amazing that there is nothing to read on the matter on the net .
The Commission and the rapporteur correctly stress that openness is required in the administration .
Even Mr Paasilinna said that there could be cause for criticism in this area .
I also wonder what allies the Commission had in Melbourne .
Did we have any representatives at the meeting ?
How representative can ICANN be considered to be ?
The same question was asked by Mr Paasilinna .
I think that Parliament needs to take considerably greater advantage of the fact that the former Swedish Prime Minister , Carl Bildt , has been appointed to head a panel for the administration of ICANN .
We therefore have good reason to be self-critical .
We have reason to consider how , for one year , we have been able to delay the handling of this matter .
We need to work more quickly .
The report raises many other important issues , including those that were debated in preparation for the summit in Stockholm .
Here , I would like to express my agreement with the words of praise directed at the Commissioner for pointing out how to launch the e-Europe programme , while at the same time the Finance Ministers are snatching away the basis for the same programme .
I am extremely grateful that the Commission and other Member States want to raise this serious issue in Stockholm .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am all in favour , as the report says , of democratising the whole decision-making process in connection with the management of the Internet .
It is an important point but , unlike many of you , I am less concerned with EU location nationalism and more concerned with who can actually use Internet technology .
It is a new technology and it is only a good new technology if a lot of people can use it .
The digital divide mainly runs between north and south and this is a huge problem because in the south hardly anyone has access to the Internet .
This is why I think it is important for the EU to make a commitment to limit the north / south digital divide , for us perhaps to launch a programme for the purpose and , above all , for us to invest in public access , for example in schools and libraries .
Only then will as many people as possible be able to use the Internet in the south and only then shall we reach the point at which people can obtain information on their own initiative and develop their talents freely and without censorship , including on the Internet .
Mr President , we are talking about the Internet and the word that springs to mind after Internet is ' surf ' .
What does that word evoke ?
For me it brings to mind the sea , which reminds me of Christopher Columbus .
And that is because Christopher Columbus was , as you know , born in Genoa . He was Genoese , not Portuguese .
The tie I am wearing this evening bears the emblem of the city of Genoa , so I could hardly refrain from speaking on such an important matter .
I have asked to speak , Mr President , to point out that there is also a social Internet , not just a commercial Internet .
The social Internet means that , thanks to the computer and the Web , adults , older people and pensioners can continue to learn , be informed , and achieve that famous lifelong learning .
Secondly , the Internet provides an opportunity for disabled people to work .
Someone who cannot walk can perfectly easily work on the Internet , and so overcome his disability .
Thirdly , computers installed in rest homes and linked to the Internet make it possible for sick and elderly people who cannot move to talk with their families , their children and their friends , and go on living in the world , so to speak , even if they are unfortunately guests of a rest home .
So I hope this Internet board - and Europe too - will remember that , as well as the commercial Internet , there is also a social Internet for old people and pensioners .
Mr President , the report involuntarily illustrates the extent to which the EU is lagging behind on two counts which are of crucial importance in today ' s world : one is a working democracy and the other is Internet practicalities .
While we sit here discussing these issues until the witching hour , the Americans have already organised special senate hearings to look into the problems in detail .
Even as an ICANN director , having been elected a few weeks ago , I am having trouble finding out exactly what ICANN does .
We simply do not take time to stop and think about it .
A few technical points have been addressed .
I completely fail to understand why this Commission does not publicly stand up for the fact that we have dot kids , we have dot sex , that we have detailed subdivisions which make everything we have discussed here possible , a clear division between e-commerce and the public sector .
The decisive move will be to cut ICANN free from this American domination , not because it is dangerous per se , but because the management of the Internet is at stake and you must do here what you normally only talk of , Commissioner , and create openness and transparency .
Mr President , first I would like to thank the rapporteur , Massimo Carraro , for an excellent report .
It is full of technical detail , but Mr Carraro has managed splendidly to raise the economically and politically important questions .
Malcolm Harbour also deserves our thanks for the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market .
At the same time I wish to thank the members of Parliament for this debate .
There will come a time when the Internet will be spoken about by day and the Chamber will be full .
For that reason I congratulate you : you are an avant-garde group in this field .
The Commission began to monitor these matters closely in 1997 , when discussions started in the United States regarding the future of the management of the Internet .
The Internet ' s revolutionary impact on communications generally and ecommerce in particular later confirmed the importance of this area of policy .
Numerous questions arose in connection with the development of the Domain Name System ( DNS ) with regard to competition , freedom of speech , consumer protection , trademarks , rights to names , the reliability and transparency of transactions , the protection of privacy , the protection of data , and so on .
The Commission agrees fully with the view expressed in the parliamentary report that these matters of public interest must be solved in a consistent and effective manner , with regard to the Internet .
At present the most important international forum , which has the powers and scope to begin discussions on these questions , is the ICANN Governmental Advisory Committee ( GAC ) , which is an intergovernmental organisation .
The Commission and the Member States are involved in large-scale programmes of cooperation in this area .
The main aims of the EU parties involved are to ensure that the globalisation of the management of the Internet will also continue during the term of the new American administration , and make the job of the GAC more effective in the debate on political questions .
As Mr Carraro said , relations with the USA in this field are important , when we take account of the fact that the US congress and a part of the private sector is inclined sometimes to deny or ignore the Internet ' s global dimension .
We shall maintain close contact in this matter with the new American administration and we intend to send Mr Evans , US Secretary of Commerce , as soon as Parliament has voted in the report , a letter in which I shall clearly explain the interests of the EU in this field , and I shall also make known to him the content of your report .
Last October , the Council of Ministers passed a resolution on this issue .
In it the Commission was empowered to coordinate positions within the EU , pursue the EU ' s interests in international contexts , and establish a private sector network to support the work of the EU in this field .
It is most gratifying that Parliament ' s report should be in agreement with this policy and that the Commission ' s actions have the support of both Parliament and the Council .
This is important from the point of view of how effective we can be in international arenas .
I would then like to make a few observations and comments with regard to Mr Carraro ' s report and Mr Harbour ' s opinion .
The report highlights the importance of defining the EU ' s role , and I am happy that it expresses the desire to accord the Commission a strong position in these matters .
Similarly , I note the desire to restrict the intervention of governments in the international self-regulatory process . In this respect we must advance one step at a time and bear in mind that our goal is a truly international , balanced and impartial regulatory system .
But we have to recognise that we have not yet achieved this aim .
The US Government still has special powers and ICANN ' s Board of Directors and staff are still not always necessarily aware of all the EU ' s views .
For this reason , the Commission will follow the situation closely and inform our partners immediately of any problems that may crop up , for example , in the area of competition policy .
I am also ready to accept the general aims with regard to the administration of the ICANN , which have been set out in paragraph 8 of Parliament ' s resolution .
In practice , however , it remains very much the task of those involved coming from the private sector and , in particular , the national ccTLD Registries , to express their views within the structure of the ICANN .
This is one reason why the Commission , back in 1997 , urged players in the European private sector to get involved directly in action that would later take the shape of the ICANN process .
I have to say that this has produced some excellent results , of which it is worth mentioning Europe ' s firm involvement today in ICANN ' s Board of Directors and supporting organisations .
Many European organisations and companies were represented at the meeting this week in Melbourne .
Unfortunately , I still have not had access to any report on the meeting , but I will inform the members of it as soon as I do .
The delegates will have come back from Melbourne by now , but there was still nothing about it on the Internet when I left my room .
Paragraph 15 of Parliament ' s resolution also refers to codes of conduct , best practice and legislation in this area .
The Internet operators and users have a lot of work to do in these areas .
The Commission obviously cannot do everything on its own .
We can take appropriate action to promote and speed up the self-regulation process with the private sector and other governments , for example , within the framework of the Governmental Advisory Committee .
I have also noticed that Parliament ' s resolution expresses the will to allow Member States to take care of certain matters .
The national registries and the principles they are based on are very largely within the competence of the Member States .
The Commission , however , has sought , in unofficial working parties and in an advisory committee , to introduce jointly approved principles .
If the need arises , the Commission is obviously prepared to use its powers , for example , in the areas of internal market legislation and competition policy .
Finally , may I say that the Commission agrees with the rapporteur about the importance of liberalising the telecommunications industry and investing in the backbone Internet capacity both in Europe and internationally .
We are actively seeking , with the help of a framework research programme , both to promote the development of the second generation Internet and strengthen cross-border and international links with regard to European research networks .
Regarding the .eu proposal , it is at present being discussed by the Council and Parliament .
As soon as a legal basis is found for this , the Commission will take every practical step it can to ensure that European communities , companies and citizens have the use of this our own .eu facility , where the players will therefore obviously have to comply with European legislation , including the protection of privacy .
The Commission will notify the Council and specialists in the field in the Member States of the contents of Parliament ' s report .
Thank you all once again !
Work of ACP / EU Assembly ( 2000 )
The next item is the report ( A5 ­ 0057 / 2001 ) by Mr Martínez Martínez , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the proceedings of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly in 2000 [ 2000 / 2106 ) INI ) ] .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , today we are talking about the activity of the ACP-EU Joint Assembly in 2000 and this is perhaps a rather different type of report to those produced in previous years on this issue .
Firstly , because specific events occurred in 2000 which have had an effect on the workings and even the very identity of the Joint Assembly , but also because we deliberately wanted to give the report a somewhat innovative approach .
In addition , therefore , to the traditional reminder of hard data on the activity of the Assembly for that year , we opened a more politically-charged debate on the role of the Assembly itself and , what is more , on how we should view the role of the Members of the European Parliament in the Assembly .
In addition to any formal or legal considerations , we feel that as Members of this Parliament who are also members of the ACP-EU Joint Assembly , we are not there as individuals . We are delegates and therefore our activity within that forum must be guided and then judged by our Parliament .
We therefore believe that , from a democratic point of view , it is crucial that this annual report on what has taken place in the Joint Assembly should cease being a largely routine and bureaucratic process and become a balance of accounts presented to the European Parliament by its delegates .
Similarly , the debate on this annual report should be an opportunity for Parliament to guide the work of its representatives in the Joint Parliamentary Assembly over the coming months .
Looking at the events of 2000 , what marked the year was the approval , following extremely lengthy negotiations , of the Cotonou Agreement , which ratifies the legitimacy in law of the Assembly and brings it up to the category of Joint Parliamentary Assembly .
Above all , 2000 marks a turning point in the European Union ' s cooperation with the ensemble of the 77 States from Africa , the Caribbean and the Pacific that are already associated members .
The effective implementation of the Treaty is also , undoubtedly , the most significant development this year for the Assembly .
The catalogue of events is described in some detail in the report .
There was the Abuja Summit in Nigeria in March and the meeting in Brussels in October , together with the new designation of the Joint Parliamentary Assembly .
Important events took place at those meetings , such as the general report on globalisation , the hearing on AIDS and the notable presence of President Josselin and of Commissioners Lamy and Nielson . An unfortunate problem was also encountered , however : the presence of representatives of the European Parliament in plenary , and especially in the working groups , was lower than we had hoped for .
Amongst the challenges that remain , the Treaty provides for the mobilisation of civil society , which is the collaborative fabric required for its very implementation , and here we need to consider how we can ensure that this is achieved efficiently and without confusion , putting each person in the right position for him or for her .
Another challenge is to exploit the Assembly ' s huge potential for coordinating positions of the associates of the ACP and the European Union , in order to make the process of cooperation and development and the Treaty itself more effective and perhaps also to establish positions of consensus for approaches in other forums such as the WTO , for example .
One of the prime conditions for achieving this is for the European Parliament to assume full responsibility for work in the Joint Assembly and to give this work the priority it deserves .
I shall conclude by saying that in the report ' s conclusions , I included a few lines on how I think the Joint Parliamentary Assembly should operate .
Of course , decisions on this fall to the Assembly itself , but Parliament has the responsibility to state its criteria in order to guide the work of its Members in this Joint Assembly .
These guidelines coincide almost entirely with the proposals that have been agreed in the Assembly ' s own working group on how it should operate .
Finally , I would add that our motion for a resolution includes many amendments by Members of various groups , which all make a valuable contribution , as well as two further amendments , which were tabled in the debate in Parliament by the European People ' s Party .
I would ask you to vote in favour of the former .
The latter seeks to remove a paragraph that was added to my initial proposal in an amendment by Mr Van den Bos , of the Liberal Group , which was approved in committee .
I think that this paragraph addresses a series of important issues which could be debated by the ACP-EU Assembly ' s own committees and I do not think it would be useful to remove it at this stage .
It does not hold us to anything and does provide a range of interesting ideas .
I would therefore ask the PPE Group to withdraw this amendment and , if they do not do so , I would ask you to vote against it .
To conclude , I wish to thank the secretariat of Parliament ' s Committee on Development and Cooperation for their considerable cooperation .
I should also like to thank my fellow members of that committee and all of you for your attention and for your votes , which I hope will be favourable tomorrow .
Mr President , in congratulating Mr Martínez Martínez on his report I reiterate that our major achievement in the last twelve months has been to support the signing of the Cotonou Agreement , a huge restatement of Europe 's commitment to development against a backcloth of globalisation and liberalisation elsewhere in international relations .
Our task now is to act as the watchdog to ensure that those mutual commitments on trade and aid are fully realised .
On trade , it remains a concern that the European Commission failed to get common agreement with our ACP partners in the run-up to the Seattle WTO meeting .
The Commission failed to consult , through the joint EU-ACP trade committee laid down in Cotonou , in recent discussions on " Everything but Arms " , whilst the long-running problems over the banana regime remain unresolved .
Trade access is the key to development for our ACP partners , just as it is the acid test for Europe 's genuine commitment to put development first .
On aid , it appears that the good principles for civil society participation have not yet been realised during the first programming exercise under Cotonou .
The lack of mechanisms for civil society negotiations in some ACP countries poses real problems .
The Commission , through its quality support group , we in the Joint Assembly , and not least the beneficiary governments should all uphold our responsibilities in this respect .
This is not just an issue of support for non-governmental organisations ; it is also about our support for the whole principle of good governance .
On this question , there is much in the resolution to commend in relation to promoting the role of directly-elected parliamentarians within the Joint Assembly .
But just as we often debate in this Chamber problems of abuse of human rights and of conflict , let us also give positive recognition to continuing moves towards peace and democracy in many African countries .
This includes , for example , recent welcome moves to national dialogue by Joseph Kabila in the Congo , the democratic alternation of power in Cape Verde , the tentative maintenance of the peace agreement between Ethiopia and Eritrea and , as we saw for ourselves in the Joint Assembly last year , the entrenchment of democracy in post-Abacha Nigeria .
Finally , on a lighter note , much of this may seem to be remote to Europe 's citizens whose support is essential to our partnership with Africa .
So it is with great pleasure that I tell you that in my own country - the UK - this Friday , a biannual awareness and fund-raising extravaganza for Africa , called Comic Relief , will see otherwise serious citizens don red plastic noses to raise cash and a laugh in solidarity with Africa .
I , myself , will be serving quaint British cherry Bakewell tarts to users at the Suffolk Learning and Resource Centre in Bungay and will then go on to sell handshakes at 10p each to schoolchildren at the Highwood Infant School in King 's Lynn , Norfolk .
And yes , I will be donning a red plastic nose in common with everyone else .
Not only should the European Parliament congratulate everyone involved , we should underline that through such creative public exercises our electors show us that they back the political commitment to development , embraced in our partnership with Africa , the Caribbean and the Pacific and marked by tonight 's debate .
Mr President , the Cotonou Agreement establishes the parliamentary dimension of the Joint Assembly .
This means that only democratically elected representatives , without exception , have the right to participate and to express their views within the Joint Parliamentary Assembly .
But a single representative for each ACP country prevents opposition representatives from gaining access and expressing their views and hence obscures political pluralist expression in these countries .
Moreover , the principle of one vote for each country in the ACP group as opposed to one vote for each person on the European side is not a fair one .
The very structure of this Assembly is therefore unbalanced .
The European Parliament is an institution in its own right .
The ACP group does not have an existence outside its appearance at the Joint Parliamentary Assembly and does not have an organisation in the form of political groups .
Secondly , the Joint Parliamentary Assembly has taken on a new role , but decision-making powers are not everything .
It does not have the right to use European Development Funds ; it does not participate in the procedure to ratify the Cotonou Agreement .
We will therefore vote for the report by Mr Martínez Martínez with conviction because it highlights these shortcomings .
But the Assembly must continue to reflect on its composition , its function and its powers so that , in 2001 , it can become a joint , fair Parliamentary Assembly .
Mr President , I hope the lack of attendance at this debate tonight is due to the late hour and not to the way in which I have chaired the two Assemblies we are talking about over the last year .
I sincerely thank the rapporteur , not just for his report and the way he has presented it tonight , but for the very hard work he does both in the ACP and in the Development Committee .
I have prepared this report twice .
I know how hard it is to find fresh ideas and yet he has come forward not only with fresh ideas but with extremely good points that we have now tried to incorporate in our rules for the future .
The past year has been a watershed for the ACP / EU partnership .
There was a lot of resistance about going to Abuja , in Nigeria last year .
But I felt that it was vitally important that we were seen to support this fledgling democracy .
That turned out to be one of the best Assemblies we have ever had .
As Mr Howitt has just said , it was very much a look back at the past and a debate about future partnership agreements .
But the real benefit of visiting these developing countries is not just the Assembly , it is speaking to people involved in development work there and speaking to those who are helped because we in Europe give that development aid .
At the Assembly in Brussels we took the first steps towards realigning the Assembly to fit the Cotonou Agreement .
As co-president I am determined we will have a workshop and not a talking-shop from now on .
We have built many of Mr Martínez Martínez 's ideas into the new rules .
We are now a parliamentary assembly .
We can involve civil society - this is desperately important .
I want to see standing committees that do real work rather than the workshops that we have .
I want to see a real North-South partnership leading to poverty eradication and I want to see the assembly take a leading role in conflict prevention and conflict resolution .
Mr President , let me take this opportunity to thank the rapporteur for his excellent and innovative report and to congratulate the Joint Parliamentary Assembly for its hard work in the year 2000 .
I am pleased to confirm that I will be attending the meeting of the Assembly in Gabon next week .
This evening I will be driving back to Brussels and flying out tomorrow morning to learn about our host country and do some political work there .
I look forward to a frank and open exchange of views with the Joint Parliamentary Assembly and I agree with the rapporteur that this exchange of views should be more than just rhetoric .
I also think that the efforts of the Joint Parliamentary Assembly in these last few years have been aimed at that .
2000 was a significant year in many ways , not least because with the signing of the Cotonou Agreement in June we entered an exciting new phase of partnership with the ACP states , one that will last for the next twenty years .
It is therefore fitting that the Joint Parliamentary Assembly should begin to reflect on how it will adapt to the changes introduced by the next agreement , particularly in promoting increased dialogue with our development partners on such topics as peace-keeping and good governance .
We are raising the level of ambition in the new Cotonou Agreement and everybody is looking at this with great excitement .
The rapporteur suggests that in this new context the Joint Parliamentary Assembly is now ready to take its place as a true parliamentary authority and welcomes the changes introduced by the Cotonou Agreement to strengthen the Assembly .
The Commission clearly supports the Assembly 's wish to take on a more politically ambitious role .
This is very much in line with what we would like the Cotonou Agreement to contribute generally in North-South relations and giving that a parliamentary accent is also very desirable .
I fully agree with the rapporteur on the role that political dialogue can play in the ACP regions and countries , which can often be characterised by a climate of instability .
It is therefore important to take advantage of the possibilities for peaceful and constructive exchanges of views as part of a process of dialogue within ACP regions and countries involving government and civil society .
The report also contains many other useful suggestions that can only make the Assembly 's work more interesting and efficient and the Commission awaits with anticipation the implementation of these changes .
This is a meaningful and necessary meeting-place between North and South in the world .
As Europeans we can be proud that we are able to play this role .
I am looking forward to the cooperation within this framework .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Nielson .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Thursday , at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 12 midnight )
Life assurance
The next item is the report ( A5-0072 / 2001 ) by Lord Inglewood , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive concerning life assurance [ COM ( 2000 ) 398 - C5-0351 / 2000 - 2000 / 0162 ( COD ) ] .
Mr President , on behalf of Lord Inglewood I should like to say that he is extremely sorry not to be here , but he is unavoidably detained in the UK for family and business reasons .
This report , which I am pleased to present on his behalf and on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market is an important part of the Legal Affairs Committee 's remit on behalf of Parliament to encourage simplification and good-quality drafting of Community legislative instruments .
In this particular case , quite a lot of important work has been done by the Commission in incorporating and simplifying three texts related to life insurance .
The source text dates as far back as 1979 and , apart from the codification process of incorporating amendments that have been made over that period into the legislative text , the reason for this more substantive report is that the Commission has found it necessary to propose a number of amendments to reflect changes that have taken place in the market since that time and to improve the overall quality and integrity of the text .
I do not need to detain the House with a lot of the technical details relating to those texts .
Those of you that are experts on the subject will clearly want to refer to the Commission 's own text and the Commission has provided an extremely helpful and clear explanatory statement for those of us who are not , unlike Lord Inglewood , distinguished lawyers - which is why he has been able to make such a good job of scrutinising this text on behalf of Parliament .
In view of the work that has been done , our job here is just to ensure that there are no political issues arising out of what is largely a set of technical amendments .
Lord Inglewood has taken soundings of the industry .
He has looked particularly at the texts of the six amendments , to make sure that they do not introduce any principles outside the directives ' original political remit and he is satisfied in this case .
Therefore , so far as his report is concerned , he is pleased to recommend adoption of the Commission proposal to the House without any further amendments .
By way of general conclusion , we in the Legal Affairs Committee regard the quality of drafting and simplification of legislation as an important remit .
It is worthwhile reminding colleagues throughout the House who are working on legal texts that this is a principle that we all need to bear in mind when we are amending legislative texts of any kind .
When we see and look at work in other committees it is not entirely clear that colleagues bear simplification in mind .
In many cases we see far too many complicated texts coming out of work done by this House .
It is an important principle - maybe this is an uncontroversial issue but the principle of the quality and clarity of legislative instruments is important .
I commend this report as a good example of that process .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to make two comments on the Inglewood report .
Firstly , I welcome the Commission ' s basic principle that legislation that has already been amended several times and no longer gives a clear and coherent picture should have to be codified .
In connection with my recently completed report on the pension funds directive , I also believe that simplification and consolidation of the life assurance directives is urgently required , because that will create clearer distinctions between the different activities and pillars .
It is possible that when the pensions fund directive is accepted , insurance companies that are active in the third pillar and therefore also subject to the life assurance directives will in future be subject to the pension funds directive for their company pensions business .
Since this likelihood will exist , it is important that what we are doing should be as clear , simple and transparent as possible .
The Inglewood report and the simplification and transparency it initiates are therefore a welcome contribution to making things easier for the citizen to understand and therefore a contribution to a living internal market .
On behalf of the European Parliament I would like to welcome to the official gallery the European Affairs Committee of the Nordic Council , led by its Vice-President , Mr Øysten Djupedal .
We are delighted to welcome these fellow parliamentarians who represent the five Nordic countries : Denmark , Finland , Iceland , Norway and Sweden .
We hope that your visit to the European Parliament will be both enjoyable and fruitful and we look forward to seeing you again soon .
( Loud applause )
The proposal for a directive recasting the three generations of life insurance directives is a response to pressure from Parliament , Council , industry and consumers , in fact anyone who has to deal day-to-day with the complexities of the Community insurance legislation .
Your objective is to facilitate the comprehension and application of the insurance directives by setting them out in a legal text that is clear , coherent and complete .
Mr Karas has just asked for texts to be as clear and transparent as possible and that was the Commission 's aim in the text which is in front of you .
In addition to the codification of the provisions , some minor amendments which do not affect the substance of the texts were considered to be necessary .
The exercise has gone beyond a pure codification and that is why this is a ' recast ' version .
A purely recodified text would have included a considerable number of repetitions , inconsistencies and obsolete provisions .
I intend shortly to present to the Commission and , if the Commission agrees , to Parliament , a parallel proposal for a recast - again recast - version of the non-life insurance directives .
Clearly the Community 's insurance legislation is not going to be stopped because of the codification exercise .
New proposals are being discussed which , once they have been adopted , will require new amendments to the recast directives .
We cannot stop the legislation tree growing but we can prune and train it so that it does not become an overgrown tangle as it has been in the past .
I am extremely grateful to Parliament 's Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market and particularly to the rapporteur , Lord Inglewood , here represented by Mr Harbour , for their efficient handling of this matter .
Mr Harbour also just said that this is a good model for other legislation and I entirely agree with him .
It is an example of efficiency which Parliament may well want to adopt in other instances as well .
They have appreciated the fact that , although the proposal exceeds the limits of pure codification , it does not really contain any legislative change .
It therefore calls for more expeditious consideration than a normal legislative proposal and that is what has happened .
They have recommended to Members of Parliament that you should approve this proposal without any amendment and I invite Parliament to follow the recommendation of the rapporteur and approve the proposal without amendments .
The Commission hopes a directive will soon be adopted , if possible with only one reading by this Parliament .
That would be a very good example of a fast-track procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken today at noon .
Water management
The next item is the following oral questions to the Commission :
B5-0015 / 2001 by Mr de Roo and others , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group ,
B5-0020 / 2001 by Mrs Grossetête and Mr Moreira Da Silvara , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group ,
B5-0153 / 2001 by Mr Olsson , on behalf of the ELDR Group ,
B5-0154 / 2001 by Mrs González Álvarez , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group ,
on water management in Europe .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we have an excellent framework directive on water , stipulating that water management should be conducted in terms of individual river basins .
This sound ecological principle is enshrined in European law .
The Spanish government tried in vain to block this framework directive on water because of its National Hydrological Plan .
This megalomaniac and wrong-headed plan of the Aznar government aims to pipe water from the River Ebro over 900 kilometres down the coast to Southern Spain .
The cost will be in excess of EUR 18 billion between now and 2008 .
The Aznar government wants Europe to give an annual subsidy of EUR 1 billion .
This injudicious plan contravenes both the spirit and the letter of the framework directive on water .
It contravenes the habitat directive on 82 counts and the birds directive on 108 counts .
Of course the Aznar government will label this plan a national economic priority , but it will also have to prove to the European Commission that there are no alternatives .
However , there are alternatives !
Desalination of brackish and salt water will be 50 % cheaper for Central and Southern Spain than the Aznar plan , and apart from that is much more flexible , small-scale , and demand-oriented .
Another method would be to introduce cost-covering prices for water and to irrigate plants individually rather than submerging the fields and allowing between 90 % and 95 % of the precious water to evaporate .
Israel provides a good example of this .
This is why the European Commission should reject the Aznar plan and stop the flow of EU funds into it .
This Aznar plan is 200 times worse than the plan for an industrial estate between Aachen and Heerlen .
On the German-Dutch border the European Commission has rightly cut off the flow of EU funds because of the threat to the hamster population .
Surely it cannot be that the European Commission as the Guardian of the Treaties is operating a double standard ?
Is the Commission aware that the Aznar government asked 83 Spanish scientists to carry out studies into this injudicious water plan and that that same government is now refusing to publish results it deems unfavourable ?
Does the Commission approve of 60 villages in Spain being wiped off the map ?
Does the European Commission find it acceptable that a landslide could dislocate the operation of the Itoiz dam and threaten the Ascó nuclear power station ?
Mr President , we are not here to criticise a particular country or a particular government .
I think that we are here to try to provide some answers and , more importantly , to be able to discuss with the Commission a particularly important subject , which is the uneven distribution of water resources on European territory , which is related to variations in geographical , geological and climatic conditions , but which also results from human activity such as urbanisation , deforestation and pollution .
With regard to uneven distribution , it is logical to consider the possibility of carrying out water transfers in some regions .
It is unacceptable to let some areas run dry , when other areas have adequate resources to help them .
The European Parliament mentioned this idea in January 1998 in its resolution on the technological feasibility of trans-European hydraulic networks .
My fellow Members in the European Parliament and I believed , quite rightly in my view , that trans-European hydraulic networks , which would carry out large scale inter basin water transfers , could perhaps be an appropriate solution , enabling water resources to be shared within the European Union .
In addition , however , and it is important to stress this , it is obviously completely out of the question to take over a Member State ' s water resources unless that Member State gives its express consent .
Almost three years after the vote on this resolution , questions are still being asked .
Basically , the European Union has no experience at all in establishing such networks .
In order to bridge this gap , prospective studies should be carried out on the feasibility of this work , as well as an analysis of the physical impact that this type of trans-European hydraulic network would have on aquatic environments and other areas protected under Community legislation .
To this day , information on possible conclusions of these studies has not been passed on to us .
I find this deplorable , and I do not know if the Commission will have anything to tell us today about this matter .
It is also important to bear in mind the irreversible nature of any projects that might be undertaken .
It is hard to imagine these facilities being challenged in the short or medium term .
It is , therefore , essential to investigate every possible way of improving existing structures and , wherever possible , to apply the principle that it is advisable , first and foremost , to optimise our water management , rather than to invest money .
It is , therefore , important , in the long term , to establish a system in which responsibility is assigned for the quantity and quality of the water transferred , if there is a need for it to be transferred , and to establish a process to monitor this .
Lastly , and I am in agreement with my fellow Member on this particular point , we have the framework directive on water , which has come into force .
We must ensure that it is implemented correctly in national law and that it is respected in the potential and more technical context of water transfers being carried out between Member States .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , although officially this debate came about as a result of the recent floods in various Member States of the European Union , it has quickly moved towards a debate on Parliament ' s support for the Spanish Government ' s plan to make a series of major changes to the water management system in Spain , which we know as the national water plan .
As spokesperson for Convergencia Democrática de Cataluña in the European Parliament , I would like to express that my party , and also the Catalan Government , of which we are a part along with Unió Democràtica de Catalunya , do not agree with the proposals from the Spanish laid down in the aforementioned plan .
In the case that most directly affects Catalonia , we suggest an alternative based on transferring one fifth of the volume of water proposed by the Spanish ( specifically from the river Ebro , which has been mentioned here ) the use of desalination plants ( which have also been suggested here as a valid alternative ) , better use of what is available in the current channels and finally , transfer from the Ródano .
And this is where this plan enters into a European dimension .
We have been saying for years that one of the most serious problems that the most-developed societies , such as European societies , have to solve , in the medium and long term , is the shortage of water caused by the development of our urban centres and the locations of our new economic activities , which requires a new type of water management .
We cannot escape from this reality and we also need to consider it from a European perspective , because the situation demands it .
We do not understand the resistance against limiting transfers between basins , while maintaining State borders .
In the case of Spain , there is complete opposition from the Spanish to this possibility , but it is , however , accepted for Portugal .
We therefore stress that water management needs to have a European perspective , that transfers from basins irrespective of the borders between the Member States need to be considered because , among other things , the aim of the European Union is a Europe without borders .
Mr President , I am going to take the liberty of reading a few paragraphs from a communication from the European Commission relating to the discussion that is going to take place in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy :
' Much of the policies , legislation and standards needed to achieve our objectives for water quality and use have already been put in place .
The main challenge is ensuring the full and proper implementation of the existing legislation and achieving the integration of the Community ' s water quality objectives into the other sectoral policies such as agriculture , industry and regional policy ...
Member States also need to take steps to ensure that they are integrated into local planning and land-use decisions ... national , regional and local authorities need , amongst other things , to introduce measures to improve the efficiency of water use and to encourage changes in agricultural practices necessary to protect water resources and quality . '
It goes on to cover some aspects of saving water , efficient use of water , land-use planning and other aspects .
It is true that this debate has arisen here because there have been a great number of floods in Europe that are probably the result of bad water management , but it is also true that currently the biggest plan proposed in Europe for radical change in water management is in our country .
We are focusing on saving water , efficiency , different agricultural practices and land-use , which is what the forthcoming Spanish water plan should be .
We are very concerned , Commissioner , that directives such as the framework directive on water , the habitat directive , the directive on environmental impact assessment and the birds directive can be violated .
These four directives are now the backbone of the forthcoming sixth environment action programme .
If they were violated , the European Commission would be helping to make it impossible for the sixth plan to be implemented .
Mr President , the water framework directive will protect all our waters and improve the quality of the environment , for example through environmental quality standards , mandatory participation by civil society and tackling pollution at source .
It applies the precautionary principle and the polluter pays principle .
The directive does not prohibit water transfers per se .
However it imposes a binding legal requirement that they should not harm the environment .
It seems particularly important in this context that since the directive entered into force on 22 December 2000 a strict non-deterioration clause has applied , which should prevent a repetition of past errors .
The possibilities for derogation are restricted and subject to mandatory conditions .
The directive points out the importance of integrating the protection and sustainable management of water into other Community policy areas .
When a Natura 2000 may be affected , the normal procedure as provided for in Article 6 of the Habitats Directive should be applied in sequence : a search for alternative solutions , assessment of the overriding public interest and as a last resort , compensatory measures .
Mr President , may I introduce a further thought ?
The water framework directive will bring radical changes to Europe ' s water industry .
But the directive is also an opportunity for a thorough rethink of our various national water industries and water legislation and for opening up new fields of business for national suppliers and undertakings .
Water offers industry tremendous opportunities to create more value added for all by opening up the markets .
Increased efficiency through new forms of cooperation between private industry and municipal suppliers in the planning , construction and operation of plants is the first essential step in that direction .
A second step must then be to increase value added through exports .
Know-how in particular , where some Member States already have a number of strong undertakings , offers the opportunity of increasing exports by paying more attention to canvassing foreign markets - but obviously exporting only to an ecologically acceptable extent .
Everyone would gain from that .
Municipalities and consumers would save on costs .
Producers would find new markets .
I believe everyone would gain from exporting water in the same way as other countries export their gold in the form of oil ; we in Austria , for example , have white liquid gold in the form of water .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I welcome the fact that this House has had another opportunity to talk about the Spanish water plan and about Community legislation , and I say another opportunity because , as you will recall , a total of three oral questions have now been put in my name on this issue , but I also regret that in the end the initial question agreed with the Verts / ALE and GUE / NGL groups was not included on the agenda in its original form , and was replaced by these individual questions .
Returning to the content of the previous answers from Mrs Wallström , I must point out to Mrs García-Orcoyen that I am surprised at the sudden change of position that there appears to be between the Commission ' s reply to us and what the honourable Member says she was told .
I would like to ask Mr Liikanen to clarify this on behalf of Mrs Wallström .
Mrs García-Orcoyen said , as was reported by various Spanish media , that the Commission had answered to her that the Spanish plan did not violate Community legislation .
I must ask you , honourable Member , not to distort the Commission ' s position .
What Mrs Wallström has been saying is that the Commission has not made any statement on whether or not the Spanish national water plan violates Community legislation because it considers it to still be a draft and that it cannot therefore make a decision , as it does not have all the necessary information to rule on this .
I ask you please , Mrs García-Orcoyen , not to say something that is not true .
However , regardless of whether or not the Spanish national water plan , as it stands , violates Community legislation , we are going to take a brief look at it , not only because of the effects of the planned work on LIFE areas , on fauna and flora ( and I thank the GUE / NGL group for picking up this issue from my previous questions ) but also because of many other aspects that can be seen .
Would you like an example ?
The framework directive says that no movement of water can take place unless there has been a rigorous prior assessment of the need for it and unless all the possible alternatives have been exhausted .
Yesterday in Spain we found out that the government is now considering reducing the transfer from the Ebro by half through measures such as saving water in agriculture and re-using it .
We strongly doubt that this reduction is a counter-proposal .
It seems more like an alteration of concessions in order to ultimately distribute the same volume of water . However , whatever the case , it goes without saying that measures such as saving and re-using water are considered to be fundamental in the alternative plan put forward by our party the Partido Socialista .
If the transfer could supposedly have been done from the start with the same amount of water that is now being proposed - i.e. half the amount - does this not show that the government did not look into all the socio-economic implications , the alternatives and the availability of the resource in detail before its proposal ?
Meanwhile , you are aware that the framework directive says that participation from citizens is very important and , so far , associations such as ADENA , Ecologistas en Acción or groups of experts have not received an official response to their very well-documented allegations .
Let us also talk about the deterioration of water , which is dealt with in Articles 1 and 4 of the framework directive .
These articles establish the objective that the current state of water should not deteriorate , and it also says that this should be complied with from the entry into force of the directive , i.e. 22 December 2000 .
This implies that the current Spanish national water plan is not compatible with the framework directive because , as the work involved is planned , there will undoubtedly be serious changes to ecosystems and to the quality of the water .
Finally , allow me to briefly explain the Group of the Party of European Socialists views water management .
We believe that water is a common resource and therefore something that is governed more by solidarity than by market forces .
Any water plan should be more than a series of infrastructures and transfers .
Transferring water should be the last resort , to be done only when all possible alternatives have been exhausted and when it has been proven that it does not damage the environment .
Any water management measure should be accompanied by parallel plans on irrigation and forest resources , and taking into account climate change .
I am aware that there is a great deal more that I could say , but I can assure you that what Mrs Wallström did say in the February part-session is that the European Union will never fund , and will never agree with , any plan that does not respect the environment .
Mr President , Commissioner , debates that should really be technical are often political , such as the one that brings us here today : water management and water plans , which are necessary to support and develop our communities , but not at any price .
Plans cannot be established by law behind citizens ' backs and without taking into account their opinions , the opinion of social agents and of the scientific community , the territories affected , through development considerations , which focus more on concrete than on where to get water from and actually assessing who needs it and why .
As Andalusians , from one of the driest areas in the European Union , with very considerable water requirements , due to the two main economic activities , agriculture and tourism , and with absolutely unpredictable weather , we are concerned about the efficiency of the project , the cost / benefit relationship , the real possibility of these projects supporting the area and not causing conflict between communities .
Our hydrological plan would always start with the word ' save ' , and the last words would be ' transfer ' and ' desalination ' .
Ladies and gentlemen , the best reservoir is saving .
Our duty is to ask for water , but also to demand that efforts first be made to make the best possible use of the existing resources , valuing this scarce resource as it should be valued , improving irrigation in agriculture , investing in optimising the efficiency of distribution networks - which are in many cases obsolete and have major leaks - regaining control of hydraulics and regenerating soil and vegetation .
Special attention needs to be paid to underground water , preventing it from being over-used , to sewage treatment and to the essential environmental impact studies , particularly in areas such as mine , where specially protected natural areas are a precious asset to be preserved .
These plans also need to be in line with the Community directives on water , Natura sites , habitat , birds , etc . , in conjunction with the national irrigation plans that should be in accordance with the forthcoming review of the common agricultural policy and rural development in order to deepen essential sustainable development .
We have the opportunity to draw up a sustainable , innovative and model plan .
Let us do so .
Now , more than ever , we can ' t please everyone .
Mr President , I wish to begin by congratulating those who have formulated the oral question that has been tabled on its relevance , importance and timeliness .
Water is a product that is essential to life itself .
It is also a strategic factor for development and , as such , is an issue that concerns everyone , a point that has already been emphasised here and rightly so .
If we accept this view , then today we must develop a joint vision for the planning and management of shared rivers .
At European level and within the United Nations , the Helsinki Convention and , more specifically , its protocol on the protection and use of cross-border rivers and international lakes , represent a framework of international law that contains this vision and these new principles .
As is well known , Portugal has played an active role in the drafting of the directive on water management , in an attempt to ensure that priority was given to fundamental aspects concerning the protection and sustainable use of water , bearing in mind the climatic and geographic conditions of the Iberian Peninsula .
It should be understood that Portugal has indeed played this active role . Portugal and Spain are in quite unequal positions , given that we are a downstream country , in other words , Portugal has no rivers that flow into Spain , but Spain does have rivers that flow into Portugal .
Furthermore , when managing their water resources , our neighbours may adopt measures that affect Portuguese interests , but there is nothing that we , on the other hand , can do in terms of our water resources that would directly affect Spanish interests .
The joint management of shared hydrological basins within the framework of international law imposed by the directive that I have already mentioned , is therefore a fundamental approach , which must govern the behaviour of those with political responsibility for this particular sector , both in bilateral negotiations and in a multilateral framework .
I feel that Spain ' s new hydrological plan is a step in the right direction , since it has stopped decanting water , mainly from the Douro and Tagus rivers , which are shared between Portugal and Spain .
The directive in fact constitutes an extremely important protection network , since it adopts the coordination of the measures for hydrological basin management from the standpoint that these are not considered to be units defined by administrative or political borders .
With the aim of establishing an integrated water management system which will make the best use of the appropriate objectives for the specific conditions of the European Union ' s regions , the regulations of the framework directive will facilitate the implementation , both now and in future , with the cooperation of national governments , of hydrological plans that take account of such important factors as water quality , the preservation of sufficient water flows , the climate and the protection of biodiversity and the environment .
Mr President , I think we are agreed that water will be a key issue in the European Union this century .
We can also be sure that we are far from paying the subject the attention it deserves .
Of course it would be an illusion to think we can solve water problems by pumping water from areas of supposed surplus to areas where there is a shortage .
If we are saying that parts of Europe sometimes have floods and that the water could perhaps be more fairly distributed , we must bear in mind that those floods are themselves the outcome of mistakes in water management .
It is high time far greater attention was paid to local and regional water management .
Water problems must , as a rule , be solved where they arise , and there they must be dealt with within an acceptable financial framework .
The neglect of one potential source of water has been criminal : the conversion of salt water into industrial and process water .
The prospects in this sector are tremendous .
Complete liberalisation of water will result in it being used by industry in a way that will bring enormous ecological problems in the long term .
We must stop that before it happens .
Mr President , I would first like to answer Mr de Roo , because it is the second time ( the first time was in writing and the second was orally ) that I have heard him make inaccurate statements about the position taken by the Spanish Members - without exception - and the Spanish Government regarding the framework directive .
Mr de Roo , about two months ago you said that the Spanish Government and the Spanish Members voted against the framework directive .
Either you were not at that vote or you did not realise that , without exception , we voted in favour of the framework directive .
I think that this is a framework directive that - and I agree with what has been said here by several speakers - is going to promote a new culture in terms of water in European countries , based on criteria of efficiency and quality of water resources .
No one can deny this , much less so the Partido Popular or the Spanish Government .
It seems to me , Mr de Roo , that your Group is particularly interested in the Spanish water plan .
You could have put the question more directly from the start .
First of all , I would like to know if you have read it .
Do you have precise knowledge of the Spanish water plan or are you echoing other people ' s positions and a political opportunism that could of course be risky ?
Secondly , I think that Mrs Sornosa should tell me where she has seen me saying that I said that the Spanish water plan might contradict the framework directive .
The water plan is currently an open draft , in the process of consultation with all the parties concerned , although none of them has wanted to make use of this facility .
It is therefore difficult for it to violate any directive , and therefore , any information either for or against this - such as some that has appeared in the press - is absolutely unwarranted .
This is what I interpreted from the Commission ' s position and what I have maintained throughout .
I never said anything else , Mrs Sornosa .
There has also been talk in this debate about the matter of alternative plans and desalination plants .
Unfortunately , I cannot answer all of that in detail due to lack of time .
Mr President , I am sure the Spanish project is a highly emotive issue in Spain and I can understand that .
But it is first and foremost , of course , something that must be decided in Spain itself .
Taking a longer view , however , I have to say that the south ' s water supply is our concern too .
A question as important as this cannot be left to the Spanish alone .
I can quite imagine that in 10 or 20 years ' time we shall have to be dealing with very different projects about which we dare not even think today .
But there is something else I should like to mention briefly , that is the growing willingness to privatise the water industry .
People are thinking about it , and I expect the Commission is too .
The Ministry of Economy in Berlin has now made a study of the pros and cons of these issues .
Personally , I would be very reluctant to privatise water .
I know that Great Britain already has experience of this , but it is at least a subject we should approach very cautiously .
It would raise problems with far-reaching constitutional consequences for our Member States .
To give just one small example , in Germany we have around 4 000 municipal water companies , in France 2 or 3 large companies .
When we go for privatisation , this means that the small undertakings are simply bought up . That cannot be what such liberalisation is all about .
It is something we surely do not want .
I do not want to go into any more detail now , I have no time to do so , but I believe it is a subject we shall have to deal with more closely in the months or years ahead .
Mr President , I just wish to clarify a couple of points .
The Spanish national water plan is a general policy document to be followed by a large number of detailed projects .
The national water plan is not comparable with a river basin plan under the water framework directive .
Such river basin plans require as their basis a thorough analysis of the environmental impact and economic aspects - a task to be completed under the water framework directive by the end of 2004 .
At the same time , a strict deterioration clause applies ; impacts and measures that cause deterioration of a water body are prohibited , unless the Member State invokes one of the limited derogation clauses , which in turn are subject to meeting a range of conditions , including the environmental impact and economic analysis mentioned .
Only on the basis of those facts will the Commission be able to fully assess whether the operational measures under the Spanish national water plan comply with the water framework directive and other directives , such as the bird protection or habitats directives .
The debate is closed .
Biotechnology industry
The next item is the report ( A5-0080 / 2001 ) by Mr Purvis , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the future of the biotechnology industry ( 2000 / 2100 ( INI ) ) .
Mr President , we live in exciting times .
In our own lifetimes there have been massive and amazing advances in science and technology .
New industries have appeared , become commonplace , and have provided a better quality of life , higher standards of living , new and better jobs and better working conditions .
For Europe to keep its position in the economic forefront globally and to provide the standards we have come to expect , it has been essential for us to grasp these new technologies .
Biotechnology is yet another of these industries .
We ignore or side-step it at our peril .
Like all new technologies , there are bound to be concerns : environmental , ethical and safety concerns . They must be fully and very openly discussed and studied with the public ; they must be monitored and safeguarded by effective regulation .
Issues such as privacy and confidentiality in an era of genetic predictions require further study and perhaps specific legislation .
We signal this need in the report and take no predetermined position .
This is for later , after proper debate .
I would suggest that Amendments Nos 9 and 27 are premature in that they seek to close off such consideration and decision .
It is incumbent on us to encourage our scientists , entrepreneurs and business managers to take full advantage of the potential of biotechnology and bring this potential to the people of Europe and to the world , especially the less well-provided developing world .
Biotechnology - the life and plant sciences which it encompasses - offers major advances in medicines and health care , to prevent and cure diseases and disabilities which for so long have blighted the lives of so many men , women and children in our constituencies and world-wide .
Biotechnology offers major advances in the production of food in Europe to the advantage of farmers and consumers alike and benefits those parts of the world which struggle against drought and saline soils and fast-increasing populations .
It offers crops that eliminate vitamin A deficiency and blindness for millions .
It will use fewer pesticides and herbicides and therefore improve the environment and natural habitats .
With valuable opinions from the Committee on Agriculture and Rural and Development and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , for which I sincerely thank their draftsmen , the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy has considered all the implications and decisively calls for us in Parliament , the Commission , the Council and the Member State governments to give this industry the support and commitment which it deserves and so badly needs .
Following several years of reticence and indecision , we are well behind our main competitors in the USA .
American R & D expenditure on biotechnology is three-and-a-half times that of Europe , employment is over three times and biotech revenues four times .
It is not only the USA : Brazil , Canada , China , India , Israel , Japan , Thailand , Singapore are all embracing biotechnology and actively promoting their indigenous industries .
There is no time to lose if Europe is to take its proper place .
We have the scientists , the research establishments and the scientific capability .
We have the basis of a successful industry , with entrepreneurs , investors and business managers . But , for too long , these have been discouraged by negative and sceptical attitudes in government and political circles , public opinion and the media , by unsympathetic fiscal regimes , by a risk-averse culture and cumbersome legal structures .
The Lisbon Council promised to make Europe the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world .
Now we look to the Stockholm Council to fulfil that promise on biotechnology , which is precisely one of the most important means for reaching that much-quoted target .
We look to the Commission to rouse itself , to shed its reticence and give a resolute lead with a bio-Europe action plan .
We look to the Member States to get on with the job of implementing the outstanding directives and providing the positive environment for their biotech industries to develop and prosper .
Our scientists and entrepreneurs are watching intently .
What happens here today , in Stockholm this month , in Brussels and the Member States in the next few months , will decide whether they emigrate elsewhere or seek their futures here in Europe .
I ask my colleagues in Parliament to give this report their full support .
I ask the Commission to respond to it with vigour , determination and singleness of purpose .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Purvis , the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has participated with interest in this work aimed at the future .
We have produced an opinion that is forward-looking and constructive , and , at the same time , balanced .
We wish to take into consideration the principle of safety when it comes to consumers , the work of farmers , and the whole food processing chain .
Our first message is that biotechnology is one way of developing agriculture , which is now struggling with problems .
It offers opportunities for the production of non-food goods , such as new biofuels , plastics , and so on .
It offers opportunities for using fewer pesticides and having a positive impact on the environment .
What is essential for farmers is that they should derive some financial benefit when the new technology is introduced .
That has not happened in the United States with regard to what are called first generation genetically modified products .
The European aim must be to improve the financial position of farmers by achieving better quality and efficiency through the use of technology .
Biotechnology could have immense importance for regional policy .
It offers opportunities for regions where natural conditions are harsh .
This also applies to the situation in the developing countries .
On the other hand , there are dangers associated with new technology , which are worth bearing in mind as early on as possible in any decision-making policy of the EU .
Farmers may become dependent on large , multinational companies in the processing industry .
To prevent the concentration of development , the EU must guarantee there are adequate public resources available for research , and support research and development in small biotechnological enterprises and plant-breeding institutes .
It will be very important to guarantee competition .
Our committee is satisfied with the work of Mr Purvis and the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , as our amendments were taken account of at the committee stage .
We would hope that the Commission will read carefully those requests that appear in the report inter alia to measure the net impact on the environment .
Mr President , just as the rapporteur points out , biotechnology offers enormous opportunities for good .
That is probably most obvious of all within the medical sphere , but there are also opportunities in a number of other fields .
However , biotechnology also raises a series of new and very difficult issues to which we must respond .
These include ethical issues within the medical sphere , environmental and consumer issues in connection with the cultivation of genetically modified crops and global issues of justice in connection with patent rights and the dominance of the industry by large multinational corporations .
These issues must be taken very seriously if a credible overall policy is to be drawn up in this area .
The opinion of the Committee on the Environment indicates some key areas .
Patent law must respect the United Nations Convention on Biodiversity which establishes developing countries ' - indeed , all countries ' - right to their genetic heritage .
There must be strong , independent and open public research in the field so that there is also research into areas which are not of immediate commercial interest and into the problems and risks posed by the technology .
There must also be public control of the research .
As far as the controversial issue of the cultivation of genetically modified crops is concerned , it has to be appreciated that the adoption of Directive 90 / 220 / EEC does not mean that there is at present adequate legislation in this area .
We still do not have the necessary regulations on labelling , traceability and responsibility .
Such regulations must be a precondition for considering whether to embark upon the large-scale commercial cultivation of genetically modified crops .
Furthermore , we would point out the risks of genetic confidentiality not being respected and of genetic profiling being misused , for example to refuse people jobs or insurance .
That would lead , of course , to an increase in social inequality .
We think it crucial that problems of this kind , too , should also be clarified , precisely so that the positive potential of biotechnology can be developed .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by thanking Mr Purvis , the rapporteur .
He has presented a remarkable report and drawn attention to the great potential of biotechnology .
We note that biotechnology is unable to develop that great potential particularly well in Europe .
There are a number of hindrances to it in the European Union .
The greatest one in my opinion is the de facto moratorium on the release of genetically modified organisms .
We do not investigate which plants or organisms are particularly dangerous and therefore should perhaps not be approved ; instead we do not approve any at all and no distinction is made between different organisms .
This arrangement was a problem from the start .
There was never a proper basis for it in law , and now it is even more of a problem because the Council and Parliament have adopted new rules for the release of genetically modified organisms , and I cannot understand why some Member States still do not want to end the moratorium .
It is particularly harmful to small and medium-sized enterprises that are unable to transfer their work abroad .
We have good rules for release and we can therefore end the moratorium now .
I believe the dangers of green gene technology are much overstated .
I also believe the prospects for medicinal use are overstated , that things are being painted in black and white - genetic changes in farming are bad , in medicine they are per se good .
I think there are opportunities and risks in both , and that is also what the report says in item 32 .
Now that we have good rules for plants , we also need good common rules in medicine .
There is room for improvement there .
I also believe that we must set ethically-based limits for gene technology and biotechnology .
We have already gone some way towards that in Europe and there is now a Committee on Human Genetics that must look particularly at this area again , because Europe is a community of values .
This does not mean that we have to have the same laws everywhere , that we harmonise everything , but we must agree in Europe , too , on certain basic principles and I would like to press for that strongly .
Mr President , this report should be welcomed for its well-rounded approach .
It highlights in a factual and non-alarmist manner the enormous potential of the European biotechnology industry for assisting economic growth , for encouraging job creation and improving the competitiveness of our industries .
But it is not all about growth .
As we live longer we also need to ensure that we live better and the infirmities of older people have to be addressed .
Diseases like Alzheimer 's , Parkinson 's , diabetes , heart disease and even cancer have yet to be fully challenged by the biotechnologists .
It is not only a question of living better , we have to be fitter so that older people can continue by their work to contribute to the wealth of society .
Long life and a healthy life have to be earned .
I am convinced that in plant , animal and human biology lie the biggest challenges of the 21st century .
I very strongly support that section of the report which calls for more concrete proposals for action from the Commission and Council .
We need the Commission to report on the present state of the industry and the comparisons between Member States and to give us better data for future action .
The development of a plan for a bio-Europe - paralleling the e-Europe - for activities of the Commission and Member States to make the Union a competitor for the biotechnology industry is a worthy aim .
The Council should also commit to biotechnology as a key new technology and the Stockholm Summit would be a useful time for them to do this .
The region that I represent has the lowest GDP per head of any region in the United Kingdom .
It is not a comfortable position and one of the key developments in the regional economic planning is to support a company to stimulate growth in biotechnology industries .
We call it Bio-Science-North .
The aim is to draw on research in university departments , to establish incubator companies and stimulate growth in those that are already established .
We believe that this is one of the most important instruments that we have been able to put in place in the last two or three years , with of course support from the European Regional Development Fund .
I know that our region is not alone in that but I believe that this is something that all regions in the Community should be examining .
The final point I would like to make is that we must reinforce the environmental possibilities of biotechnology .
It should be recognised that it gives us tremendous opportunities for tackling pollution and reducing resource depletion and gives us opportunities in the food sector to improve the output from our agricultural industries .
I hope that the biotechnology industry will get a tremendous boost from the adoption of this report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , I compliment Mr Purvis on his own-initiative report , which in terms of content does justice to the importance of the biotechnology sector for the European economy but which in the view of the ELDR Group could have been more balanced in its choice of words .
For that reason we shall support Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 25 and 27 .
Biotechnology , along with information and communications technology , is among the most promising technologies of the twenty-first century ; in the years ahead these sectors will provide much new employment worldwide .
A precondition for this will be that the European Union develops a transparent and innovation-promoting regulatory framework , as well as an encouraging entrepreneurial climate .
Up to now , the biotechnology sector has been the lame duck as regards legislation facilitating economic support .
Consequently , I welcome the Anglo-Dutch initiative to make biotechnology a key priority on the Stockholm agenda .
If the European Union wishes to become the most dynamic and competitive knowledge economy , it is now time to create a ' B-Europe ' alongside an ' E-Europe ' .
I am glad that the Dutch Prime Minister has realised this .
Perhaps he can also persuade his party in the Netherlands parliament to withdraw its appeal to the European Court of Justice against the directive protecting biotechnological inventions .
Because without sound patent legislation there will be no new investment by companies , no biotech start-ups and hence no innovation or employment .
Finally , I hope that our Commissioner will inform Parliament speedily about the Stockholm summit and what has been decided there with regard to biotechnology .
Perhaps he could suggest changing the acronym GMO to GEM , genetically enhanced materials , since ' gems are precious stones ' , and that is what biotechnology must become in Europe .
Mr President , the rapporteur is aware that the Green Group has criticised this report as unbalanced and it indeed is unashamedly pro-biotech industry , doubtless because of the explicit involvement of Glaxo Wellcome - or whatever they are now called - in preparatory meetings .
However , the report in no way affects the legislative programme , which is addressing such issues as traceability , labelling and liability .
The report has not dealt with serious concerns such as ethics in biotechnology , public health , consumers ' concerns regarding food , and indeed the effects on the environment .
However , the most extraordinary thing in this report is the reference to the market and the creation and availability of new financial resources and the rationality of European stock markets .
I thought Mr Purvis clearly understood that stock markets are beyond the control even of a powerful Commissioner like Mr Liikanen and I urge him to ignore this extraordinary interventionist proposal .
Mr President , Commissioner , it is the custom here to praise and thank the rapporteur .
I will say this : Mr Purvis is right about one thing .
Biotechnological applications will develop rapidly in the next few years .
But we do not need everything that industry would like to see for that to happen , such as patenting genes that already exist in nature , the free trade in manipulated genes , tax concessions for stock options for companies and their directors , the liberalisation of product labelling , subjective information , and the handling of biotechnology as an exclusively industrial operation , for which the EU ' s Directorate-General for Enterprise in the has responsibility .
Mr Purvis ' s report contains many views that point in this direction , and our group cannot , therefore accept it .
We wish to see biotechnology as an opportunity that will open up new dimensions in science .
The manipulation of nature must be approached in a more careful way than that which Mr Purvis is proposing .
We have to set aside time to examine all the effects of unborn - and possibly unheard-of in nature - species and varieties on people and the rest of nature .
We support the development of biotechnology and research in the field must not , for example , be allowed to be trampled on by information technology .
The IT stock market bubble has now burst .
We do not want biotechnology to become another such bubble , built of false expectations and empty promises .
As this is a matter of basics , issues relating to the genotypes of people and the rest of nature , politicians must bear the responsibility , because industry will not . Industry only maximises the value of shares .
Mr President , the rapporteur displays too optimistic a view of biotechnology .
Based on a one-sided industry-oriented approach he calls on us to support the biotechnology industry .
That is understandable from his perspective , in which the aim of Europe is to create wealth and employment .
However , I have a number of peripheral comments to make .
There is no sign in the report of a balance between the advantages and disadvantages of biotechnology .
The rapporteur calls the development of biotechnology good for the environment , the quality of food , health and the developing countries .
However , it is very doubtful whether the developing countries will benefit .
Probably they will become more dependent on the mainly Western suppliers of seed and pesticides .
After all , food provision , besides being a problem of technological and biological shortcomings , is mainly a distribution issue .
Unfortunately , the rapporteur imputes an exemplary function to the United States .
Biotechnological agriculture there announced that it can no longer guarantee that its products are GMO-free because of cross-pollination .
Information on biotechnology should also reflect an even-handed balance .
Leaving it to the sector leads to an entanglement of ethics and economic interests .
Ethical decisions should be taken as close as possible to the level of the citizen .
That also applies to the direction of development in biotechnology .
The report , on the other hand , instructs the Member States even on financial support , tax measures , education and immigration .
In addition , it is premature for the rapporteur to call upon Member States to agree with a patent on life , to which there are ethical and legal objections , such as conflict with international treaties .
The Netherlands and Great Britain have appealed to the Court and it is better to wait for the judgment .
The report gives responsibility for authorising GMOs to the European Food Authority .
However , the latter has only an advisory function .
Politicians remain responsible for the decisions .
Policy for the biotechnology industry in the European Union should be based on the views of the Member States .
In the light of this poor coordination , it is telling that this report should appear before the temporary Committee on Human Genetics has reported on the matter .
Apart from that , it is odd that Europe , usually averse to state aid , should be calling upon the Member States to support an industrial sector .
It is unclear for what reason this industrial sector deserves to receive support .
At this stage it would have been better if the report had been restricted to cross-border industrial aspects , such as development barriers or a survey of options within the various possible policy directions , without simply advocating support .
Because of the above misgivings , I am unable to support the report .
Economic motives must not dominate moral considerations .
Europe , which claims to be a community of values , should show greater sensibility in dealing with this question .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mr Purvis on his excellent work in committee .
It was an intelligent , integrated operation which interpreted and respected the different stances of the members of the committee , including their ethical concerns .
For my part , as a scientist , I greatly welcome both the specific intrinsic value of the report , which , at last , places Europe on a level with the countries which invest more in scientific research , and the new horizons which are appearing in the fight to eradicate terrible diseases such as certain neurodegenerative diseases affecting the central nervous system .
Moreover , in the agrifoods sector , the adoption of my amendment , which stipulates that genetically modified foods must be subject to obligatory mutagenisis , carcinogenesis and toxicity tests before they are placed on the market , will go some way towards restoring the citizens ' confidence at last , especially their faith in the institutions and the political world .
I would like to thank John Purvis once again for consenting to the adoption of a number of amendments I tabled , which seek to ensure that our human resources are properly valued and enhanced , particularly young researchers , and that young researchers are offered attractive career prospects which are on a level with those offered by the United States of America .
To sum up , I feel that the Purvis report can be considered a valuable contribution to that complex , diverse mosaic which is the European Research Area , which , together with Mr Busquin and Mr Liikanen , we are doing an excellent job of establishing in Europe and which will make us competitive and enable us to take up this world challenge .

Mr President , Mr Purvis has done a good job as several speakers have already said .
I think it is a good report .
Imagine if we could understand how algae produce oxygen from sunlight .
Such things exist .
We could imitate it .
It would transform our energy industry completely .
To understand that , for example , is an enormous challenge .
Or look at a sea urchin ' s spine under the microscope .
You get a fantastic picture of how new materials might be built .
To understand how that is made could dramatically change our industrial culture .
We will only understand it if we are curious enough to find out , if we approach new technology , new science with curiosity and not with fear .
That is John Purvis ' message and I would like to endorse it .
Moreover , as regards developing countries I would like to point out that there is one developing country that has made enormous strides in biotechnology .
That is Cuba .
For 40 years , Cuba has been investing in biotechnology like hardly any other country and today has a turnover in modern biotechnology of well over USD 100 million .
I only want to mention that because other countries are named here .
Despite all the criticism that can be levelled at Cuba in other respects , I think that is a major achievement .
In the energy industry we have tended to go the way of conventional thermodynamics .
No living creature operates according to conventional thermodynamics , otherwise we would not live as long as we do .
Irreversible thermodynamics , small changes , will perhaps show us a completely new way forward in energy .
That is also something we need to understand .
Then what we have been doing hitherto will perhaps one day be seen as an aberration .
I think we should be showing a little more courage with this technology , paying attention to the risks of course , but there has never been any progress made without curiosity or courage , and the same applies for biotechnology .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Purvis 's report is an excellent document .
Biotechnology offers great opportunities , but also considerable risks .
We live in a democracy .
That means that our citizens ' fears and anxieties must be taken seriously .
We can only succeed in doing this through debate and by making information easily accessible .
However , we must not allow these fears concerning the risks involved in the new technology to overshadow what it potentially has to offer humanity and the environment .
We are told that we can reduce the number of pesticides used in farming .
I should prefer to focus on the possibility of using biotechnology to design new pesticides and chemicals which work where they have to work and are broken down when they have to be broken down .
We must have a truthful and open-minded attitude both to opportunities and difficulties .
As far as food and agricultural production are concerned , we must have a deep respect for people ' s clear right to information about the food they eat .
Responsible and informed freedom of choice is fundamental to a democracy .
I am very glad that the report is to include paragraph 62 which addresses the protection of the individual 's personal integrity whenever genetic information is used .
Used properly , biotechnology can contribute to ecological , economic and social growth .
Used improperly , it can , like any other technology , be dangerous .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the gene technology industry has been promising us much for decades . It is supposed to heal diseases , solve the problem of world hunger and create better people .
What have we seen in that time ?
Many dangers have appeared , people have already died in experiments , hunger has not been wiped out and better human beings have not been created .
I think these problems are the result not of a technology but of the power structures prevailing in this society .
Firstly , there is twice as much food in the world as would be needed to feed everyone adequately .
It is a question of distribution .
Secondly , sickness is caused by environmental conditions , and these cannot be changed by technology but by changing the conditions .
Thirdly , we will only get a better human being if we allow more self-determination , if we allow people more freedom , but we will not do it simply by means of a new technology .
Biotechnology on the other hand creates more selection , has already resulted in a new form of genetic racism , and we must resist that with all our might .
This report puts all the power in the hands of the gene technology industry and we can therefore only reject it .
/ NGL ) . ( EL ) Mr President , every new science that emerges significantly improves our quality of life but generally harbours the danger of innovations being hijacked by groups of interests .
In the case of biotechnology , we must not forget that life is an exceptionally complicated physical system which has evolved over a timescale of millions of years and that , consequently , interventions which provoke change over a timescale of a few years may have unforeseen repercussions on the balance of the overall system .
The Purvis report completely ignores the risks and endeavours to ensure that biotechnology serves the monopolies ' interests .
According to the report , the biotechnology industry should operate without restraint and beyond any form of control and its interests should come before any public interest .
The interest in third world countries is hypocritical in the extreme , now that the pharmaceutical industry is dragging the South African government through the courts and the third world is overburdened by debt .
The overall stance of the European Union is hypocritical because it has abandoned its earlier reservations precisely when the European monopolies are at the point at which they can compete with the American monopolies .
The MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece will be voting against the report , not just because it is unacceptable , but because it is dangerous for the future of mankind .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , John Purvis ' s report is a particularly good - by this I mean complete and well balanced - review of the situation surrounding the biotechnology industry in Europe .
This is shown not least by the very large majority in support of the report in committee .
In particular , the call for a coordinated European action plan was backed on all sides of the House and evidently also fell on fertile ground in the Council of Ministers and the Commission .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
At its meeting this week , the European Commission reaffirmed its desire to develop a consistent overall strategy for supporting and developing biotechnology in Europe and to present it to Parliament and the Council by the end of this year .
I am particularly pleased that it is Commissioners Liikanen and Busquin who have stressed the importance of this technology for our economic and scientific future .
At the same time or more or less at the same time , Heads of Government Tony Blair and Wim Kok sent a joint letter to the Swedish President of the Council calling for an economic action plan to promote the European biotechnology industry and giving due emphasis to that call with a raft of suggested measures .
Mr Liese has already said that we are dealing with other issues besides economic matters , and as a Parliament we shall be following all these actions closely .
It is an important , essential prerequisite for the success of this action plan that all decisions should be taken on the basis of the best information available .
We are therefore particularly anxious that full use should be made of the various advisory and scientific committees through which scientific and economic expertise is fed into the preparation and taking of decisions .
I therefore most especially welcome the report ' s call for greater use to be made of all these committees and would like to call on the Commission to make greater use than before of all the possibilities for consultation and groundwork , as we should do , too .
Mr President , as many fellow Members have already stated , I believe that the biotechnology industry can bring about improvements , particularly in medicine , but I think that it would be naïve to believe that it can solve all the world ' s problems .
When I hear what some Members have to say , or when I read certain passages in the report , I am stunned and astounded .
World hunger , unexpected climate change , protection of the environment , all these problems could be resolved tomorrow thanks to the benefits of biotechnology .
I think that it would be just as naïve to simply disregard the possible risks , excesses and abuses , all the more so because we are already seeing some of them taking place .
The risks and excesses could either be curbed or increased depending on developments in legislation both in the European Union and internationally .
I would like to make just two points .
The first relates to drug patenting .
We are now seeing the problems of access to generic drugs to combat AIDS in the African nations , Brazil and countries in Asia .
Given the pharmaceutical industry ' s propensity for the use of biotechnology in future drugs , I think that this problem will only grow worse and that we will therefore have to ensure that patent legislation does not prevent production and parallel imports of generic drugs to combat great scourges and serious diseases , which threaten the poorest nations .
My second point relates to patents on genetic discoveries .
I think that a clear distinction must certainly be made between patents on inventions and patents on discoveries , especially since biological riches are concentrated in the countries of the South , in tropical areas , because , otherwise , we will once again see the countries of the South being plundered so that major laboratories of industrialised nations can benefit .
In any case , we must put an end to the ' patenting of life forms ' .
The third point , which will bring me to my conclusion , is that I believe fundamental decisions , particularly on releasing GMOs , must continue to come under political responsibility .
The European Food Safety Authority will most probably play a crucial role in providing expertise , information and recommendations , but it is the competent authorities which must , on a political level , continue to authorise the release of GMOs .
As long as problems such as traceability , labelling and determining responsibility for damage persist and as long as we have no guarantees on risks , I believe that we are justified in continuing the moratorium .
Mr President , the biotechnology industry in fact provides us with an important means of combating certain diseases , reducing the use of chemical products in agriculture and of protecting the environment .
Mr Purvis quite rightly emphasises all these developments .
However , by almost exclusively falling into line with the approach of biotechnology companies , and by giving priority to economic and technological aspects , the report pays minimal attention to the major questions of ethics and safety , which are giving the general public so much concern .
There is a risk that the biotechnology industry , seen from a strictly industrial and mercantile point of view , will make all these problems worse ; for example , unfair trade , environmental disasters , industrial mergers and unemployment and the increasing power of multinationals .
I do , therefore , find the report is too partial by far and is even prejudiced .
It disregards the concerns that were even expressed in this House on GMOs .
It questions the moratorium imposed by several Member States , one of which was France .
I agree with what my fellow Member has just said .
I think that , given all the problems we face - and since I heard you mention courage earlier - it would show courage to persevere with the precautionary principle and take time to verify the facts of the situation .
While I do , therefore , acknowledge the advantages of biotechnologies , I cannot support the report as it stands .
I hope that it will be amended , particularly in the light of the conclusions of the Sjöstedt report , which is , in the main , based on respect for the precautionary principle .
In its Sixth Framework Research Programme , the Commission made biotechnology and genetic engineering priority areas .
It is preparing a strategic communication on biotechnology to be completed by the end of 2001 .
I call on the Commission to do all it can to take full advantage of the contribution that biotechnology can make to economic growth and to the protection of the environment , but also to take full account of ethical , environmental and social issues , which I believe require dialogue between politicians , scientists and citizens .
Mr President , the report of Mr Purvis on biotechnology comes at just the right moment .
Europe is lagging behind the rest of the world and threatens to miss opportunities .
The causes are mainly a fairly weak strategic vision , laborious approval procedures and non-transparent coordination between European and national legislation .
The great value of this report is that it clearly describes where additional guarantees are required for producers , consumers , environment and health care .
In that respect the report stands in a number of areas in glaring contrast to the letter addressed by the British and Dutch prime ministers Blair and Kok to the European Council .
This letter is too bogged down in rather hollow rhetoric on opportunities , whereas Purvis rightly speaks up for the small and medium-sized business that is so important to Europe .
In that respect , the government of my country has depressing examples of a zigzag policy , as was shown , for example , only last year in relation to the use of GM potatoes for non-food production .
Mr President , the FAO has calculated that world food production will have to increase by two-and-a-half times in twenty years , and that there is insufficient scope for opening up new agricultural areas in the world .
And those who , like the present Minister for Agriculture in Germany , Mrs Künast , retreat into small-scale production and organic farming , are in fact turning their backs on international society .
A good balance between new techniques such as biotechnology , sustainability and their accommodation within a strategic food policy is indispensable .
As far as that is concerned , a strong European food authority with supervisory and monitoring powers is in fact also indispensable for such policy .
Mr President , I must say that with his report the honourable Member has taken an excellent first step towards a new discussion in Europe .
Mr President , may I congratulate Mr Purvis on his report on the future of the biotechnology industry .
As Mr Purvis makes clear , it is a vital industry for the future of the European Union .
It will provide jobs and opportunities for innovation with new products and new processes in such fields as agriculture , medicine and pharmaceuticals .
In the Fifth Framework Programme we are already putting EUR 2 billion into the biotechnology industry and I hope that in the Sixth Framework Programme that will increase .
But despite all that we are behind the United States , which dominates the biotechnology market in terms of revenue , R and D expenditure and even number of employees . It is between three and four times bigger than the industry in the European Union .
If we are going to benefit from the biotechnology industry , we need to nurture the industry .
We need to invest through the Sixth Framework Programme and other R and D funds .
Balanced regulation is important .
It is clear there has been a public loss of confidence in science and technology , scientists and engineers .
The BSE and foot-and-mouth crises indicate a lack of confidence .
It is also clear that there is an ethical dimension .
We need public accountability and clear guidelines that command public support .
In terms of research and genetic manipulation , many of us would support somatic cell repair but might have doubts about somatic cell enhancement or germ cell repair and certainly there will be grave concerns about germ-cell enhancement .
It is not acceptable for insurance companies to refuse cover on the basis of genetic profiling or for manufacturing companies to recruit those with a low propensity to cancer for dirty jobs .
We need to strike a balance between introducing regulations that will allow the biotechnology industry to thrive in the future and maintaining public confidence .
Otherwise public concerns may well drive economic activity across the Atlantic .
Mr President , Commissioner , research and society face great scientific and ethical challenges in the 21st century .
Genetic engineering applications will play a key role .
I would like to thank Mr Purvis sincerely .
In the last legislative term I drew attention to the importance of genetic engineering in my report on genetic engineering and its impact on agriculture .
We must now at last give the green light to green genetic engineering .
To stick with this theme of colours , consumers have long since given the green light to red genetic engineering , i.e. the application of genetic engineering in medicine .
The advantages are tangible and easy to understand .
In green genetic engineering , its application in agriculture , consumers are , as I say , sadly still showing the red light .
We must also show the red card to extremists .
Biotechnology and gene technology must cease to be the poor relation .
The EU must get on board the moving train of research and application or it will leave without us .
I am worried by the trend of more and more small and medium-sized enterprises pulling out of green biotechnology and gene technology .
The present EU moratorium means that while research is taking place the subsequent application of the product is not being allowed in individual countries .
Undertakings , and with them jobs , are leaving Europe .
In my view , the lights are on amber here .
They must be allowed to change to green .
Of course , whether we are talking about red or green genetic engineering , the ethical bounds to biotechnology and gene technology must be clearly formulated .
I would like to say to the opponents of research that we have a moral obligation to use the opportunities this new technology offers for medicine and for caring for the world population as a whole .
The public will give the green light to biotechnology and gene technology only if they have information and transparency with clearly marked out ethical bounds .
I also appeal to industry to do their part in helping us with the public relations work so that acceptance will increase .
Mr President , I wish to begin by congratulating Mr Purvis on his comprehensive report .
The Commission supports the basic thrust of the report .
We can only welcome it as a recognition of the economic , social and environmental impact of biotechnology .
Biotechnology has a very important role to play in fulfilling the commitment made by the Lisbon European Council to develop a competitive , knowledge-based economy .
That is also the basis for creating employment in Europe .
The Commission has already indicated the priority it attaches to biotechnology in its proposal for the next research framework programme .
Therefore we share the report 's view on the need to promote a competitive European biotechnology industry .
A study on the position of the European biotechnology industry should be ready later this spring , and I shall make that available to Parliament .
Further , let me say how much the Commission appreciates the report 's particular merit of taking a comprehensive view on all major issues related to biotechnology .
I should like to congratulate the rapporteur on this successful attempt .
In its report to the Stockholm European Council , which takes place next week , the Commission underlines the importance of biotechnology as a frontier technology for growth and employment , and as a tool for sustainable development .
The Commission also announces a broad policy paper setting up a strategic vision for life sciences and biotechnology after 2010 , which will be ready by the end of this year .
The policy paper and action plan will be the Commission 's response to Parliament 's wish for an initiative .
Obviously , in preparing this policy document we can now carefully take into account the views of the European Parliament as expressed in the report .
I agree with those who say that we need a broad debate on the ethical and societal impacts of the issue .
If and when we want to promote the biotechnology industry and its possibilities , we must always be open about it , otherwise we will not be successful .
We will also base our report on the indications from the Industry Ministers ' informal meetings on 16 February and possible indications from the European Council next week .
I expect the European Council will take a very strong position on this issue .
It is also clear that we will have to build on expertise in many fields , as well as consulting a wide range of stake-holders .
We need to hold discussions with a wide range of people : scientists , experts and citizens .
There are no simple answers to the needs and questions raised by biotechnology , but it is the Commission 's intention to provide - with you - a considered and comprehensive strategy before the end of this year .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
I propose that the sitting be suspended until the votes are taken .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.40 a.m. and resumed at noon )

Madam President , yesterday in this House the chairperson of my delegation , Rosa Díez , reported another leak of a written answer from the Commission to a question in Question Time , before Parliament officially received the answer from the Commission .
It was the answer to Question No 91 from Mrs García-Orcoyen about the national water plan .
Having received the press release that the Group of the European People ' s Party in the European Parliament distributed yesterday to the Spanish media in Strasbourg , dated 13 March , half an hour before Question Time finished , I would like to inform the President of the European Parliament that as well as the answer to Mrs García-Orcoyen ' s question , the joint answer to Questions No 92 from Mr Agag Longo and No 94 from Mrs Avilés Perea was also leaked .

Therefore , on behalf of my delegation , I once again ask the President to investigate what happened and to take every step to ensure that this situation does not reoccur .
Mrs Dührkop Dührkop , I shall do whatever needs to be done .
I listened to your point of order because it gave Members the time to arrive in Parliament .
Madam President , as it is the second time in one month that there have been leaks , and they are always to do with questions associated with Spanish Members , I would ask you to inform the House as soon as possible of the result of the investigation that you promised to carry out at my request .
I also address this to President Prodi , who promised to investigate it within the Commission .
I think it is absolutely scandalous that this should happen again .
I agree with you wholeheartedly , Mr Barón Crespo .
This is utterly unacceptable and I shall , of course , let you know the results of the enquiry .
We cannot enter into a debate , Mr Galeote Quecedo .
I am allowing points of order because we are still waiting for some Members to arrive . Generally , points of order are always heard after the votes .
Madam President , since Mr Barón Crespo has recently been so obsessed with receiving all sorts of regulations , I would also ask you to send him the regulations on the questions that Members put to the European Commission , and he should not be surprised that the answer was received by the person who asked the question .
Once this person has received the answer he can do what he likes with it , and can therefore give it to the media , and what is more , I would say that it is his duty to do so .
These , Mr Barón Crespo , are the rules of democracy .
But as you like receiving documentation , please , Madam President , send him the regulations governing this event .
Madam President , I addressed you regarding an unacceptable leak of questions put by Members from my Group .
Now I know who was responsible for the leaks .
Mr Galeote has just told us .
Ladies and gentlemen , you accepted the rule that I put before you , in other words , to deal with points of order after voting .
We shall proceed to the votes , and then we can come back to deal with this issue in full , if you wish .
VOTE
Madam President , we shall agree to this version of the text in its entirety only in the last vote by roll call , but there is a small mistake in paragraph 17 of the Finnish version of the joint resolution . Paragraph 17 in the joint resolution on the Stockholm summit says in Finnish ' emphasises the importance of progress in the field of a pioneering technology ' , although it should read ' in the field of biotechnology ' .
In other words , it is talking about pioneering technology rather than biotechnology . I hope the final version to be approved will be correct in the Finnish version .
Very well , Mrs Kauppi , thank you for making this clear .
We shall look into this .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Motion for a resolution ( B5-0172 / 2001 ) , by Mr Elmar Brok , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on developing the Union 's capabilities in conflict prevention and civil crisis management
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Madam President , I am not going to raise a point of order , under Rule 141 of the Rules of Procedure , because , as you said , we leave this until the end of the debate , but I do want to speak under Rule 122 due to personal allusions .
Mr Barón Crespo has made a completely unfounded accusation here , and I ask you , Madam President , to ask Mr Barón Crespo to retract it .
No , Mr Galeote Quecedo .
Any Member wishing to speak on a personal matter can do so when the current item on the agenda has been discussed .
The item that we are currently discussing is the votes on the reports .
You will , therefore , be able to take the floor as soon as we have finished , in accordance with the Rules of Procedure .
Joint motion for a resolution on the incidents on the border between the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia ( FRY ) , Kosovo and the FYROM and the situation in the region
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Motion for a resolution ( B5-0173 / 2001 ) by Mrs Randzio-Plath , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the final report of the Committee of Wise Men on the regulation of European securities markets
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0082 / 2001 ) by Mr von Wogau , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the state of the European economy , report preparatory to the Commission recommendation on the broad economic policy guidelines [ 2001 / 2008 ( INI ) ]
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0060 / 2001 ) by Mr Fava , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Security and Defence Policy , on the Commission communication on EU Election Assistance and Observation COM [ 2000 ) 191 - C5-0259 / 2000 - 2000 / 2137 ( COS ) ]
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0083 / 2001 ) by Mr Väyrynen , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Security and Defence Policy , on the Common Strategy of the European Union on Ukraine [ C5-0208 / 2000 - 2000 / 2116 ( COS ) ]
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0063 / 2001 ) by Mr Carraro , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the Commission communication to the Council and the European Parliament on " The Organisation and Management of the Internet - International and European Policy Issues 1998-2000 " [ COM ( 2000 ) 202 - C5-0263 / 2000 - 2000 / 2140 ( COS ) ]
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0057 / 2001 ) by Mr Martínez Martínez , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the proceedings of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly in 2000 [ 2000 / 2106 ( INI ) ]
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0080 / 2001 ) by Mr Purvis , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the Future of the Biotechnology Industry [ 000 / 2001 ( INI ) ]
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Madam President , I apologise for interrupting proceedings , but I think that this situation justifies my action .
We will be voting , this afternoon , on a motion for a resolution condemning a political group now active in Angola for having taken eight Portuguese citizens hostage .
It so happens that representatives of the group which is alleged to be responsible for this act are amongst us here in the European Parliament .
I consider that this situation is unacceptable and that measures should be adopted to ensure that this cannot happen .
We cannot accept the presence in the confines of the European Parliament of representatives of a group that is holding eight Portuguese citizens hostage and which today we will be condemning in a resolution to be adopted by this Parliament .
I therefore ask you , Madam President , to take measures to ensure that the individuals representing this group leave the European Parliament immediately .
I understand what you are saying Mr Miranda .
Obviously it is totally unacceptable that these people should be in the building .
If they are here , I shall do what is necessary to ensure that they leave .
Madam President , following on from what Mr Miranda said , I would like , if possible , to ask the European Parliament ' s services to inform us , at a later date and in writing , how these gentlemen were able to enter the buildings of the European Parliament .
Absolutely , Mr Seguro , we must definitely look into this .
EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE
Kauppi Report ( A5-0071 / 2001 )
Madam President , the document we have voted on concerns the amendment of the regulation on the reclassification of settlements under swaps arrangements and under forward rate agreements .
While making an appeal for the Italian version of the documents to contain the Italian translation of all the terms contained therein - despite my love of the English language , and of French , for that matter - I would like to say that I voted for Mrs Kauppi ' s report .
On this , as on many other occasions , Mrs Kauppi has demonstrated her competence and her abilities in analysing the financial and economic problems of Europe , particularly the problems of pensioners and elderly people who invest their money in banks and various funds for their future .
In fact , she has done so well that I could appoint Mrs Kauppi honorary Chairman of the Pensioners ' Party , which , given the fact that she is one of the youngest Members of the European Parliament , would bring honour to our party .
If only more Members would concern themselves with the elderly !
Madam President , the reclassification of financial swaps and forward rate agreements has been delayed for more than a year , while the Council of Ministers of Finance of the European Union made it clear when it met that it would not accept the initial proposal from the Commission because , with the method of accounting for these transactions , possible situations of excessive public deficit might not be detected .
In order to avoid this dead end , two amendments have been approved so that , in the reports that the Member States have to send to the Commission in accordance with excessive public debt procedure , payments resulting from swaps and forward rate agreements would be considered as financial burdens incorporated into interest or debt servicing .
However , from now on , the main amounts of these transactions are going to be considered as financial assets that do not count as public debt , which could enable the net debt , and therefore excessive public debt , to be disguised or hidden , which is unacceptable .
Inglewood Report ( A5-0072 / 2001 )
Madam President , I voted in favour of the directive on life assurance .
As you are aware , during the course of their working life , one reason why many people take out life assurance is in order to receive a pension when they are older .
As I was about to vote , I remembered my daughter , Cristina Fatuzzo - now 24 years old - who , when she was still a small child of eight or nine and already interested in my work and pensions , asked me : ' Why is it that when pensioners receive their pension from the State , they have to give some of it back in the form of tax ?
Would it not be simpler to give them a little less money rather than making them pay tax ?
Why do they have to pay tax ? '
In her naivety , she said something which I am now putting to you : why do we not help pensioners in matters of taxation by exempting them from paying taxes ?
Stockholm European Council
In his presentation , the President of the Commission , Mr Romano Prodi , spoke at length about the elderly in Europe and about how to resolve the problem of pensioners .
Now , I would like to inform Parliament that the Pensioners ' Party and I personally will not be satisfied until we ensure that pensioners receive a pension which is 100 % equal to their salary .
Can anybody explain to me why a pensioner who stops working should receive a lower pension than the salary he received when he was working ?
Furthermore , I have to say that I am tired of hearing people say that there is not enough money for pensions because pensioners are living too long .
We predict what the weather will be doing in 20 years and we worry about all those who are going to die of BSE , so do you really think , Madam President , that we did not know that people would be living longer ?
We are trying to deny the obvious !
The truth is that there is not enough money because it has been badly managed , not because we are living longer .
I deplore the fact that the European Parliament has not acknowledged the need to argue the case , to the Commission and the Council , for a new type of sustainable development which creates high-quality employment and which guarantees a high level of social protection as called for in the motion for a resolution tabled by my group .
The guidelines contained in the Commission document designed to prepare for the Stockholm European Council insist on the need to give priority to completing the internal market by speeding up the process of liberalisation , to strengthening the financial markets by instituting pension funds , and to increasing the competitiveness of businesses by reducing wage costs and by increasing flexibility and mobility at work .
Nevertheless , the guidelines do not add to the main legislative initiatives laid down in the Social Agenda , specifically those that provided for increasing workers ' individual and collective rights and for improving their working conditions .
Furthermore , social and employment policies still take a clear second place to respecting the Stability Pact and the arguments continue to be presented for liberalisation in sectors such as gas , electricity , postal services and transport , which undermines the objectives of high-quality employment that gives workers rights and which meets the basic needs of the most vulnerable sectors of the population .
The European Council is changing its presidency but liberalism is still in control .
The Swedish programme talks enthusiastically about competitiveness , competition and free trade .
This time around , there is hardly any mention of the social agenda and other nods in the direction of solidarity , the favourite alibis of the outgoing French Presidency , and the emphasis is purely on economic criteria .
The criteria for an antisocial Europe which will mean insecurity and poverty for the workers of both Member States and candidate countries , taking as its slogans the ' flexible organisation of work ' and the ' modernisation of social protection ' , just the kind of thing to encourage the mediaeval ambitions of the bosses .
Nor does this document make any secret of its desire to ' create a business-friendly climate ' .
With feigned piety , the EU is preparing itself for a regal handout of new markets in energy , transport , and even intellectual property .
And also the criteria of an imperial Europe , the kingpin of capitalist globalisation , which intends to ' move , within the WTO , towards specific liberalisation measures ' .
Today , just like yesterday , in Nice as in Gothenburg , we shall oppose this policy in order to create a social Europe , a Europe for workers and peoples , which will begin by levelling upwards the best of the European acquis .
I wholeheartedly welcome the Council and Commission statements on plans to be discussed at the Stockholm Summit on 23 / 24 March .
Stockholm will build on what was set out at last year 's Lisbon Summit which outlined plans for a dynamic , knowledge-based and competitive economy .
I have said it before and I will say it again , jobs , jobs , jobs . That is what it is all about .
Lisbon set far-reaching goals for the next decade - to create the world 's leading knowledge-based economy by 2010 , to create 20 million new jobs across Europe by 2010 and to promote economic and social reform which combine competitiveness and social cohesion , investing in people and raising skill levels .
In simple terms , this means increasing the skills and mobility of Europe 's workforce , encouraging enterprise , helping small firms and improving EU regulation .
It also means boosting the EU 's research and development effort and ensuring lifelong learning .
This Summit is incredibly important to our citizens and we have to set out what Stockholm means for them .
First and foremost , jobs is our top priority .
We aim to establish a business-led skills taskforce and a jobs database to overcome the skills shortage .
We must make full use of Europe 's older workers , increase gender equality across the labour market , and encourage women to become entrepreneurs .
Supporting SMEs is crucial for the EU to meet its employment targets , as small and medium-sized businesses provide two-thirds of all private sector jobs across Europe , and make up 98 % of all businesses in the UK .
The right regulatory environment , including cutting red tape , is of paramount importance to small firms and to job creation .
Furthermore , we need to accelerate economic reforms and full energy liberalisation by 2003 is a priority in this agenda .
Not only will this bring down prices across Europe , but it will encourage energy suppliers to be more efficient .
Madam President , all this is just a small sample of what we want to achieve at Stockholm .
I very much hope that we can achieve our goals , so that , our citizens will benefit from a dynamic and competitive economy .
Situation at the border between FRY / Kosovo and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
Madam President , I believe we are in a very dramatic situation ; on the one hand we have the nationalist policy of Mr Kostunica , and on the other , the very European , moderate attitude of the Macedonian Government that is doing magnificently well and deserves our full support .
But in between lies Kosovo , and we must at last make clear that a few extremists , extremists whose background is unclear , do not represent the Albanian people .
That is why elections must be held in Kosovo without delay in order to strengthen Mr Rugova ' s position and make clear where the majority of Albanians stand and where the democratic forces stand .
That is missing from our resolution .
That is why I wanted to vote against our resolution .
I fear I voted wrongly and I would ask you to please correct that , and I would like to say clearly that this resolution is unbalanced because the crucial point , namely elections in Kosovo , is missing .
The joint resolution on the incidents at the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia / Kosovo-Macedonia border is a pathetic illustration of the European Union ' s inability to tackle national questions positively .
Yet it has tried everything : force , with the NATO bombings , and negotiations , with a number of plans for the ' ethnic ' sharing of the region .
But still the disputes continue , and a lasting solution in the Balkans will not be found by criminalising this or that community , labelling it as terrorist , or by bringing in the Serbian army to enforce a bad compromise .
The prerequisites for a settlement of the conflict in the region are to condemn the policy of Milosevic and other war criminals , and also to condemn any military intervention from outside , in particular that of NATO .
It is the responsibility of these peoples themselves to choose their own destiny in complete freedom and independence .
In our opinion , the processes of self-determination , of independence and freedom to associate as desired , should take precedence over the territorial integrity of this or that entity .
It is only by respecting all the elements involved , including minorities , that the Balkans , and Kosovo in particular , will be able to emerge from this crisis .
Real conflict prevention comes from below , from people who do not feel oppressed by anyone and the great majority of whom are satisfied with the national unit to which they have been assigned .
On the other hand , you cannot keep any state lastingly together from above against the will of the majority of the inhabitants of a region , or maintain internationally recognised borders .
Right across the area populated predominantly by Albanians run national borders they never wanted , and within Serbia and Macedonia they find themselves against their wills in the position of an ethnic minority .
The Albanians believe they suffered an injustice in 1913 when a large part of their native region was not assigned to the new state of Albania that had just seceded from Turkey .
Since then this has created a breeding ground for popular uprisings which aim at finally creating a Greater Albania .
One way of avoiding this might be to quickly introduce a federal constitutional regulation into Macedonia , along the same lines as that which enables Flemings and Walloons to live peaceably side by side again since Belgium ' s federalisation .
Anyone wishing to combat nationalism must first remove its breeding ground by offering people a solution acceptable to them .
Because the resolution gives people no hope of improvement and does not remove the causes of violence , I am unable to support it .
Conflict prevention
The British Conservatives support the use by the EU of certain civil instruments to help head off or alleviate crises in third countries .
These include humanitarian and development aid , mine action , election monitoring , financial and practical assistance to strengthen the judiciary and the rule of law and the civil administration , and well-targeted economic sanctions where appropriate .
The EU institutions should focus their efforts on improving their efficiency in delivering these .
However , we are firmly opposed to any idea of developing a ' European Police Force ' , we believe that the European contribution to military rapid reaction forces should be conducted through NATO , and that ' operational capacity ' that relates to either of these aspects is a matter for individual nations and not a matter for the EU .
Property values
A month ago , the Lamfalussy Committee of Wise Men presented its final report on the regulation of the European securities markets .
Apart from the many advantages that an integrated internal market for securities would bring , the report also contains a proposal for reform of the legislative process in securities matters which I consider to be a major step in the right direction .
The present legislative process is much too long-winded and inflexible to be able to adapt to the much more rapidly changing securities markets .
We simply cannot always be lagging behind market trends while at the same time setting ourselves such ambitious targets as the one decided in Lisbon , of becoming the world ' s largest and most dynamic economic area within ten years .
I agree with the broad outlines of the Lamfalussy Committee ' s proposal , but I must insist on the ' call-back ' mechanism proposed in Parliament ' s resolution , which allows the European Parliament to call on the Commission to withdraw the proposals put before the Securities Committee concerning implementing measures in the event of a negative position being taken by itself or the Council .
The Commission would have to comply with such a request and put forward a legislative proposal as part of the codecision procedure .
But the most important thing in all the squabbling about power sharing between Council and Parliament is that we should not lose sight of the objective of an integrated European securities market .
We have set ourselves the year 2005 as a target date for an integrated internal market in financial services .
Time is ticking by and rival markets and economies are not asleep .
von Wogau Report ( A5-0082 / 2001 )
Madam President , yesterday afternoon I met Mr Karl von Wogau , who is a good friend of mine and whose abilities and intelligence I admire , and I said to him : ' Mr von Wogau , tell me why I should vote for your report ? '
' But Fatuzzo , ' he replied , ' are you asking me this because you want to know whether the report concerns pensioners in any way ? '
' Well done , Mr von Wogau .
You have hit the nail on the head ! '
Then Mr von Wogau said to me : ' Have a look at page 7 , paragraph 12 . ' I did this and , indeed , page 7 , paragraph 12 states that the European Parliament ' insists on the need to adapt the present social security systems with a view to ensuring they perform safely . '
Therefore , how could I have voted against such a fine , clear document which does so much for pensioners , who have been longing for so long for one thing alone , for just one result : to have safe pensions .
I regret to say that this safety has been lost : let us hope that it will soon be reintroduced .
This sort of report necessarily refers to ' averages ' , rounds figures up and down and hence conceals economic divergences in certain economies .
While , for example , the report considers that there are high employment rates and that unemployment has fallen at European Union level , the Commission itself highlighted the increase in unemployment , the high rate of structural and long-term unemployment , the low productivity of labour , the high level of taxation on low incomes etc. in Greece at the beginning of March .
Today the governor of the Bank of Greece presents his report to parliament , in which he highlights the huge increase in Greece ' s balance of trade deficit , which almost doubled in 2000 and now exceeds EUR 8 billion , compared with about EUR 4.5 billion in 1999 .
This huge increase in our balance of trade deficit has little to do with the increase in oil prices .
The statistics show a significant increase in the number of imports penetrating traditional manufacturing sectors of the Greek economy with all that this implies for production , inflation , employment and incomes .
I would have expected this report to take a stand on the Ecofin ' recommendations ' against Ireland .
Would there have been ' recommendations ' if it were France or Germany in Ireland ' s place or would we be talking about a ' steam engine ' of Europe ?
This sort of report cannot , I think , hide the fact that there are economies in the EU which are still a long way from ' real ' convergence .
Despite its title , the von Wogau report does not analyse the EU ' s economic and social situation . Instead , it limits itself to repeating generalisations and to focusing on the sole objective of monetary policy , price stability and keeping inflation below the 2 % limit set by the European Central Bank , without taking account of considerations concerning the real economy , particularly employment .
The report insists on the need to speed up the liberalisation of telecommunications , postal services , energy and transport , regardless of the consequences for employment , regional cohesion , working conditions and a high-quality universal public service .
It continues to predict a healthy economic situation , despite signs that the EU ' s economy is slowing down , as the rapporteur himself states , when we should be thinking about the slowdown of the US economy , the economic recession in Japan and the effects of these trends on the European economy .
The report insists on the need for greater flexibility in the labour market , at a time when there are more than 14 million people unemployed in the EU and around 65 million living in poverty . There are striking inequalities in income and employment is becoming increasingly insecure , with the majority of new jobs created being temporary or part time .
The report continues to insist on moving towards the euro without creating the mechanisms necessary to minimise the economic and social risks .
This is all being done in the name of the inviolable principle of competitiveness and the abstract concept of the social economy of the market .
I have therefore voted against the report .
The economic and monetary policy of the EU and its Member States should be directed towards continued improvements to the quality of their citizens ' lives and meeting their needs to an increasing degree .
This document is a complete hotchpotch , which resuscitates the old concept of the ' Social Market Economy ' so as not to have to adopt a deeply neo-liberal position .
Its first recommendation , and the only specific one , is to ' demand ' that ' all necessary steps be taken ' to keep inflation below the mythical threshold of 2 % .
But how can anyone have confidence in experts who think that investments represent 5,3 % of the GDP in Europe , whereas , in the year 2000 , the accurate figure is 20,5 % ?
How can we accept this insistence on demanding , yet again , as always , these ' suitable reforms ' of social security systems , and a ' more flexible ' labour market ?
The political hypocrisy of using the word ' social ' to dress up an increasingly rampant capitalism is compounded here by a very foolish error .
By making inflation the absolute barometer of good economic health , there is a risk that the current recovery will be stifled , and that the prospect of a return to full employment will be put off to a time which is decidedly not ' reasonable ' .
That is where it leads , this alignment of socio-liberals with liberalism pure and simple .
We are voting against it .
I voted in favour of the resolution on the state of the European economy proposed by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs in a report preparatory to the Commission recommendation on the broad economic policy guidelines .
The resolution contains a number of sensible statements that I would like to underscore here too , especially because they are not always written so clearly .
It is quite amazing that Members of all groups are saying that the present demographic trends make suitable reforms necessary to guarantee the benefits of social security systems in an efficient and safe way and that incentives must be provided for older workers to opt to extend their working lives .
I would also like to stress how welcome it is that this Parliament takes the view that the economic and monetary policy not only of the European Union but also of the Member States should be guided by the principles of the social market economy , the main elements of that economic system being named as freedom and democracy , competition , price stability , sustainable growth , subsidiarity , solidarity and private property .
I also find it good , given the worrying inflationary trends in many Member States , to reiterate that all necessary steps must be taken so that the inflation rate can be kept below 2 % in the second half of 2001 .
I am particularly pleased that my motion that the liberalisation of the telecommunications , post , energy and railways sector must not be hasty but balanced was accepted .
The explicit call for a more flexible labour market , a labour market that must have the necessary human capital with the best possible education and training to satisfy the demands of the international knowledge economy , which presupposes consistent investment in the fields of education and new technologies , is particularly important if we are to achieve the ambitious objective of becoming the locomotive of the world economy in this decade like the American economy was in the 1990s .
I wanted to express my satisfaction with this , and I hope that not only the Commission but also the governments of our Member States will follow this sound advice .
Fava Report ( A5-0060 / 2001 )
Madam President , it is not because I represent the Pensioners ' Party that I am knowledgeable about the issue of the election observance by our missions in the other States , but because I established the Pensioners ' Party in Italy and , for almost 20 years , I have been surrounded by papers , regulations and elections : indeed , not a year passes without me being involved in some election or other .
Well then , I would like to stress that I voted for the motion , but , in particular , I would call not just for missions to be sent to the various States holding elections to check that the right voting procedures are being followed , but for the voting rules themselves to be controlled as well .
In fact , there are States where only the wealthy are allowed to put candidates forward for elections , only those who own television networks can succeed in winning elections , or only those who are able to collect thousands of signatures from a certain notary , and so on and so forth .
This is not true democracy . Therefore , the voting rules themselves must be controlled in those States .
We think it is legitimate for Members of the European Parliament to participate in election observation .
In several places in the report , however , the impression is given that these observers ' task as missionaries for the EU overshadows their role as election observers .
The impression is given that the most important thing is to raise the profile of the EU and preferably overshadow observers from other parliamentary assemblies , such as the OSCE and the Council of Europe .
We find this competition for media attention highly inappropriate . What would be far better , in our view , are collaboration and coordination , taking into account the expertise of the aforementioned organisations , which both have great experience in this area and a wider circle of members .
It is precisely because we are in favour of promoting human rights , and in particular the observance of democratic elections , that we are abstaining from voting on this report .
Besides , the report itself recognises that the aim of these parliamentary missions is really to ensure ' the best possible visibility ' of the AEU .
And yet we are well aware of the role played by European States and industrial lobbies such as Elf , in assisting dictatorial African regimes which systematically violate basic rights and are involved in widespread corruption .
Finally , as the parliamentary missions plough their way through the world , ' illuminating ' it with the light of Europe ' s example , they would do well to stop off in France , and investigate the rumours of the hidden funding of certain parties .
In Porto Alegre , in southern Brazil , a form of participative democracy has been in operation for over ten years .
It gives the workers who live there not only a voice , but also the power to draw up , decide on and control the major budgetary priorities to be used to meet social needs .
A European stopover there would probably be instructive .
Väyrynen Report ( A5-0083 / 2001 )
Madam President , you will not believe this but , the day before yesterday , I met a group of young Ukrainians who , when they heard that I often talk about the problems of pensioners , almost begged me , with one voice : ' did you know that in the Ukraine pensioners are really , really badly off ?
Why is it that you in the European Union are not doing anything about the fate of the pensioners in Ukraine ?
The pensioners in our country lived under the communist regime for many years , when they were young workers .
They had neither freedom nor democracy , their lives consisted of work and nothing else .
Now communism has fallen and they are left with a miserable pension which is not even enough to buy a couple of pints of milk a day .
We expect a great deal from you : you must concern yourselves with our elderly people as well as our economy , or else they will wish the communists had never left . '
We Swedish Social Democrats believe that nuclear power is not an ecologically sustainable source of energy .
We cannot therefore support the financing of new nuclear plant , as provided for in paragraph 26 .
However , we support increased safety for existing nuclear plant .
The Common Strategy of the European Union on Ukraine is merely a programme for accelerating the introduction of liberalism .
Considerations about supporting the process of democratic transition do nothing to disguise the fact that the principal aim is to introduce a market economy and free trade .
We are radically opposed to this way of thinking , which asks the Ukrainian authorities to give priority to encouraging ' private enterprise ' and ' internal investments ' , to establishing in Ukraine , obviously with the help of European and international financial institutions , ' a foreign investments promotion agency ' , or to accelerating ' agricultural reform ' and ' the transition to private ownership of the land ' .
As for those recitals which ask Ukraine to strengthen its system of border controls , so as to push out even further the barbed-wire fences of Fortress Europe , they can only aggravate the tragic refugee situation .
This Common Strategy will bring with it only unemployment , social and economic catastrophe and poverty for the majority of the Ukrainian population , and will enable European investors to become even richer .
That is why I voted against this report .
For centuries , there have been attempts to join areas inhabited by Ukrainians and to divide them off from Austria-Hungary , Russia , Poland and Turkey .
In 1991 , to everyone ' s surprise the moment suddenly arrived .
The new , independent Ukrainian state , comparable in area and population with France , is now unfortunately a country in crisis .
I visited the country in 1995 , and saw factories at a standstill , stinking trains , dilapidated trams , beggars , money that had become worthless , and political polarisation between the Central Europe-oriented west and Russian-oriented east of the country .
Things have not improved since then .
A power struggle is going on uninhibited by any sense of decency , and parliamentary democracy is being given no chance to develop seriously .
In general , I see no point in giving oppressive regimes money and simply hoping that things will improve as a result .
The rulers of these countries are keen on the advantages of trade and subsidies , but absolutely refuse to allow openness or democracy .
But the abuses in Ukraine are still less serious than those in Russia or Turkey , and resistance to them is greater .
I agree that we should in this case take advantage of the opportunities for improvement .
The report underlines the importance the EU attaches to the Ukraine .
It highlights the progress made in the country ' s development and in the partnership between the EU and the Ukraine , but is not afraid to refer to matters of criticism .
I would like to discuss three aspects .
Firstly , the collapse of the Soviet Union in December 1989 led to the rapid formation of sovereign independent states , a process that happened quickly , almost overnight , but which could not change the specialisation that had developed over decades or the cooperation between the various countries ' economies .
Although at a different pace , the process of transformation , for which the EU also pressed , went hand in hand with social breakdown and unknown poverty for large sections of the Ukraine ' s population .
The EU ought to attach greater importance to dealing with this problem in its cooperation with the Ukraine .
While the EU and the Member States pursued primarily market interests under the slogan of stability , little attention was paid to the cooperation established over many years between the CIS states , one might even say it was torpedoed .
In its own interest , the EU should pay greater attention to this factor in future and , in its understanding of how the Ukraine fits into the world economy , should also bear in mind that other CIS states are engaged in a similar process .
Secondly , the Ukraine has been given a lot of advice , and in many areas this has no doubt been legitimate and helpful .
But politics is always tied up with interests .
And if the shaping of partnership shows a strong tendency to benefit one particular party , then there is a problem .
Partnership with the Ukraine ought to promote economic stability and social security and prevent or help to reduce tension .
This is where the EU ' s and the Ukraine ' s real common interests lie .
Thirdly , no-one will dispute that the OSCE played an important role in maintaining stability in Europe during the cold war .
Both sides were involved in this process and both sides gained from it .
The cold war ended ten years ago , and the OSCE should now be developed primarily into an instrument for the peaceful political resolution of conflicts .
But NATO is pursuing the opposite course , basing its new strategy on strength and displays of power outside the alliance ' s borders , which are steadily moving eastwards , and the EU is following in its wake .
I consider involving the Ukraine , which has a long frontier with Russia , in this strategy to be a very serious matter .
The Ukraine - and other CIS states as well - ought to be more closely involved than in the past in political processes for the resolution of conflicts .
The OSCE would be the appropriate framework for this .
With the Union acquiring new external borders , this factor will be of increasing importance not least with regard to the Ukraine .
Carraro Report ( A5-0063 / 2001 )
Madam President , the Carraro report contains the mysterious English word ' cybersquatter . '
At first sight , this would appear to be an endangered species or something of that sort , whereas it actually refers to pirate web surfers .
When you surf , you go into the sea , where there are always pirates .
And these are bona fide pirates : if Mr Fatuzzo were to take it into his head to set up a website www.fatuzzo , somebody might register his name and set up the site before he did , and then he would have to pay to be able to use his own name .
Why , though , is it that nobody has thought of distinguishing between addresses by using numbers , like telephone numbers , for that would avoid Internet piracy ?
The report that we are discussing today concerns the place the Member States of the European Union should occupy in the ICANN system . It is important to know that ICANN ( Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers ) was created in October 1998 in order to address American dominance in internet control , including DNS ( Domain Name Systems ) and the allocation of Internet Protocol ( IP ) address numbers .

ICANN consists of a 19-member Board of Directors , whose directors and external members are selected on the basis of criteria that will ensure a geographical balance .
ICANN consists of four advisory committees , including the GAC ( Governmental Advisory Committee ) , which includes representatives of the European Commission and the Member States .
Taking these factors into consideration , it would seem obvious that the European Union must invest in order to play a crucial role in the international management of the internet , and in order to strengthen the neutrality of ICANN by means of a strong presence from the European Union , in collaboration with the United States and other governments , through the Governmental Advisory Committee .
It is also important that the Board of Directors of ICANN should be geographically representative .
Its representatives should be elected , and Africa should now be represented , so as to ensure that all continents are represented .
I must emphasise that the management structure and legal field in which ICANN develops must be based on transparency , neutrality and independence .
This means that the budgetary and financing system of this organisation must be based on criteria of clarity .
It is only in these conditions that the viability of ICANN can be guaranteed .
The Union must make sure that ICANN observes the protocols of WIPO ( the World Intellectual Property Organisation ) and cooperates with WIPO in its role as a negotiator and protector of rights .
I welcome the fact that the rapporteur reminds us about the importance of closing the digital divide , and of providing the widest possible access to the Internet .
In effect whenever we talk about developing new telecommunications networks , we cannot come to a deadlock on this essential objective .
Martinez-Martinez Report ( A5-0057 / 2001 )
Madam President , I greatly welcome the Cotonou Agreement , which establishes the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly .
As representative of the Pensioners ' Party , I hope that this example will be followed by other interparliamentary assemblies , but I call , in particular , for a Working Party to be set up on the situation , standard of living and problems of the pensioners and elderly people in the ACP States .
It is of great concern to us European pensioners that the pensioners of the States who have confidence in the European Union should also live comfortably and that they should come together in joint parliamentary assemblies to resolve common problems .
Purvis Report ( A5-0080 / 2001 )
Madam President , I voted against the report on biotechnology because it pays no attention to the fundamental interests and concerns of agriculture .
That does not mean that I am against innovative access to biotechnology in general , but agriculture requires special treatment and can in no way be compared to the situation in industry .
The questions of labelling , traceability and liability are of crucial importance for farmers .
Farmers have to buy products of impeccable quality such as seed for their production .
Farmers cannot assume any civil liability for any harm caused by genetically modified products .
There must be clear rules about this .
Since this House has not come out in favour of accepting the amendments tabled in the matter by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , I could not vote in favour of the report .
The principle of case-by-case assessment must apply for agriculture .
An objective and comprehensive examination must weigh up the advantages and disadvantages of introducing genetically modified plants .
Madam President , I voted for the report on biotechnology .
The Pensioners ' Party and the pensioners expect a great deal from biotechnology .
They know that research is being carried out on extending the life span of human beings .
I know that this is a problem for the governments who say that there is not enough money , but we have the pleasure of living long , comfortable lives .
Mr Purvis is a living example of this : just by drawing up his report on biotechnology he has become younger , if that is possible , for he is always youthful .
We all admire him for his vivacity and his enormous enthusiasm for his parliamentary work .
He is the epitome of eternal youth and he has become even younger in the drawing up of this report , so it is true that , thanks to biotechnology , we will be able to live longer in the future !
The resolution which the European Parliament has adopted following the Purvis report on the future of the biotechnology sector seems to us to be too soothing , and often even full of pitfalls .
This is why the Movement for France delegation has not voted .
The resolution , particularly in paragraph 32 , attempts to amalgamate the issue of genetic engineering in the medical sector with the issue of biotechnology in the agricultural sector , perhaps in order to make the latter more acceptable .
In reality , although both cases involve manipulating genes , the problems that arise are different .
In medicine , it is a question of helping certain individuals whose lives would be seriously compromised if they were not given such treatment .
In agriculture , on the other hand , the target is broad , or even undefined and infinite , since it involves setting in motion production methods which may affect the environment in general or the health of millions of consumers .


On the other hand , there is no doubt that genetic engineering in the medical field gives rise to ethical problems which are more serious than those elsewhere , and we note that the Purvis resolution , in paragraph 61 , takes cover behind pious generalities , while avoiding specifically tackling the problem that is currently the most urgent : that of cloning for therapeutic purposes .
When voting took place , Parliament did not wish to ask directly for the abolition of the de facto moratorium on the authorisation of genetically modified organisms .
Nevertheless , it adopted a paragraph 34 , which ' regrets government actions to block or delay authorisation of GM products for reasons not based on objective scientific opinion ' , which may amount to the same thing , depending on what one understands by the phrase ' objective scientific opinion ' .
We would feel more reassured if the resolution had clearly said which government , in its opinion , was holding up these authorisations in such a blameworthy fashion .
Another defect in this resolution is the fact that in paragraph 36 it congratulates itself on the subject of the agreement drawn up a month ago between Parliament and the Council , on the procedure for authorising GMOs .
Yet we ourselves criticised that agreement , on the grounds that it establishes authorisation procedures without establishing traceability , liability or compulsory insurance on the part of distributors .
Admittedly , the resolution also calls for testing and labelling guarantees , but Amendment No 6 , which lays down liability and insurance obligations , was rejected .
Finally , as if this were not enough , the resolution calls for the European Food Safety Authority to be responsible for authorising GMOs , which we totally disagree with , because we would like each State to retain the right of international safeguard in this important field .
In the Purvis report , the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy asks the European Parliament to support the major private companies in the biotechnology sector and to promote their individual interests .
It demands that Member States encourage private industry to penetrate further into universities and public institutions .
It calls upon researchers to participate in setting up private businesses .
It wants more mobility between universities and the private sector . It welcomes the progress achieved in the financial markets and is in favour of stock options .
It invites businesses to play an active role in ' informing ' the public about GMOs - as if we were not already subjected to massive ideological publicity campaigns from these industrial groups !
The resolution tabled by the Committee on Industry leads the way in favour of GMO production .
It claims that there is no objective scientific opinion on which to base their non-authorisation .
It calls for the immediate lifting of the ' effective moratorium ' that is holding back the marketing of these products .
It wants field trials to be authorised , even though this would mean the inevitable uncontrolled spread of GMOs .
A few considerations on the need to draw up ' ethical guidelines ' do nothing to hide the essential nature of this resolution , i.e. to oppose all the public movements that are currently campaigning on this issue .
Advocates of the further development and use of biotechnology expect all kinds of benefits .
However , they cannot prove that there are no major drawbacks attached .
Nor can opponents of a rapid deployment of biotechnology prove that the drawbacks are such that no deployment should ever take place .
The truth will only emerge in the long term , perhaps in 30 or 50 years ' time .
In the meantime , patience and research are called for .
It is precisely that kind of patience that is lacking in Mr Purvis ' s proposal .
On the contrary , following on from what was discussed here last month in relation to the Bowe report , he wants to make it difficult for Member States to maintain the moratorium independently .
His aim is to give scope for rapid commercial use wherever possible .
It is remarkable that the parties grouped in the PPE , which call themselves Christian , are here throwing the door wide open to something , while they are still completely unsure as to whether they will have to explain it in retrospect as an improvement on God ' s creation or as a further contribution to its progressive destruction .
Instead of focusing all criticism on therapeutic cloning and voluntary euthanasia , it would have been more natural for these parties to be more critical on this of all points .
I reject the Purvis report even more emphatically than I previously did the Bowe report .
We Swedish Christian Democrats wish to emphasise that we voted against the second and third parts in the split vote on paragraph 36 which asserted - mistakenly - that ' a clear framework now exists for the release of genetically modified organisms in Europe which will ensure maximum consumer protection and environmental protection ' and - also mistakenly - that ' it would therefore not be justified to continue the de facto moratorium on the release of GMOs ' .
We have also actively supported , inter alia , Amendment 8 which warns against a development leading to a situation in which individual farmers or entire nations become dependent on certain large corporations dependent in turn upon gene patents .
The Swedish Christian Democrats wish to stress that personal genetic information falls under the heading of fundamental rights of privacy and that it must therefore be protected so as to prevent third parties such as private insurance companies , employers , public authorities , commercial interests and others from gaining access to it or being able to make use of it .
We have therefore supported amendments along these lines , especially Amendment 27 .
As a Europe of Values we are committed to ensuring ethics , accountability and transparency as integral parts of all our dealings .
Our citizens have challenged us in the field of food production to safe food , with the guarantee of adequate precautions to ensure this goal and proper liability and penalties in place for any violation resulting in damage to the person on the environment .
We are presently living with the tragic devastating results of BSE and FMD and there is a consensus in the EU that we must re examine the very basic of our agriculture industry : There is presently a united call for re examination of the CAD and organic food production in being promoted and supported within our institutions .
In light of these considerations , I believe the EU must exercise extreme caution in embracing the biotechnology industry without the outmost care and precautions being in place .
The US , a front runner in the field of biotech Industry is itself dealing with the difficulties of rapidly progressing GM food production sector where private sector involvement has lead to a market place dominated by global companies and the devastation of small producers who cannot compete with ' corporate ' farming .
The SME 's of Agriculture do not appear to have been protected or supported in the world of GM food production .
I must vote against the Purvis report on a number of points .
I believe that the promise of solving illnesses , increasing yield and cleaning up the environment etc remain to be proven .
Indeed in the US , it is my understanding that many GM crops have been shown not to increase yield but even to possibly decrease yield .
Widespread genetic engineering of crops and food will surely lead to further intensification of agriculture and what of the health risks from GM products ; the EU Commission has banned the use of BST ( genetically engineered Bovine Growth Hormone used to increase milk production in the US ) for health reasons .
BST is not allowed in any other country apart from the US .
There is a documented large increase in allergies to Soya which is now 50 % GM .
Regarding the suggested lifting of the Moratorium on GM crops , gene transfer is now a proven fact .
In my own country of Ireland what hope is there of protected non-GM crops from contamination of this kind ?
How will we be able to pursue organic food production in crops such as wheat and the cereals ?
How can we determine if future proposals for labelling and monitoring are adequate when we do not , as yet , know exactly what they are to be ?
Regarding the Cartagena Protocol , it must be aid that our own European Commission tried to resist clauses to introduce Cartagena into the Directive 90 / 220 .
This report unfortunately dismisses organic food , as being at present incapable of providing enough food for Europe as it 's not cost effective .
Organic producers assure me that they refute this statement .
There are many other points including an almost unrestricted Patenting system that force me to vote against this report .
Finally , as far as the ethical problems surrounding genetic engineering , the US model we are using as a benchmark has without doubt , led to the breakdown of the protection of the dignity of the human being .
We are now faced with some members of our human family being used as objects for research , and the cloning of children at the embryonic stage is imminent within our own European Community .
I should like to start by paying my sincere respects to our rapporteur , Mr Purvis , who has submitted a very comprehensive report containing a very detailed analysis of biotechnologies in their various applications , from medicine to agriculture , and their various aspects , from the industrial to the ethical .
However , having said that , I must admit that I am suspicious of a certain utilitarian philosophy which tends to affirm that the ends justify the means and that , ultimately , we should just let the operators get on with it and the market will sort it all out .
I am also suspicious of an ideology of progress , which was what also inspired the Nazis and Stalinists , and feel that the ethical concerns surrounding this issue are not of secondary importance but should take centre stage because biotechnologies touch on the very heart of life in all its mystery and sanctity .
Biotechnologies are a vast sector , which ranges from the innocent use of natural fermenting agents , used since the dawn of mankind to make bread and beer , to the genetic engineering of human beings , which touches on the very essence of mankind in all its intimacy and heredity , leaving behind individuality in a bid to achieve immortality .
Mr Purvis ' s report is immensely enthusiastic on the subject of biotechnologies , from which he expects wondrous benefits for mankind ; to be fair , he does refer to the risks inherent in biotechnologies and to the ethical problems which they raise , but I should like to draw your attention to the fact that , so far , these benefits have yet to be proven .
For now , the benefits seem to be assets for the companies alone and the risks appear to be liabilities for our citizens and the environment .
I shall close by quoting from two small articles in Mr Purvis ' s report which deserve to be highlighted :
Article 60 : [ the European Parliament ] wishes the technology to be exploited to the benefit of society in accordance with the fundamental values and ethical principles of European citizens , their culture and civilisation , and to this end sees the need to develop ethical guidelines ;
Article 61 : stresses that the public ' s wish for ethically-motivated limits on genetic engineering and biotechnology is justified ...
It is important that the European Parliament states its position on the future of the biotechnology industry , not only because this will be a key industry in the future but , particularly , because of the ethical and socio-economic issues that it raises , such as those of genetics and medicines , for example , in the case of GMOs .
Unfortunately , Parliament ' s report , drafted by Mr Purvis , does not address these issues and , dangerously , acts as a biased mouthpiece for all the interests of the huge multinationals in the sector .
It follows an approach that supports , in the name of good causes , the liberalisation and increasingly widespread use of products , not all the consequences of which for the environment and human health are known , quite apart from the fact that these actions also raise far-reaching ethical issues , such as genetic modifications and the patenting of life and the environment , which is the heritage of everyone .
The approach of squeezing profit from everything , without careful assessment , leads the industry , in order to compensate for high research costs , to try to put onto the market products whose safety cannot be guaranteed and which , furthermore , create an economic dependency on the part of their users , which is what is happening in agriculture with GMOs .
Furthermore , in terms of medicines and patenting them , developing countries and the poorest parts of the population are being excluded , which is what is happening , unacceptably , as a result of the behaviour of multinationals in Brazil and South Africa .
I therefore reject this report .
This is an area in which research should be in the public domain , not controlled by private interests , since the fair distribution of the benefits and the necessary risk assessment must be guaranteed .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.06 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

TOPICAL AND URGENT DEBATE
The next item is the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
Access to medicaments for AIDS patients in the third world
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolution :
B5-0182 / 2001 by Mrs Sauquillo Pérez del Arco , Mrs Kinnock , Mrs Carlotti and Mr Van den Berg , on behalf of the PSE Group , on access to drugs to treat HIV / AIDS in developing countries ;
B5-0195 / 2001 by Mrs Dybkjær , Mrs Thors and Mr Maaten , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on access to drugs for HIV / AIDS victims in the Third World ;
B5-0202 / 2001 by Mr Rod , Mr Lannoye , Mrs Lucas and Mrs Maes , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on access to drugs for AIDS victims in South Africa ;
B5-0212 / 2001 by Mr Wurtz , Mr Miranda , Mrs Eriksson , Mr Vinci , Mr Manisco , Mr Alyssandrakis and Mrs Frahm , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on access to drugs for AIDS victims in the Third World ;
B5-0221 / 2001 by Mrs Maij-Weggen , Mr Johan Van Hecke and Mr Corrie , on behalf of the PPE ­ DE Group , on the proceedings instigated by 30 pharmaceutical companies against the South African Government concerning the importing of cheap drugs to treat AIDS .
Mr President , fair access to drugs to combat HIV and other diseases is , I believe , a very important issue .
If we consider that in South Africa 50 % of new AIDS cases are young persons under the age of 25 , that means that a 15 year-old in South Africa today has a 50 % risk of infection , and if we consider the effects of that situation - that the most active section of the population is affected - on those young people and also on the country ' s development , then I think it is long overdue that we say something on the subject and send a signal in the right direction .
We wish to encourage and create fair access to medicines and vaccines .
We therefore greatly welcome Commissioner Lamy ' s position and that he will give his backing to the developing countries and their right to a protection clause in the WTO and TRIPS Agreements .
We must press for these life-saving drugs to be made available as cheaply as possible .
For Europe , this means supporting the transfer of technology and local production capacity .
If we are serious about global development , these are important demands and important steps that must be taken by Europe and all concerned .
Mr President , the results of drug therapy against AIDS partly depend on the question whether those drugs are administered in the correct way , at the correct time , in the correct dosage and under expert supervision .
In this , preconditions , such as a sound local infrastructure and stability play a crucial role in the approach to health care .
Drugs have an optimum effect if continuity in dispensing and expert supervision in treatment are guaranteed .
Otherwise there is a real risk of incorrect or inadequate treatment .
The combating of AIDS requires the structural improvement of local health care conditions and support from the World Health Organisation , and the work of the European Union directed to that end is therefore of the greatest importance .
Only these factors will guarantee long-term development .
In the short term many people are already dying , and for that reason a priority choice for affordable drugs now is advisable , as is rightly argued in the resolution .
This resolution refers to a greatly impoverished Africa .
The Caribbean region and South East Asia , where the problems are also considerable , must not be forgotten in this discussion .
Mr President , I feel that we can be satisfied - at least my group is satisfied - that not only is this debate being held at an important juncture when a process is under way to mobilise the international press , a process which has currently been suspended in South Africa , but it also has a symbolic value : do poor communities have priority access to medication which can relieve their suffering and delay their death or not ?
This is a fundamental problem and I am doubly delighted that the main groups in Parliament have agreed on a joint text which sends out a very strong message .
The first message is directed at the pharmaceutical industries , calling on them to withdraw their case against South Africa , which is important , and the second message is that we want a clear interpretation within the framework of the TRIPS agreement on intellectual property , or even for the agreement to be revised .
We must certainly welcome the fact that the European Commission , represented by Mr Lamy , has undertaken to pursue this course and I therefore subscribe to what the previous speakers have said .
One last figure to conclude : as far as AIDS is concerned , patented drugs cost about one hundred times more than generic drugs , which have the same effect but which are manufactured in countries where patents are not yet the norm .
This applies to India in particular .
This should make us seriously aware of the advantages of having a system to protect intellectual property in an area such as this , where it is vital for people to have access to medication .
I think that this process will re-launch the debate , as will the interesting position to be taken by the European Parliament .
Mr President , the French constitution which emerged from the 1789 revolution contains a duty to revolt which appears to sum up our debate perfectly .
A duty to revolt for the 34 million people with AIDS , most of whom - over 4 million sufferers - live in South Africa .
What could be more normal , in the face of a catastrophe which everyone agrees is a humanitarian , health , demographic , economic and social catastrophe , than to want to do everything to save one ' s own people .
Must we reiterate that , thanks to various treatments , we have considerably prolonged and improved the life of patients in the west , while in Africa and Brazil AIDS sufferers are dying because only 5 % of them can obtain treatment due to the excessively high cost of drugs .
That is why South Africa passed a law in 1997 so that its sufferers could benefit from suitable care .
I think it is irresponsible for the pharmaceutical industry to block this legislation .
During this period , 400 000 South Africans have contracted AIDS .
In using the WTO to attack Brazil , which - by using its own treatment - has almost halved its AIDS epidemic , the United States have demonstrated an equally unfortunate cynicism .
Not only should these proceedings be abandoned ; more importantly , we should urgently help revise international trading rules so that they benefit human health .
Mothers of families with no access to AZT are bringing babies into the world who already have AIDS and are condemned from the day they are born .
Is that the humanitarianism and solidarity which inspires our resolutions ?
I think , Mr President , that we need to retaliate against the indifference of the 34 pharmaceutical companies and affirm the principle of exemption for reasons of health .
If this principle is not applied , we shall call on the Commission to suspend the investment aid granted to all the European companies until such time as they withdraw their complaint against South Africa .
And then we should push for a World Solidarity Fund to be set up and cofinanced by the pharmaceutical industry .
Because , faced with their indifference and given the huge profits which they make , we should force them to invest in research and invent a vaccination as a matter of absolute priority .
Mr President , the case brought by 39 pharmaceutical companies against the South African government on the sale of cheap drugs against AIDS is a tragedy as well as a dilemma .
A tragedy because the scale of the problem in South Africa , where millions of people suffer from AIDS , is almost impossible to grasp .
South Africa is one of many countries contending with this problem .
Ninety-five per cent of those infected with HIV live in developing countries .
Africa has over 25 million AIDS patients , and South Africa 4 million .
By 2010 , life expectancy in Africa will fall by 20 years .
In South Africa , half of all young people already run the risk of dying from this disease .
It is a tragedy that all these countries have to cope with .
Then there is the dilemma of the pharmaceutical industry , which has meanwhile developed drugs that have reduced the number of deaths from AIDS in Europe and the US by 75 % .
But those drugs are so expensive - in Dutch terms , NLG 30 000 a year per patient - that they are out of reach and unaffordable for African AIDS patients .
Hence it is understandable that these African countries should look for solutions , for instance imitation drugs and parallel imports .
After all , the lives of millions of people are at stake .
The price varies from NLG 30 000 to NLG 450 .
In our view a court case is not the right way of solving problems .
Solutions must be sought through discussion , as has happened meanwhile in Senegal , the Ivory Coast and Uganda , where five pharmaceutical companies are working with three governments on considerably cheaper drugs .
For that matter , the pharmaceutical industry often exaggerates its costs : after all huge profits are also made in this sector , especially on cosmetics and on products like tranquillisers and vitamins .
AIDS drugs constitute only a fraction of sales .
We therefore advocate the dropping of the court cases in South Africa and the finding of an acceptable solution , and therefore ask the Commission to retract its previous letter to the South African government in which the case brought by the pharmaceutical industry is supported , and to do its utmost to ensure the application of the TRIPS scheme in the WTO .
Europe must opt for solidarity with the AIDS patients and not for the rights of the strongest and wealthiest .
Mr President , combating AIDS is not just a matter of the price of the drugs .
You need funding for infrastructure , to test the patient , to diagnose and to monitor his progress .
Then you have the access to medication .
Of course price is important .
The pharmaceutical companies have brought their prices down .
But what is important , even if it is USD 10 for medication , do we have the will to fund the procurement ?
We are getting too emotional about this .
Let us be sure that we have a strategy for funding the purchase .
Governments in these poor countries do not have the funds , even if it is only USD 10 for treating a patient .
The good news is that the prices have come down and they can come down even further if we get the pharmaceutical companies on our side .
The bad news is that we need the funding to be organised .
I hope , as rapporteur , to devise a package that is deliverable and will benefit the poorest who are suffering , without being emotive , without recommending a solution that requires billions in funds , which I know will not be forthcoming .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , AIDS is one of the gravest tragedies in the world .
The fight against AIDS in Africa must therefore be given the highest priority .
Essential drugs for AIDS and other serious diseases , such as malaria and tuberculosis , must be made available in developing countries free or at very low , and hence affordable , prices .
For that reason I wholeheartedly support the resolution .
Consequently , we must lend our urgent and unambiguous support to the South African government in its battle for cheap drugs .
But we cannot combat AIDS with cheap medicines alone , I agree completely with the previous speaker on that point .
Medical infrastructure is required , so that drugs can be dispensed in controlled conditions .
Many more laboratories with competent staff must be set up .
In addition , simple things like refrigerators are needed .
But that is still not enough .
The social infrastructure must also be called upon : women ' s organisations , trade unions , schools ; we must involve these much more in the battle against life-threatening diseases .
So a great deal of money is needed , and also a new initiative .
I propose the setting up of a European partnership , financed with European and national funds made up of public and private contributions , a combination of research money and funds for development aid .
The research money must be used for scientific research , the development aid money on the construction of social and medical infrastructure .
This concerted effort will make it possible to take decisive steps forward .
This topic will remain on our agenda for some months to come . I look forward to broadly based cooperation in this Parliament .
Mr President , our Group fully supports the proposal .
I would first like to speak as a doctor and as a lecturer in the Faculty of Medicine , and point out that we embraced medicine and science not in order to make money but in order to save human lives through health .
Secondly , I speak as a European , to say that Europe has a huge historical debt to Africa , as it is behind an age-old process that has impoverished the African continent .
We must therefore help to solve the very serious problems that we triggered .
Thirdly , I am a leftwing man , and from this point of view I would like to say that when the welfare and needs of the people come into conflict with the monopolistic interests of a small proportion of companies , the people should be defended and the interests of both need to be reconciled .
I would also like to point out that the structural adjustment funds from the International Monetary Fund have helped to make the situation worse .
Mr President , I should like to make the following comments on access to HIV / AIDS medicines in developing countries , or what we prefer to call the affordability of the key pharmaceuticals debate .
I am basically referring to what my colleagues , Commissioners Nielson and Lamy , have already said at previous sessions .
For more than a year now the Commission has been strongly committed to addressing the urgent need for action on communicable diseases which have a dramatic effect on the lives of so many , in particular those most vulnerable living in the poorest countries or regions of the world .
The Commission agreed one communication on HIV / AIDS , malaria and tuberculosis in the context of accelerated reaction in September last year and recently adopted the subsequent programme for action .
The new Community policy framework is being discussed in many international fora and also at national and regional level with the developing countries , civil society , industry , the European Parliament , Member States , UN agencies , the US government , G8 and many others .
This process of consultation will continue for some time until the Commission formulates specific work plans with all the partners involved .
In these discussions the issue of affordability of key pharmaceuticals often takes the most prominent position .
This may be at the cost of the urgent attention still needed for prevention , for strengthening the health systems in developing countries and for long-term solutions to the problems , which means the development of an AIDS or malaria vaccine .
In our new policy framework we tried to combine the different levels of intervention needs in terms of both prevention and care , and even cure in the cases of malaria and tuberculosis , and in terms of country , regional , international or global level .
Addressing the issue of affordability of medicines should never exclude the focus on prevention efforts , nor negatively affect the debate on research and development .
All these areas are complementary and we will continue to address them in a complementary , comprehensive manner , not allowing one to be played off against the other .
We strongly support the international commitment to tier pricing as the most efficient way in the short term to increase affordability of medicines .
The Community will support , through its technical and development assistance programmes , the reinforcement of pharmaceutical policies and global production capacities in developing countries as a medium-term means of increasing affordability .
We would insist on keeping the debate on a broader level , including targeted action in favour of those millions who suffer and die from malaria and tuberculosis , and who , like those infected by HIV or living with AIDS , simply cannot afford to pay for medicines .
As you know , treatment for malaria and tuberculosis - however problematic - exists .
It costs between USD 10 to 25 to treat a malaria patient and USD 11 to treat a patient suffering from tuberculosis .
HIV / AIDS involves medicines which are priced way above the potential of the poorest and most vulnerable .
Finally , I would urge Parliament not to lose sight of the need for the development of an AIDS and malaria vaccine .
The crisis will continue to prevail and become even worse if prevention efforts are not sustained .
It will take some time before vaccines are developed and available .
However , we are on the right track and we urgently need to make progress .
Afghanistan
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B5-0184 / 2001 by Mr van den Berg and others , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the situation in Afghanistan and the destruction of the cultural heritage ;
B5-0194 / 2001 by Mr Dupuis and others , on behalf of the TDI Group , on the situation in Afghanistan and the destruction of the cultural heritage ;
B5-0196 / 2001 by Mrs Malmström and Mr Di Pietro , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the destruction of antique statues in Afghanistan ;
B5-0203 / 2001 by Mr Vander Taelen and others , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on the situation in Afghanistan , including the destruction of the world cultural and artistic heritage ;
B5-0213 / 2001 by Mrs Fraisse and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the situation in Afghanistan , including the destruction of the cultural heritage ;
B5-0219 / 2001 by Mrs Muscardini and others , on behalf of the UEN Group , on the situation in Afghanistan and the destruction of the cultural heritage ;
B5-0222 / 2001 by Mrs Pack and others , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , on the situation in Afghanistan .
Mr President , Commissioner , the sad point that I have to make at the outset is that the statues have now been destroyed and so we have been overtaken by events .
Nevertheless , as a funereal action and as a warning to the world , our resolution holds considerable resonance .
Certainly the suppression of women 's rights in Afghanistan continues apace .
I come from a different cultural and religious tradition to those who created the Bamiyan Buddha statues in the 2nd century , but I feel that all of us share a common ownership of our heritage and the right to free movement , education and employment regardless of gender .
Coming particularly to the statues , this destruction was much more than just a mindless act of violence by a regime that apparently intends to catapult us back into the Middle Ages .
All of us , whatever our creed , nationality , or political viewpoint , lost an irreplaceable piece of the common heritage that binds us together on this earth .
A founding principle of the European Union is that religious and cultural tolerance is integral to a democratic and civilised society .
This debate therefore not only registers our disgust with the Taliban , it is also a reminder that there are forces we need to guard against .
The Taliban may see the destruction of the Buddhas simply as the shattering of stones . But we in Europe know better .
We know that the burning of books meant much more than the burning of books .
It signified something else entirely .
In commending my resolution to the House , I hope therefore that we in the Union will continue to work with all the governments and other agencies which sought to prevent this action and that together we can prevent any further catastrophes of this kind .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I feel that , as Mrs Garaud said , we need to clarify straight away that this is not predominantly a resolution on the statues , it is a resolution on the situation in Afghanistan .
As you know , the whole population is being held to ransom by fanatical clerics and the episode with the statues is just the umpteenth example of the fanatical nature of this regime , a regime which lives and thrives within these madrasas , these so-called schools which , at the end of the day , only teach one thing : intolerance .
The second thing which I think is important is that we have to dispel the widespread view that nothing much can be done about Afghanistan . I think the contrary is true .
I think there are some very specific things which can be done .
I can name three .
The first is probably the most important : Commissioner , the European Union , i.e. the Commission , should take an extremely firm stance vis-à-vis Pakistan because , without Pakistan , there would be no Taliban .
That is an absolute basic .
The Union must therefore make clear that , if Pakistan persists , as it is doing , in helping and supporting the Taliban , there will be no prospect of developing relations between the European Union and Pakistan .
A second possible line of action , for which we can , I think , thank a forerunner in our Parliament , General Morillon , consists of giving firm support to General Massoud over and above any hypocrisy .
We cannot keep hiding behind alibis .
It is , I think , the only organised resistance against the regime in place and we need to give it teeth .
The third line of action , which will perhaps seem a little more indirect , but which is just as basic , concerns aid given by the United Nations - fairly indirectly but not as indirectly as all that ­ via the UNDCP , the United Nations Drug Control Programme headed by Mr Arlacchi .
The UN has given the Taliban substantial aid through programmes which profess to eradicate crops but which , in fact , do no more than shift them a few hundred metres or a few kilometres , to the point that the Taliban have had access both to UN subsidies and to the profit generated by cultivating banned substances .
So we need to get the UNDCP with its back against the wall .
I think that we also need to campaign to prevent Pino Arlacchi from being re-elected in June .
This man needs to go home and study sociology and relieve us of his presence in an organisation of such importance .
The UN and the European Union , which is funding this programme , and the Member States , which fund the UNDCP , should therefore insist that all aid programmes to Afghanistan to eradicate drug crops be abolished .
We should also persuade the Russians who have infiltrated Mr Arlacchi ' s entourage and who have a certain number of dubious connections to say the least - and I shall not say more - to go home and let us clean up the management of this specialised United Nations programme and , in doing so , stop helping the regime in place .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , what good are our resolutions , conventions , treaties and rights for the protection of our cultural heritage , the slogan ' women ' s rights are human rights ' , when a group of people blindly destroys cultural heritage in the name of an extremist religion , when women are forced day in day out to deny themselves , to hide behind heavy robes with a mesh covering in front of their eyes ?
Women who almost float along , who are kept apart by curtains on public transport , who are obliged to give up their jobs ... time and time again they are kept apart , and time and time again they are humiliated , abused and sold short .
This is why people are actually forced to move home , to emigrate in the face of the inhuman conditions prevailing in Afghanistan .
What must be done to get the Taliban to reconsider ?
In practical terms it is too late for many statues .
That is a very tragic fact and in my view it is to be greatly welcomed that the international community protested against this iconoclastic fury of 2001 .
This protest came not only from the West or from the Dalai Lama , but also from their own fellow-Muslims , who realised that this was a matter of cultural heritage and not purely religious symbols .
The protest was vociferous .
It is to be welcomed that at the same time the discriminatory and inhuman treatment of women in Afghanistan is receiving the attention it has long deserved : there should be worldwide protest against this too .
This regime discriminates not only against its own women : the local correspondent of the BBC , herself a woman , has just been deported .
Her criticism of the iconoclasm was too stinging and so the press bureau , which had existed since 1950 , had to close .
I am not very optimistic , not to say pessimistic about the Taliban heeding these resolutions .
Hopefully no one will take it into his head to support them financially or by supplying weapons .
It just shows you what can happen when dogma becomes law .
It is to be welcomed that we , as the European Parliament , are responding .
The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance fully supports this resolution .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , are these two issues , the destruction of a heritage and the systematic oppression of women , really unrelated ?
I would like to highlight these two points in our joint resolution .
' Heritage ' is not the right word to use because of its significance .
I would prefer to take up the distinction made two days ago in a daily newspaper by a French philosopher , Jean Luc Nancy , between the symbol and the idol .
The symbol represents the human being , whose capacity for truth will never be extinguished .
The nature of the symbol in this case are statues which also serve as idols .
The idol is the total yet limited presence of the symbol itself .
It is perhaps the inverse representation of the symbol .
But , in both cases , the symbol and the idol merge into the image and the ability of the human being to transcend itself .
In terms of both nature and symbol , women in Afghanistan are totally deprived .
Let me explain what I mean by deprivation .
Rather than describe it , I will talk about it in the appropriate terms .
The word ' discrimination ' in our joint resolution , as in the Council joint declaration of January and the texts of the UN and of the international institutions , disturbs me because discrimination operates in a space where a common minimum is allowed for there to be discrimination .
Discrimination is a natural corollary of exclusion .
Here we have women who are denied access to employment and education and who are excluded from public life .
This is called rejection .
These are the words we must use .
I find it hard to believe that hanging and public beatings are the result of discrimination .
I should like to point out that I believe we have become mired in a form of language , which I do not find very suitable and , as Members of the European Parliament , we must be very careful about this .
This is because behind all this , all these words , behind this international language , which uses the same words to describe democracy in the West and for our Western democracies as it does to describe what is happening in Afghanistan , lies our capacity for doing anything at all .
Who is protecting the Taliban ?
Who is supporting them ?
Pakistan .
Who is protecting them ?
Do I have to answer ?
Can you answer with me ?
Why did we go to fight against Saddam Hussein ?
Why have we imposed sanctions against Iraq ?
Why do we not take sanctions against Afghanistan ?
Mr President , what goes on in the minds of terrorists ?
On the orders of Taliban chief Mohammad Omar , the two world-famous Bamiyan Buddha statues have been completely destroyed regardless of all international protests .
These millennia-old treasures that are part of our common cultural heritage are irreplaceable .
Not even the promise of further aid for this totally impoverished country could deter the self-styled warriors of God from their scandalous acts .
They control Afghanistan , drive out dissenters , exploit the country , human rights are trampled under foot , women are denied the opportunity to go to school , as my fellow Members have pointed out , and they are not allowed to appear in public .
It is like living in the Middle Ages .
The Koran says that freedom of religion and conscience together with justice are central elements of Islamic social order .
These commandments have been misinterpreted by the mullahs , an abuse that is unpardonable .
The Taliban ' s closest ally , Pakistan , intervened without success .
Commissioner , the European Union must act here .
We in the Group of the European People ' s Party and European Democrats want the international community to outlaw such fanaticism and vandalism !
Mr President , I would like to explain our position on this issue by making four simple points .
Firstly , it is unacceptable for us to support what I would call a lawless area , where there is no recognition of the basic aspects of human welfare .
I do not think that Europe will ever be able to allow this situation and I believe that each and every one of us , whatever their attachment , can sympathise with it , given the two examples that Mrs Fraisse already mentioned .
Secondly , it is clear that the abolition of many symbols , representing what men and women might believe in , is crucially significant , but what is even more serious is the fact that denying any dignity for women ' s rights must stir us into action . This is obviously a serious point and it certainly needs to be made .
My third point relates to Islam .
I believe we must have the courage to say that some people , who have a good understanding of Islam , have denounced the current situation in Afghanistan . By invoking Western values we must not deny this truth , which is that a certain number of men and women who are devoted to Islam oppose the events which are unfolding today in Afghanistan .
Therefore , the message that ideas and convictions can peacefully coexist , which must be adopted by Europe , must be disseminated far and wide .
So , there must be no demonisation , simply the desire to take action .
Fourthly and finally , point 12 of our resolution calls on the United Nations to rapidly establish an independent committee of inquiry .
We must arrange a meeting .
If the United Nations does not have either the determination or the courage to establish this committee of inquiry , it may fall to the European Parliament to take the initiative on behalf of our shared values and set up such a committee .
That is what is expected of Europe : it has its values ; it is tolerant ; it must demonstrate its determination , perhaps such a meeting has already been arranged .
If the United Nations does not act , it is up to us to do so .
However , we are sending a very clear message to the Taliban and I hope I have succeeded in obtaining your support .
Mr President , the people of Europe had every reason to be shocked by the prospect , first of all , then the confirmation that the giant statues in Bamiyan were to be destroyed .
The observers concerned were quick to point out that this indignation was rather late in coming and that it could have been voiced when the Taliban took power because of the archaic and barbaric regime which they established in defiance of the most basic rights of the Afghan people .
This criticism cannot be levelled at the European Parliament which has taken action several times over , the last occasion being on 30 November 2000 , when it condemned the regime as forcefully as it could and set alarm bells ringing regarding the tragic humanitarian situation experienced by the entire population .
Madam President-in-Office of the Council , our Parliament welcomes the common positions adopted on 22 January , and particularly those adopted on 21 February this year , but we think the time has now come to openly give all the necessary political aid to the very forces on the ground that continue to fight under Commander Massoud . I would very much welcome a clear response on this issue .
Commissioner , as you know , we are also concerned about the tragic situation which , according to the Under-Secretary General responsible for humanitarian affairs at the UN , is threatening one million people in Afghanistan with famine .
I also asked you about this during the previous debate in this House .
May I ask you what the current situation is with regard to the aid that the European Union can give to all the populations under threat , including those of the North and the more isolated populations ?
Do you not think that parachuting food into these areas could and should be considered ?
Mr President , the civilised world has been shocked by the recent edict of the leader of the Taliban , Mullah Omar , that the two statues of the Buddha in Bamiyan should be destroyed because they were idolatrous and unislamic .
It now appears from the press reports , that in defiance of appeals from world leaders , the UN General Assembly and international organisations including the EU , the statues have indeed been destroyed .
The international community despite its unanimity on this issue has been helpless to intervene , other than through direct appeals to Mullah Omar to reconsider .
He has been unwilling even to meet the representative of UNESCO , who travelled to Kandahar to see him .
The EU Troika has also sought a meeting from Islamabad without success .
The Taliban faction is isolated by UN sanctions and has been consistently informed by the international community that military victory will not bring diplomatic recognition for the Taliban organisation in Afghanistan .
Only a peace settlement involving all the parties to the current conflict can be the basis for lasting solutions to the tragedy of Afghanistan and its people .
Certainly acts of cultural vandalism of the kind that appeared to have been carried out in Bamiyan this week are no encouragement to the international community to engage in dialogue with this group .
Meanwhile human tragedy in Afghanistan continues , thanks to the effects of the worst drought in the country in 30 years and of course the ongoing conflict which has continued throughout the winter .
It is now estimated that there are at least half a million displaced persons inside Afghanistan .
In recent months , 170 000 have left Afghanistan for refugee camps in Pakistan and there are estimates that 1 000 people a day are crossing the borders from Afghanistan to Iran .
On the ground , the Commission , through ECHO and through its budget to aid for uprooted people , continues to provide humanitarian assistance via UN agencies and NGOs both inside Afghanistan and in Iran and Pakistan , including for demining .
This totalled more than EUR 400 million over the past ten years .
ECHO has already committed EUR 2.5 million for assistance to IDPs in Afghanistan and refugees in Pakistan this year .
Further support for drought and conflict affected areas is planned .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 6.30 p.m.
Human rights
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolution :
Situation in Zimbabwe - B5 ­ 0183 / 2001 , by Mrs Kinnock and others , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the situation in Zimbabwe ;
B5-0197 / 2001 , by Mr Mulder and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , on the situation in Zimbabwe ;
B5-0204 / 2001 , by Mrs Maes and Mrs Lucas , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , on the situation in Zimbabwe ;
B5-0214 / 2001 , by Mrs Morgantini , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , on the situation in Zimbabwe ;
B5-0223 / 2001 , by Mrs Van Orden and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , on the situation in Zimbabwe ;
Children abducted by one of their parents- B5-0185 / 2001 , by Mrs Van Lancker and Mrs Terrón i Cusí , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on children abducted in another country ;
B5-0198 / 2001 , by Mrs Ries , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , on children abducted by one of their parents ;
B5-0205 / 2001 , by Mr Jonckheer and Mr Lannoye , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , on international parental abductions ;
B5-0215 / 2001 , by Mr Di Lello Finuoli and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , on children abducted by one of their parents ;
B5-0224 / 2001 , by Mrs Banotti , on behalf of the Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , on children abducted in another country ;
Cabinda- B5-0186 / 2001 , by Mr Soares and others , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the kidnapping of three Portuguese citizens in the enclave of Cabinda - Angola ;
B5-0206 / 2001 , by Mrs Maes , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , on Cabinda ( Angola ) ;
B5-0216 / 2001 , by Mr Miranda , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , on the kidnapping of three Portuguese citizens in Cabinda , Angola ;
B5-0225 / 2001 , by Mr Pacheco Pereira and Mr Graça Moura , on behalf of the Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , and Mr Queiró , Mr Ribeiro e Castro , on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group , on the kidnapping of three Portuguese citizens in Cabinda , Angola ;
Situation in Kalimantan- B5-0187 / 2001 , by Mr Candal and others , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the situation in Kalimantan ( Indonesian part of the island of Borneo ) ;
B5-0199 / 2001 , by Mr Maaten , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , on the situation in the Indonesian province of central Kalimantan ;
B5-0207 / 2001 , by Mrs McKenna and others , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , on the situation in the Indonesian province of central Kalimantan ;
B5-0217 / 2001 , by Mr Vinci and Mrs Frahm , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , on the violence in Kalimantan ;
B5-0226 / 2001 , by Mrs Maij-Weggen and Mr Posselt , on behalf of the Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , on the violence in Indonesia , especially in Kalimantan ;
Situation in Turkmenistan- B5-0188 / 2001 , by Mr Sakellariou and others , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on Turkmenistan ;
B5-0192 / 2001 , by Mr Belder , on behalf of the Group for a Europe of Democracies and Diversities , on the situation in Turkmenistan ;
B5-0200 / 2001 , by Mrs Thors , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , on Turkmenistan ;
B5-0208 / 2001 , by Mr Staes , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , on human rights in Turkmenistan .
Situation in Zimbabwe
Mr President , we have in Europe fought for Zimbabwe ' s independence for many years , where freedom and democracy are said to prevail , despite the colour of people ' s skin .
This democracy was to lead to an independent judicial system and separation of political and judicial powers .
Twenty years after Zimbabwe ' s independence , we can only establish that the Mugabe government has not achieved a great deal .
The economy is in decline and , as for human rights , it is questionable whether the present situation is so much better than twenty years ago .
But what is most surprising , is the fact that the rest of Africa , especially South Africa , is looking on in silence .
My group is of the opinion that the European Commission must come down as hard on this regime as it did on any other regimes in southern Africa which rode roughshod over people ' s rights .
If not , this problem might well contaminate the rest of Africa , which could have disastrous consequences .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , since Zimbabwe decided to take part in the war in Congo , its economic situation has deteriorated by the day .
It simply cannot afford a war , but instead of withdrawing from it , it seems that the Zimbabwean government has chosen to create new problems for itself and look for scapegoats .
The way in which the land reform has been handled has made the economic and social situation even worse , and now that the success of the opposition parties , despite all intimidation attempts which we have witnessed with our own eyes , has become apparent , Mr Mugabe is resorting to human rights violations .
Zimbabwe is not only in chaos , it is under a reign of terror .
A Head of State who plunges his own country into chaos , and persecutes his own people does not really deserve our respect .
The dialogue between the European Union and Zimbabwe must , therefore , in the context of the ACP , be employed to reverse this situation .
We therefore understand that any official contact with Mr Mugabe is only acceptable to the extent that it is aimed at reinstating the rule of law and human rights , and takes place within the framework of the peace negotiations in Central Africa .
In that sense , we distance ourselves from Paragraph 16 of the compromise resolution , because we make allowances for the Belgian government , the French President and Commissioner Nielson who received President Mugabe in the framework of those peace negotiations .
We will therefore support the amendment from the liberal group , but our population and the people of Zimbabwe do expect to see results very soon .
We expect the pressure to be stepped up in such a way that the cynical stance of Mr Mugabe , who is indeed still receiving support from his old companions , will be brought to an end and the rule of law restored instead .
Mr President , as initiator of this resolution , this morning I met members of the Zimbabwean opposition - The Movement for Democratic Change .
They told me that Zimbabwe is going through hell .
Europe 's efforts at quiet diplomacy just have negative results .
Mugabe presides over a state that day in and day out subjects innocent Zimbabweans to untold misery , murder , brutality and intimidation .
They pleaded for the same standards of democracy , the rule of law and human rights to be applied in Africa , as would be expected in Europe .
They told me that they do not want some second-class status in these matters .
They would like to see Mugabe arrested as soon as he sets foot in a European state .
Instead , it seems there is one standard in Europe for handling right-wing dictators and another for socialist tyrants and terrorists , such as Mugabe .
Instead of handcuffs he gets champagne in Brussels and Paris .
In our strong resolution , thoroughly approved by the MDC representatives we have seen today , we condemn Mugabe and his regime and call for suspension of EU assistance directed through Zimbabwe government channels , identification of Mugabe 's extensive overseas assets , invocation of the Cotonou Article 96 procedures and insistence that the Zimbabwean government respect its own laws .
Our message is clear .
I commend the resolution unamended to the House .
Mr President , two Zimbabwean politicians are listening to our debate today .
They have been tortured in the past and their colleagues have been killed .
At lunch they told me very calmly : ' We are here but when we go back we are going to be arrested and killed .
We have passed our sell-by date : we were supposed to have been killed two weeks ago . '
We are sitting here , wringing our hands , writing resolutions , talking about human rights but , at the same time , we seem to have double standards .
If black people kill other black people , we avert our eyes and let them get on with it .
It is all right for a right-wing dictator like Pinochet to be arrested for human rights violations in Chile .
Why do we treat people with a different skin colour in a different way ?
We are supposed to have one standard for all .
We are supposed to be not only a global economy but a one-world family .
But is that the way we react ? No !
We need to do something about it .
Mr President , I share the view of Mrs Maes .
I shall continue in French in order to show that indeed we must have a common stance .
What is clear is that Zimbabwe is in chaos .
Human rights there are being trampled underfoot .
Do we now need to erect a cordon sanitaire , which effectively means there will be no dialogue ?
No .
We do need a cordon sanitaire but one which clearly expresses what we want to achieve when we meet with these interlocutors .
I would like to say to the last speaker that there was no champagne in Brussels . There was a reminder of resoluteness and there was a reminder of values , because if we want to safeguard the interests of the people of Zimbabwe , we must continue to get our position across to everyone , including the authorities .
Therefore , what I am asking is that the amendment we have tabled and which highlights the fact that we must invoke the law each time and we must specify what actually the scope of human rights is .
This is an important element .
So , let us not condemn those who defend this point of view , but let us call on the entire European Community - be it the Commission , the European Parliament or the Member States - to reiterate just how important human rights , and the law itself , are in this very sensitive area .
That is why I sincerely hope that the European Parliament will vote in favour of the amendment we have tabled .
Mr President , the clear language of the Zimbabwe resolution leaves no doubt that we hold President Mugabe personally responsible for conditions in that country .
Unfortunately , he is unwilling to listen to advice , whether it comes from his own country or from abroad , unless it is accompanied by concrete measures .
That is why we are urging the EU to suspend all cooperation directed through government channels .
It is also important to send Mr Mugabe the message that Europe no longer has a relevant political camp to act as his political sponsor .
But I would also like to hear the Commission and the Council speak the same clear language .
It is true that bilateral cooperation for development has been greatly scaled down , but I would ask the Council presidency to make the necessity of joint action clear to the Jospin Government in particular .
If France wants more influence in the region , it must back the forces of the future .
In this part of Africa civil society sometimes manages to overcome autocratic structures unaided , and then they remember who in Europe backed the wrong horse .
Please do not let us wait for everything to fall apart down there .
Mr President , this is one of the few times I have actually spoken on a topical or urgent matter in this House . I am motivated to do so because the shock waves and repercussions of what is happening in Zimbabwe have reached even my constituency in the in Yorkshire in the North of England in a number of ways in the last couple of weeks .
It started with a visit from a young Zimbabwean with our local asylum seekers ' organisation .
He was an active member of the MDC .
He and his fiancée had fled in fear of their lives , first to South Africa and , finding that not safe , they had come to the UK , but unfortunately his fiancée is likely to be returned . We do not know to what , but we can suspect .
Then last week in Ripon in Yorkshire , I was asked to share a platform with a Member of the Zimbabwean Parliament , a shadow minister .
Quietly spoken , he told of his aspirations for his country , a country of great potential but where , as we have heard , democracy and human rights are now denied and the rule of the law flouted .
He told how he had been beaten , how he feared daily for his wife and his family and , just as we have also heard , he feared what would happen to him when he returns on 17 March .
When people are fleeing for their lives across the world and when democratically elected politicians are in fear of their lives , Europe needs to make a response that this is not acceptable .
I believe our resolution is clear and I hope it gets the support it deserves .
Children abducted by one of their parents
Mr President , one of the items of today ' s topical debate is that of parental abduction , more specifically the case of the Limet children , who , despite court rulings and diplomatic steps , have not visited their father for many years .
The reason why this topic is on the list of urgent questions today is because , thanks to the efforts of the Belgian government and pledges of President Arap Moi from Kenya , there is a chance of breaking the deadlock in this case in the short term . All it needs now is a little nudge from this European Parliament to guide it onto the right track .
But the fact that we are discussing this case here today should not make us oblivious to the fact that the Limet case is only the tip of the iceberg .
Many of us are involved in cases of parental abduction , sometimes even as a country ' s go-between .
I myself know of many dozens of cases of parents in Belgium whose children have been kidnapped and taken to Tunisia , Morocco , Lebanon and even to America , and also in the European Union many children are denied the right to one of their parents .
Only recently , I was reading a report which stated that , in 1999 alone , cases were recorded under the Convention of The Hague involving more than 1 800 children . And that is only covering the 47 countries which have ratified the Convention and excluding the cases which are being considered under the Convention of Luxembourg .
All these children are entitled to both their parents , and the European Parliament has ensured that this is clearly spelled out in the EU ' s Fundamental Rights Charter , promulgated in Nice , even more clearly than in the Convention of New York .
And that is another reason for making sure that this Charter is included in our Treaty .
I hope that approval of this resolution will help guarantee the Limet children their right to both parents , but I am just as much convinced that the European Parliament , and the Commission too , I hope , will need to take many more initiatives in order to restore the rights of all these other children and parents .
I am convinced that this House has the political will to carry this through .
Mr President , on behalf of Mrs Ries , I should like to underline the importance of this resolution .
Although it only deals with one case , it still reflects the issue which has a European and even international dimension .
These are facts that are , unfortunately , increasingly common and which constitute a violation of the international treaties .
It has a devastating effect on the life of a father or mother , of children and of an environment .
Mr Limet has now been fighting for his children for more than two years . He had been given custody over his children , but they were abducted by his ex-wife and taken to Kenya .
The mother of the children was recently found guilty of abduction and given a one year unconditional sentence , but despite the legal steps and mediation by both the Belgian and European political authorities , especially Mr Prodi , the chances of Mr Limet seeing his children again are as good as non-existent .
A solution is therefore needed and , where this particular case is concerned , I would ask the Commission and the Council to call on the Kenyan government to ensure that justice ultimately prevails .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have two observations to make regarding the disturbing problem which is the subject of this resolution , namely parental abduction .
We are all familiar with the many conventions , Article 24 of the EU ' s Fundamental Rights Charter , the treaties of The Hague , and the many real-life cases , as Mrs Van Lancker mentioned a moment ago .
I can foresee two large obstacles which will stand in the way of finding solutions .
First of all , many of the existing agreements between countries , and even within the European Union , are different and not harmonised , as a result of which it becomes extremely difficult , if not impossible , to reach a solution .
This is therefore something we need to work on .
Secondly , if a parent who kidnaps a child is domiciled in Germany , for example , but actually lives in Greece , then a solution is often ruled out .
That means that the professional NGOs , of which Belgium has many , have to start their own investigations and try to track down children and bring them home .
That is why the Group of the Greens / Free European Alliance hopes that this resolution will not be swept under the carpet but may signify the necessary step forward .
Mr President , as the Parliament 's mediator for transnationally abducted children , I have been involved in the de Brouwer-Limet case for some time .
First I wish to reassure other victim parents , some of whom have expressed concern that this resolution deals with a particular case , that their tragedies too are just as important to me .
My primary concern today is to ensure that the channels of communication , which seem to be opening for the first time since the onset of the Limet tragedy , are strengthened and that progress can be made to return the children to their home as soon as possible .
This is the primary aim of this resolution .
All too often in Member States , the abduction of a child is treated by the police and other authorities simply as a domestic rather than a criminal matter .
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Kenyan authorities , and in particular President Moi , for any assistance they can provide to ensure a positive outcome .
It is my firm belief that the children have the right to know both parents and this right was scrupulously respected until the failure to return the children to their father in Belgium in August 1998 .
However , since then the children have been denied access to one parent , in this case their father .
He has given undertakings that once the children are returned to his custody their mother will continue to have visiting rights as before , thus restoring the children 's right to have a relationship with both parents .
Next week , I will be travelling to the Hague conference , where the special commission will meet to review the practical operation of the Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction .
We have a big task ahead of us , but I would like to take this opportunity to remind all the signatories of the Hague convention that they signed up not just to protect their own nationals who may become victims of child abduction , but also to use the convention to assist those who are victims of child abduction by their own nationals .
It is not a one-way process .
For the convention to succeed , full cooperation by all the signatories is essential .
Mr President , this issue of Cabinda , which is troubling public opinion in Portugal , Angola and other countries , is quite intolerable , and all of the Portuguese Members from the various political groups in this Parliament have agreed to table a motion for a resolution , which I recommend should be voted for .
This is a moderate motion , which is designed to condemn the unacceptable fact that innocent people have been kidnapped for political ends .
The motion does not discuss the basis of the issue , simply whether it is legitimate for a so-called revolutionary organisation to kidnap innocent people from other countries and to use these kidnappings to put pressure on the political powers of other States in order to achieve some form of recognition .
This is unacceptable .
What is even less acceptable , however , is the fact that people who are political refugees - and I have a great deal of respect for political exiles , because I myself spent many years in exile - take advantage of the countries in which they now live , particularly France , for example , and make threats to exact reprisals on the interests of other countries , such as , for example , Portugal , in order to achieve a political end .
This is totally unacceptable .
I therefore call on this organisation - the LFEC , to accept that , by using these terrorist-style methods , it is discrediting itself and will certainly fail to achieve its ends .
I also call upon Parliament and upon the Council and the Commission to adopt a position of total condemnation of these methods , which could encourage others to act in the same way .
Many countries are undergoing major conflicts and it is crucial that people ' s rights are always safeguarded .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are keen to endorse this resolution .
On humanitarian grounds , we have no choice but unequivocally to condemn the kidnapping of citizens .
We therefore lend our support to the resolution in the hope that the people involved will be released at the earliest opportunity and can return to their families .
In this connection , we should not , however , forget that the entire Angolan population has been held hostage for years by a civil war for which there is no end in sight .
The fact that both the armed government troops and armed rebel movements repeatedly take revenge upon the civilian population is a scandal which has lasted for too long .
I therefore hope that the pressure which the European Union can bring to bear in aid of the peace process will also put an end to the inhuman conditions in Angola .
Mr President , first of all , I wish to express my concern at the precarious and difficult situation of the eight Portuguese people who are being held hostage by various factions of the LFEC . I also wish to express my sympathy for their families and to state my heartfelt desire that these hostages are unconditionally released as quickly as possible , and I therefore believe that the Portuguese Government must make every possible effort to achieve this .
As a matter of fact , this was precisely the thrust of a letter that I sent to the Swedish Presidency , in due time and with the utmost discretion , asking it about the possibility of the various Member States adopting measures in conjunction with the Portuguese and Angolan Governments which would facilitate or improve the likelihood of the immediate release of the hostages .
In any case , I feel that it is appropriate to emphasise that these actions by the LFEC must be explicitly and roundly condemned .
These are criminal acts that are designed to aggravate the political and military situation in Angola and which are also intended to give an international profile to a group that has no compunction about resorting to such actions in order to achieve separatist objectives , which are also completely unrealistic .
In fact , it is worth pointing out that Angola ' s territorial integrity must be scrupulously respected , also because no legitimacy has been conferred on this type of separatist objective by the international community , specifically either by the Organisation of African Unity or the United Nations .
Lastly , I must express my profound surprise at the ease with which representatives of organisations that carry out such acts and which threaten to continue with them if they succeed , and are given total freedom to make statements and express themselves with complete impunity , which is , in fact , what has happened today .
I wish , by the way , to thank our President , Mrs Fontaine , and her staff , for their rapid and determined action , compelling the three representatives of the LFEC who were present this morning to leave Parliament ' s buildings .
Mr President , since May 2000 , eight Portuguese citizens have been held prisoner in the territory of Cabinda .
These people are workers who were forced by necessity to leave their country and they are also citizens of the European Union to whom all the governments of the Union have responsibilities .
The fact that , on our initiative , Parliament is discussing this issue is therefore to be warmly welcomed .
We feel that a very clear position of principle is involved : it is unacceptable to imprison peaceful citizens in order to make political demands .
I therefore call on all those who are detaining these Portuguese citizens to release them immediately , in a gesture of humanitarian good will , which is the only thing that can help their captors ' cause .
The situation of our fellow citizens is obviously close to our hearts and , in order to ensure their release , we will do whatever is necessary , in accordance with our principles .
This does not mean , however , that we are unaware that there are many conflicts , including the conflict in Cabinda , that do not reach the public ' s attention as a result of the way we ignore Africa .
We know that the current situation in Cabinda is extremely harsh for the Cabindese .
Although they coexist with powerful international interests , in a territory that produces hundreds of millions of barrels of oil , they endure the most extreme poverty .
Let no-one be under any illusions , because these ghettos of prosperity in which huge international companies set up on the coastline , protected by mercenaries and government troops , are an echo and a portrait of a colonial-style situation .
We also know that there is no real political freedom , freedom of expression or free opportunity for the people of Cabinda to develop fully their cultural and religious identity which would allow them to argue for all that they want in a legal and peaceful way .
We know that war is raging in most of the territory , together with human rights violations against the people of Cabinda , which have been condemned in all international reports .
There is no need to look any further than the reports by Amnesty International , which detail the extrajudicial executions , the systematic use of torture , the murder of civilians and the destruction of villages all suffered in Cabinda .
These are facts that it would be hypocritical to ignore and that it suits many people to conceal .
I shall not do this !
Just as I call on those who are holding our fellow citizens to release them immediately , given the possibility of their release , I urge the Angolan authorities not to initiate or intensify military operations that could put the lives of the Portuguese who are being held at risk .
They share responsibility for the situation that has arisen and we will be watching events closely .
The adoption of a constructive position by the Angolan Government would obviously be welcomed by the international community .
As a matter of fact , in the recent past , contacts have been established and direct negotiations have taken place between the Angolan Government and those fighting for independence in Cabinda , and the international community can only support this approach .
Whatever reasons the men and women of Cabinda may have , making these Portuguese workers suffer will not help their cause .
This is a unique opportunity to release these people in full view of the international community .
We call once again for this to be done .
Mr President , our declaration of support for the European Parliament resolution on the kidnapping of eight Portuguese citizens in Cabinda is motivated by a single concern : to do everything to obtain their release as quickly as possible .
Bearing this in mind , those who wish to see this initiative as an attempt to use the media to take advantage of a situation that is of legitimate concern to the whole Portuguese and , of course , international community , or to exacerbate political or party-political quarrels , which have no place at all in this context , are deluding themselves .
We are acting on principle here and in order to achieve a result .
Let us clearly state the principles that are guiding us : we consider the use of kidnapping to express political opinions in any part of the world and for whatever reason to be unacceptable .
This means that we cannot associate ourselves with any attempt to raise the profile of Cabinda ' s political situation unless the Portuguese citizens are released .
The result that we wish to see forces us to make a sincere appeal that is not tainted by any party-political affiliations with the parties involved in the conflict in Cabinda .
From this rostrum I appeal urgently to the sense of humanity of the leaders of the LFEC , so that they free our fellow citizens , some of whom have been detained for around nine months in extremely harsh living conditions .
If I may put it like this , the LFEC must not be in any doubt as to the appreciation of the Portuguese and international communities of the historical aspirations that motivate their struggle .
The simple release of the hostages , of their Portuguese brethren , from the very country with which the LFEC wishes to reopen relations that were cut off more than 25 years ago , will encourage a positive reaction and closer attention to the LFEC ' s historical and political aims by these two communities .
When the hostages are released , for our part , we shall not forget what we am now stating , particularly because we are aware of the difficult conditions in which the citizens of Cabinda are living .
The release of the Portuguese citizens is , in this sense , also an act of political clarity and affirmation of humanitarian principles that we all need in order to bring about the resolution of this unfortunate episode .
Mr President , I welcome all the efforts , both public and those behind the scenes , that have been made , from the moment the first Portuguese citizen was kidnapped , particularly the efforts made by the Portuguese Government , with a view to ensuring the release of the hostages .
I also wish to add my voice to the appeal made to the LFEC by all the Portuguese Members here in Strasbourg , for it immediately and unconditionally to release the eight Portuguese citizens that it is holding hostage , to respect human rights , to think of these people ' s families , who are undergoing considerable anguish and worry , and to return the hostages to normal life so that they can move freely within the country in which they have decided to exercise their professions .
I also wish to make it quite clear to the LFEC that there is no political cause , whether one agrees with it or not , that justifies using kidnapping as a form of defence .
Situation in Kalimantan
Mr President , in the current climate of restlessness and uncertainty in Indonesia , the tiniest detail is enough to spark an eruption of ethnic or religious violence .
The riots in Kalimantan are no exception .
Virtually every community in Indonesia with social or ethnic differences is a potential hotbed , now that the sub-districts , districts and provincial boundaries are being re-established or contested .
In addition , local disputes regarding natural resources are increasingly fierce .
A moratorium on every administrative change of boundaries or local administrative restructuring would be welcome , certainly until such time as law and order are restored in a credible manner and the situation in Jakarta becomes more stable .
Military intervention is not the answer .
General Suharto 's implicit suggestion that a military coup against the current civilian government is under way to restore order in the country must therefore be condemned most emphatically .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it was with utter disgust that we witnessed the massacres in Kalimantan , which are unprecedented in their brutality .
This is a clear case of ethnic tensions having got out of hand , as is evident in various places in Indonesia : Timor , Aceh , the Moluccas and Irian Jaya .
In West Kalimantan , the riots broke out as early as 1997 and 1999 and , across the country , these are , in actual fact , the result of the imposed transmigration programme of 1960 .
But under the expert , dictatorial rod of iron , all these tensions remained under the surface , and they are now all of a sudden erupting with a vengeance .
In my opinion , the international community has to take great care and must make sure that it is ready to grant the lawful government the necessary aid , for the poor are fighting the poor and , at the end of the day , this is an issue of poverty .
Mr President , the violence in Indonesia is unremitting .
For a number of years , there have been problems in Timor , mainly concentrated in West Timor at the moment , as well as in the Moluccas , in Aceh , in Irian Jaya and now again in Kalimantan .
The old Suharto regime has in the past forced more than 8 million Indonesians to move from overpopulated regions to regions with a low population rate .
For example , a few hundred thousand people moved from the island of Madura to Kalimantan , formerly Borneo .
The migrants are often given a considerable degree of preferential treatment . For example they receive land and living facilities , sometimes at the expense of the indigenous population .
That is the case in Irian Jaya and the Moluccas , as well as for the people from Madura in Kalimantan .
It is therefore understandable that difficulties should arise , and neither is it all that difficult to let the tensions between population groups escalate .
Unfortunately , there are quite a few people and groups in Indonesia who stand to gain from an escalation in tension between regional population groups , causing the government in Jakarta to become destabilised .
This whole situation has now led to hundreds of killings , and tens of thousands of refugees , in addition to more than a million internal refugees which Indonesia was already grappling with .
It is a huge problem , which is threatening to get the better of the Indonesian government .
In our resolution , we call on the European Commission to address the Indonesian government in a bid to halt these brutalities , and we urge the Commission to implement this resolution .
Mr President , 240 million people live in an archipelago that would stretch from London to Baghdad .
Indonesia is massive in geography and population .
It is the world 's largest Muslim country .
It is a mega-player in its region and has enormous potential . Were it to disintegrate , the implications for its neighbours would be catastrophic .
I was there two weeks ago .
It is a young democracy emerging from the oppressive years of Suharto .
Habibi gave it press freedom , which is surviving , Wahid came in as symbol of the drive against fraud and corruption and there are still high hopes of his policy of devolution .
He is under pressure from Parliament and street demonstrators and those ambitious to replace him .
One of the benefits of dictatorship , of course , is often that the lid is kept on social , religious and racial tensions .
Sadly the end of dictatorship so often opens the box and releases these ills .
Timor , Moluccas , Aceh , Papua and now Borneo-Kalimantan all show this .
The situation in parts of Kalimantan is intolerable and I back this motion totally .
But what Indonesia most needs is our support for their efforts to find and fund solutions and any criticism from us must be constructive .
Situation in Turkmenistan
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this sitting is almost a prayer-session for democratic life , and , even though the echo and the consequences of our protests may be limited , they will nevertheless give hope to someone deprived of his or her liberty and will be a thorn in the side of tyrants such as the current president of Turkmenistan , who forced his Parliament to vote him in unanimously as President for life .
The legislative elections in Turkmenistan have not even been recognised by the OSCE .
European diplomacy must be active in this country , which has 4.5 million inhabitants , and which is already experiencing religious persecution , media censorship and the ongoing breach of human rights .
This country is located in a part of the world where great strategic and energy interests meet , as it borders the Caspian Sea and has huge reserves of gas .
The European Union cannot turn its back on this region for , as classical humanism dictates , we cannot ignore any aspect of the human condition .
Mr President , it is best not to think about how this country is being run , because then , everything is under control .
If you do start to think about it , then you make a mistake .
These are revealing words , with a double meaning , spoken by a German businessman working for the regime of President Saparmurat Niyazov , the Leader of the Turkmen people .
Turkmenistan , a republic in Central Asia , is blessed with generous oil and gas reserves .
No wonder that the Head of State , Mr Niyazov , has promised his people an ' Altyn Asyr ' , a golden era .
However , Turkmenbashi , the pet name for the country ' s great leader , has no intention of keeping his promise .
Quite the reverse , in fact !
President Niyazov has spared neither cost nor effort to glorify his own persona in the form of prestigious constructions .
For example , word has it that every street corner in the capital , Ashgabat is adorned with a bust of Turkmenbashi in gold and bronze , while the ordinary citizen is somehow having to survive in a society overrun by corruption .
What is also shocking is the complete neglect of the national health care system and of education by Niyazov 's regime .
Examples of this are the decisions by the powers that be to close down hospitals in the provinces , and the imminent resignation of thousands of teachers , despite overcrowded classrooms .
Turkmenbashi ' s megalomania and mismanagement have instilled a general climate of fear in the country .
Whoever dares to speak up is immediately imprisoned for years .
It is the frank belief of a Turkmen lecturer , who for obvious reasons prefers to remain anonymous , that human rights count for nothing at all in that country .
Most of his fellow-sufferers avoid frank discussions about the abject conditions in their home country .
In the final analysis , Turkmenistan ' s political leaders are just as much at the mercy of Turkmenbashi Niyazov .
In front of running cameras , the President brings shame on ministers in public , and sacks them at will .
As a former communist , President Niyazov has a great affinity with Sunni Muslims - he has already completed the pilgrimage to Mecca - and the Eastern Orthodox Church .
Members of other religious communities in the country , on the other hand , are liable to downright persecution , which is completely at odds with their constitutional right to freedom of religion .
The present joint resolution asks , in this connection , for special attention to be given to the position of the condemned Baptist minister Shagildy Atakov .
According to the latest reports , this prisoner is said , because of his faith , to be in a prison hospital in the town of Mary , where he is being administered highly infectious and tranquillising injections .
I therefore also call on the Commission to obtain information about Shagildy Atakov and to intervene with the Turkmen authorities on his behalf .
In the Netherlands , the Protestant churches held a prayer day yesterday .
There is no doubt that the Turkmen Christians , as well as the entire Turkmen population , were placed before God on that occasion .
In that spirit , due to Man being a Creation of God , we would ask the Council and Commission to employ all diplomatic means in order to improve the situation in Turkmenistan .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , as Chairman of the delegation of the European Parliament with the Central Asian countries , which covers Turkmenistan , I receive weekly reports on the continuous violation of human rights in Turkmenistan .
It is one of the reasons why our delegation decided a couple of months ago not to travel to Turkmenistan in mid-June to set up the parliamentary cooperation committee .
I fully subscribe to the requirement not to implement the Interim Agreement as long as the human rights situation in Turkmenistan does not improve .
Commissioner Liikanen , I would urge you to pass the content of this resolution , and especially the paragraph relating to the TACIS programme , on to your colleagues , and to Mr Patten in particular .
I call on the Commission to employ all available means to reinforce mainstream society , to strengthen a true multiparty system and to promote free and independent media .
Mr President , as rapporteur for a new Interim Agreement between the European Union and Turkmenistan , and having consulted the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , I have delayed the parliamentary discussion , despite the hesitant go-ahead received from our Parliament ' s Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Security and Defence Policy .
The reasons for my action were that democracy is increasingly becoming a sham , and that there is even a president who has had himself appointed for life .
There is no political will for reform in Turkmenistan , as that country is riding roughshod over human rights , especially the rights of religious minorities , both Islam and Christian .
Additionally , the proper implementation of European-funded TACIS projects is being frustrated by poor management and by a lack of adequate information and sound financial accountability .
Mr President , it is only natural that all fledgling democracies will struggle at first , but riding roughshod over human rights cannot be tolerated and cannot be reconciled with a new Interim Agreement between the European Union and Turkmenistan .
As MEP and rapporteur , I warmly recommend the urgency declaration to my fellow MEPs .
Mr President , I shall start with Zimbabwe .
In 1999 , the Commission took steps to re-orientate its cooperation with Zimbabwe in favour of social sector actions - health , education and AIDS , democracy and support to civil society .
The Commission and the Member States have opted for confidential political dialogue under Article 8 of the Cotonou Agreement in order to influence the Zimbabwean government and to seek improvements in respect for the fundamental principles of human rights , democracy and the rule of law .
Sanctions are not considered appropriate at this stage .
The Commission believes that sanctions should be kept as a last resort to discourage major setbacks such as the suspension of the constitution or the cancellation of the 2002 presidential elections .
While President Mugabe is closely associated with these undesirable events , his public demonisation is counterproductive since it encourages support for him by dissenting factions in Zimbabwe African National Union / Patriotic Front and by neighbouring states .
Overemphasis on the plight of whites risks encouraging a revival of the independence theme supported by many blacks in Zimbabwe and in southern Africa .
It neglects the plight of many very poor black people in Zimbabwe .
Secondly , on trans-nationally abducted children : the Commission shares the concerns expressed by the honourable Members in the case of international child abductions , often by one of the child 's parents .
Within the Community the Brussels II regulation entered into force on 1 March this year .
This regulation sets out rules on jurisdiction , automatic recognition and simplified enforcement of judgments in matrimonial matters and matters of parental responsibility for children of both spouses .
Therefore custodial decisions at the time of divorce taken in the Member States in accordance with Brussels II can now be enforced throughout the Community .
Admittedly the regulation does not go far enough in that it is limited to custodial decisions for the children of both spouses taken at the time of divorce .
Later this month , the Commission plans to present a working document on the mutual recognition of decisions on parental responsibility , to be followed by a proposal for a regulation extending the scope of the Brussels II regulation to cover all children and situations .
As far as cases that transcend the borders of the Community are concerned , the Commission also supports the ratification , or the correct application , of the 1980 Hague Convention on the civil aspects of international child abduction , which is indeed a very valuable instrument .
On Cabinda : the Commission agrees and deplores the situation of the eight European citizens who have been kidnapped in Cabinda .
The Commission hopes that a solution can be rapidly found to allow them to regain their freedom .
On Kalimantan in Indonesia : the Commission shares the honourable Members ' concerns about the conflict in Kalimantan , which resulted in injury and serious loss of life .
Clearly several factors have influenced the outbreak of violence and massacre : a decade-old and badly implemented policy of trans-migration , genuine poverty in some parts of the area , misadministration and provocateurs who , for reasons we may only speculate about , create the violence .
To address the poverty in this region , the Commission has in place development projects in southern and eastern Kalimantan , which include support for sustainable management of tropical forests .
The Indonesian leadership currently faces some extremely difficult policy choices .
They must establish temporary shelter for the refugees in Kalimantan .
However , they also need to consider whether to assist those who want to leave Kalimantan permanently and return to Madura .
They must also show determination to restore law and order and pursue the perpetrators .
Failure to do so would send bad signals about the commitment of the Indonesian leadership to the rule of law .
The Commission is closely following the situation and would stand ready to assist if the situation justified it .
However , our current assessment is that most of the 50 000 refugees intend to return to their place of origin - Madura - where they have families who will be able to support them .
On Turkmenistan : the Commission is fully aware of the case of Mr Atakov , a Baptist pastor , who was sentenced to four years ' imprisonment .
It supported the EU démarche in Ashgabat by the EU Presidency and the Member States in February this year , asking for the release of Mr Atakov .
The Commission has expressed concerns about the human rights situation in Turkmenistan .
It supported the EU presidency démarche earlier this year in order to release Mr Primukuli Tanrykuliev and Mr Nurberdy Nurmamedov .
The release of these two prisoners was ordered by President Niyazov later in an amnesty allowing the release of 12 000 prisoners .
The Commission fully supports Parliament 's resolutions .
External pressure has to be maintained to achieve results in the fight for human rights and freedom of religion in Turkmenistan .
In response to Mr Staes ' s question about assistance through TACIS , I would add that EU assistance provided through the TACIS programme is mainly oriented towards agricultural development , which directly benefits the population .
In addition , the Commission develops TACIS democracy projects mostly through local NGOs in order to enhance civil society .
As requested , I will refer this to Mr Nielson and Mr Patten for further action .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 6.30 p.m.
Uncontrolled trade in light weapons
The next item is the joint debate on five motions for resolutions on the uncontrolled trade in light weapons :
B5-0189 / 2001 by Mr Van den Berg , on behalf of the PSE Group : uncontrolled trade in small and light weapons ;
B5-0201 / 2001 by Mrs Malmström and Mr Van den Bos , on behalf of the ELDR Group : uncontrolled trade in small and light weapons ;
B5-0209 / 2001 by Mrs McKenna , Mrs Maes , Mrs Schroedter and Mr Rod , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group : UN Conference to be held in July 2001 on the illegal trade in small and light weapons and all aspects thereof ;
B5-0218 / 2001 by Mrs Morgantini , Mr Schmid , Mr Alavanos and Mr Manisco , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group : UN Conference to be held in July 2001 on the illegal trade in small and light weapons and all aspects thereof ;
B5-0227 / 2001 by Mr Johan Van Hecke , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group : small and light weapons .
Mr President , Commissioner , throughout almost 6 000 years of human history and 10 000 wars , we have always encouraged the production of weapons .
A certain degree of conscience , however , now seems to be dawning upon us .
In 1972 , we banned biological weapons .
In 1993 , we banned chemical weapons , and in 1997 , we banned land mines .
Nuclear proliferation is more or less under control , although we have been going through a very difficult phase since the signing of the Non-Proliferation Treaty in 1968 , which then came into force in 1970 .
Nowadays , however , the weapons that take most lives are light weapons .
There are estimated to be five hundred thousand million light weapons on this planet .
They kill 200 000 people a year , which is twenty times more than land mines . More than half of victims are in Africa .
So it comes as no surprise that the Secretary General of the United Nations , who is himself a great African , has put on the agenda of the UN General Assembly , which is due to meet next July in New York , the debate on a convention to try to limit this dangerous and terrible proliferation .
The idea is to identify weapons so that they can be monitored , to keep a register of weapons , to encourage all States to strengthen their controls and their domestic legislation on exporting and re-exporting weapons , to organise the prosecution and punishment of traffickers and , finally , to finance and push forward national weapons ' collection and destruction programmes .
Against such a backdrop , the European Union , which adopted a moratorium on the sale of weapons three years ago at the behest of Great Britain , would do itself credit by having an effective common policy and playing its full part .
I welcome the fact that six political groups were able to table a motion for a resolution which is an excellent and timely compromise .
I will not say any more .
We must support it . It is totally in keeping with our code of conduct and with what has already been decided by the OSCE , and falls fairly and squarely within the scope of the next UN Convention .
During voting time , Mr President , I will ask to table two oral amendments , which I know have already received general approval .
The first is in the recitals . When the time comes , I will say where to add a citation to the Bamako Declaration of last month - a great historical first - in which 52 African nations took up a single position which was in perfect harmony with our code of conduct .
The second addition would simply be a reference to the marking of weapons in the proposals of our compromise resolution .
I know they have your backing and I will support them at the appropriate time .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this plenary week is the week of conflict prevention .
A lot of wise things have been said , but the most important action in this context is this EU initiative for the UN conference on the illicit trade in small arms .
We know that this very trade is a major reason for the aggravation of conflicts and that the innocent civilian population suffers the most casualties .
The positive thing about the EU proposal is that it involves both sides , users and producers , and that the EU is striving for more binding commitments .
This conference must be the first step towards stopping arms exports .
But there will have to be a permanent commission to check that it is enforced .
It would be good if the EU would not only call for this but be the first to enforce it in its own ranks .
Mr President , on various occasions Parliament has talked about the code of conduct for the export and transfer of arms .
First of all in order to arrive at this code of conduct , then in order that it should be effective .
Today , our resolution has a fundamental objective : to help the next United Nations Conference in July to be successful .
In order to do this we propose various points in the resolution .
Taking into account the time that I have , I am only going to explain three .
In the first place , preventing arms from being exported or transferred to groups or countries that violate human rights .
Secondly , an international agreement on the trade and transport of arms that is binding for all countries .
Thirdly , transparency and parliamentary control over this trade which causes low- and medium-intensity conflicts , something which you only have to be here for an afternoon of topical and urgent debate to see .
Of course , without these arms , those conflicts would not happen .
Parliament must therefore wish the United Nations Conference in July to be a success .
Mr President , since the end of the Cold War , the distribution of light weapons has become a worldwide issue ; this is a phenomenon which is fomenting both street crime in our part of the world and civil wars in the Third World .
The UN Conference is therefore more overdue than premature .
I am of the opinion that the European Union must take the lead in New York .
The 1998 European code of conduct can serve as a template for a worldwide agreement on the export and transfer of weapons .
This code has proved its usefulness but is deficient in two important areas .
First of all , it is not legally binding .
Europe must press for an international agreement which is binding .
Secondly , no provisions have been made for monitoring the end users of exported weapons .
In Africa , for example , Togo and Burkina are officially known as end users of weapons from Bulgaria while , in reality , these weapons are being channelled to Liberia and to the rebels in Sierra Leone .
Europe must call for the stricter monitoring and penalisation of transfer countries of this kind .
The distribution of light weapons is , in fact , not only a problem in the Third World .
In Europe and North-America too , the possession of weapons is on the increase .
Half of all American families possess a firearm .
Although these are often legal weapons , they cause just as much damage , as was once again demonstrated last week in California .
That is why the UN Conference must also pluck up the courage to broach the subject of legal small weapons , and Europe must be able to argue for a total ban on the advertising of firearms .
Mr President , the UN Member States are facing a difficult dilemma : either they opt for the arms industry and economic interests , or they choose human safety , stability and peace .
We are very much counting on the Swedish Presidency to set the right tone at the preparatory meeting , and on the Belgian Presidency to make the right choices during the conference .
Mr President , the EU is committed to combating the destabilising accumulations of small arms in many parts of the world .
The EU joint action on small arms and light weapons proposes the adoption of a series of confidence-building measures including measures to promote increased transparency and openness .
The Union also pledges to provide financial and technical assistance to countries , international organisations and NGOs , requesting support for these measures .
A number of projects emanating from the joint action are currently under way or under consideration .
The financial execution of these projects is carried out by the European Commission .
The EU attaches great importance to the upcoming UN Conference on the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects .
Some progress was achieved during this second preparatory committee but many important questions remain to be settled .
We welcome the revised draft programme of action submitted by the chairman of the preparatory committee which serves as a good basis for further discussions .
We will continue to consult closely with our partners during the preparatory process and work together towards the adoption of politically and legally binding instruments as well as comprehensive international programmes for action on small arms .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 6.30 p.m.
Disasters
The next item is the joint debate on nine motions for resolutions on disasters :
Floods in Mozambique - B5-0176 / 2001 by Mr Miranda , Mrs Boudjenah and Mr Vinci , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group : floods in Mozambique ;
B5-0190 / 2001 by Mr Marinho , Mr Seguro and Mr Van den Berg , on behalf of the PSE Group : floods in Mozambique ;
B5-0210 / 2001 by Mrs Maes , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group : floods in Mozambique ;
B5-0220 / 2001 by Mr Queiró and Mr Ribeiro e Castro , on behalf of the UEN Group : floods in Mozambique ;
B5-0228 / 2001 by Mr Cunha , Mr Coelho , Mr Johan Van Hecke and Mrs Bastos , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group : floods in Mozambique ;
Humanitarian disaster in Mongolia- B5-0191 / 2001 by Mr Van den Berg and Mr Lage , on behalf of the PSE Group : humanitarian disaster in Mongolia ;
B5-0193 / 2001 by Mr Dupuis , Mr Pannella , Mrs Bonino , Mr Dell 'Alba , Mr Turco , Mr Della Vedova and Mr Cappato , on behalf of the TDI Group : economic and humanitarian disaster in Mongolia ;
B5-0211 / 2001 by Mr Staes , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group : humanitarian disaster in Mongolia ;
B5-0229 / 2001 by Mr Maat and Mr Posselt , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group : humanitarian disaster in Mongolia .
Floods in Mozambique
Mr President , once again , and in a similar situation to the one we saw last year , we are witnessing serious floods in Mozambique , which have claimed a considerable number of victims and caused enormous material damage .
Once again , we wish to express our solidarity with the people of Mozambique and to ask the Community and the Member States to increase their emergency aid to that country .
I wish to take this opportunity to mention Commissioner Nielson ' s willingness to make statements on this subject to the Commission on Development and Cooperation and , particularly , his announcement here of extraordinary aid for Mozambique .
I wish , nevertheless , to emphasise the need to find more rapid ways of achieving greater coordination and more effective mobilisation of resources , especially by the Member States , in order to address emergency situations such as this and with a view , in particular , to guaranteeing the evacuation of communities that are affected or at risk .
Lastly , I should like to draw your attention to the urgent need for special consideration of the possibility of cancelling Mozambique ' s foreign debt .
Mr President , the initiatives adopted by some Portuguese Members , including myself , in order to see this joint resolution carried , have already had some positive effects .
Firstly , there is the joint resolution itself , which expresses Parliament ' s will to show solidarity ; and secondly , there is the financial support that has already been announced and promised by the Commission .
Unfortunately , Mr President , we are speaking once again about a disaster recurring in Mozambique , a new democracy .
Following a civil war that decimated a large part of the population and left the country in the most abject poverty , we are now helplessly witnessing the swings of nature which appear determined to sacrifice the people of Mozambique .
The country is facing a very worrying situation .
It is true that the Zambezi river has stopped rising , but the situation could change at any time as a result of the rainfall levels that have occurred or that are forecast to occur .
The Cabora Bassa dam is reaching maximum saturation point and discharges from it could make the situation worse .
Maintaining the minimum survival threshold requires emergency measures , both for food aid and shelter , for rescue and reconstruction measures and for the supply of medicines .
It is extremely important that we send health specialists because the first symptoms of diseases such as malaria and diarrhoea have already been diagnosed in the population .
Nevertheless , various problems have arisen in addressing the basic needs of those affected , due to the fact that bridges and railway lines have been flooded .
Helicopters need to be used but , although these are resources that Mozambique does have , it does not have anywhere near a satisfactory number .
The European Union and , particularly , the Commission , must play a very important role in adopting humanitarian aid programmes , which are , in fact , a distinguishing feature of the European Union ' s external policy .
The EUR 2 million - ESC 400 thousand million - which have already been made available are a good indication of the Commission ' s cooperative approach , but are clearly insufficient to meet the shortages and the problems Mozambique is facing .
Ultimately , Mr President , what we are asking is for the Commission and the Council to take the broadest and most sympathetic view possible of our joint resolution .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is enough to give you nightmares .
A country such as Mozambique , which has had so much bad luck , is once again struck by heavy flooding .
Once again , emergency aid turns out not to have arrived on time , and it proves not to have been possible to evacuate many people in time . Moreover , we must ask ourselves how such a desperately poor country is to survive another disaster like this .
A few years ago , we were able to delight in the prompt economic recovery in some parts of Mozambique , but the inland regions are so extremely poor - people have absolutely nothing - that I find it disgraceful that some countries have still not released Mozambique from its debts .
Europe should lead the way in this respect .
That country should not have to repay its debts .
It is already paying such a heavy toll to nature that what we need here is the highest level of solidarity .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we seem to have been here before . Tomorrow , it will be exactly a year since , we were discussing and voting on a resolution in this Parliament on this very subject : floods in Mozambique .
We have once again focussed on the communities that have been affected , which this time are mainly in the provinces of Tete , Sofala and Zambezi . Dozens of people have died or disappeared , around half a million people have been affected and almost one hundred thousand have lost their homes .
The suffering of these people , many of whom are in an extremely weak condition , has been enormous and the problems they face are serious : there is a shortage of drinking water and food , a shortage of fuel and the threat of disease .
The European Union must therefore express its solidarity with Mozambique , translate its words into action and not forget the efforts of the people of Mozambique , who have tried , at great cost , to consolidate their process of transition to democracy , which is still a long way from being achieved .
In this context , I wish to highlight the content of the final part of paragraph 5 of the joint resolution that we shall be voting on and which is ultimately designed to safeguard all the security and operational conditions needed to ensure that aid reaches its intended destination .
We all have an obligation to ensure that this requirement is met - it is the right of everyone who needs help .
Our intention must be to show solidarity and we must demonstrate our commitment to helping effectively .
Mr President , once again the people of Mozambique are the victims of terrible floods : half a million people have been affected , with 80 thousand people displaced , dozens of people dead or disappeared and considerable material damage , particularly in the provinces of Tete , Manica , Sofala and Zambezi .
In addition to destroying infrastructures , these floods are causing a shortage of drinking water and food as well as a real danger of epidemics as serious and deadly as the floods themselves .
The tragedy and the scale of this disaster are such that the Mozambican authorities cannot act efficiently or in isolation to resolve their serious economic , social and public health problems , particularly because Mozambique is a very poor country .
The European Union and , in particular , the European Parliament , cannot turn their backs upon this tragedy , nor must we limit ourselves to simply expressing our sympathy .
We therefore call on the Commission and the Member States to increase emergency aid to Mozambique , and to coordinate their aid in conjunction with third countries and multilateral organisations .
We call upon the Member States to define a structural aid programme for Mozambique , within the Council and together with the Commission .
We also urge the international community to be unstinting in its efforts to allocate human and material resources , to mobilise the emergency aid which is so necessary , to adopt economic and financial measures to contribute to the reconstruction of the regions that have been affected and to revive Mozambique ' s economy , which has been so badly hit .
Humanitarian disaster in Mongolia
Mr President , images of Mongolia , this distant country , which has only 2.7 million inhabitants , spread across an immense territory of 1.5 million square kilometres , swept by icy winds , with its population of nomadic shepherds who have lost hope and who expect the worst , and with its flocks dying of cold and hunger , these images that we see on television are striking and moving .
It is crucial and pressing that we support and help this slightly mythical country that has achieved the miracle of establishing democratic life in an environment which is seen to be so hostile .
In addition to the intrinsic value of development aid and of immediate assistance to Mongolia , both to its human and animal populations , we must cherish an extraordinary democratic experiment which proves that democracy knows no boundaries , be they physical , geographical , religious , cultural or of lifestyle , given that many of Mongolia ' s inhabitants live a nomadic existence .
This is a good cause , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , for the Commission and the European Union to adopt .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as Mr Lage has just said , Mongolia is certainly the country of the former Soviet Union which has made the most progress in establishing democracy and the rule of law .
Unfortunately , it is also a country that seems to have been completely abandoned by the gods . During the winter of 1999-2000 , it experienced extremely harsh conditions with temperatures falling to -50º centigrade .
It experienced the same conditions this year after an intervening drought last summer .
All this has led to the death of millions of head of livestock .
Livestock is Mongolia ' s chief resource . No doubt you read in yesterday afternoon ' s edition of the newspaper , Le Monde , that , in addition to these scourges , Mongolia has been hit by foot-and-mouth disease .
It is easy to imagine the damage that may cause in a country whose economy is based primarily on the rearing of livestock .
In point 8 of its legislative programme last year , the Commission pledged substantial emergency aid to Mongolia .
So far , it has only allocated a small amount of this aid .
It has sent just a few hundred thousand dollars to add to the few hundred thousand dollars from other donor countries , which include Israel and the People ' s Republic of China .
Mongolia needs USD eight million .
It is therefore crucial that the Commission ' s pledges match the scale of the catastrophe that has now struck Mongolia .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , at one time , the Mongolian nomadic armies under the command of Genghis Khan instilled fear across the world .
Today , the remote descendants of these feared hordes are condemned to abject poverty .
Two harsh winters in succession will probably spell the end of a nation of shepherds and of economic developments in Mongolia .
I hope that this debate will break through the indifference of the international community .
In mid-January , I , together with Mr Maat , received the Prime Minister of Mongolia .
We were taken with the openness and determination he displayed in approaching our Parliament .
I would remind the Commission of the wish Parliament expressed last year to grant Mongolia the necessary emergency aid .
Commissioner , I beg you , please grant Mongolia more structural aid and economic assistance through ECHO and TACIS .
I will be much obliged to you .
Mr President , Mongolia is developing into the democratic pearl of Central Asia .
Without oil or other minerals , it is trying to gain a foothold in the new globalising economy .
The country is making a name for itself in the world of sports , as was evident recently in the skating event in my own country , and it deals with political landslides well , as was apparent from the most recent elections .
In the tough fight for a place in the world , the country is , for the second year running , afflicted by extreme cold after a summer which was too dry .
One hundred thousand families and twelve million cattle are on the brink of starvation .
That problem is made still worse by the fact that , in the past , Mongolia used to supply countries like Russia and Finland with large amounts of beef .
The accession of Finland to the European Union closed off the Finnish market to a large degree , and massive European food aid to Russia meant that Mongolia was sidelined on that market too .
The European Union thus owes Mongolia something .
The ECHO funds are appropriate here , and it would be to the European Union ' s credit if more TACIS funds were to be spent on stimulating this democratic rarity in Central Asia .
Democratically speaking , too , a good example will be keenly followed .
I would also like to find out from the Commission what concrete steps it intends to take in terms of ECHO funding , extra funding and emergency aid , but also - and mainly - by way of democratic encouragement of that country through making extra funding available to it through the TACIS programme , possibly in advance of the 2002 budget .
I feel I am in good company with Mr Staes , but also with our Vice-President , Mr Wiebenga , who is also committed to this region .
Commissioner , as far as this matter is concerned , you could make many people a lot happier this afternoon .
I can vouch for the fact that I too was impressed with the determination and democratic outlook of Mongolia ' s Vice-Premier , whom I received on behalf of Mrs Fontaine .
Mr President , first on the Mozambique flood situation , the Commission is following the current flood situation in Mozambique closely and is deeply concerned by the numbers of displaced people and by the loss of life which has already occurred .
I agree with what many of you have said : that this country has really suffered more than his reasonable in recent decades .
The Commission 's humanitarian aid office , ECHO , is in close contact with the Commission 's delegation in Mozambique and also with governmental and non-governmental organisations in the country .
The Commission 's assessment confirms the need for new humanitarian aid intervention in Mozambique .
Initial funding to the tune of EUR 2 million is currently being prepared .
The evolution of the situation is being closely monitored .
The Commission intervenes most appropriately from the relief phase onwards as search-and-rescue at such a distance is most effectively done by the South African and Mozambican air forces .
The Commission 's role can then be complementary after the initial phase .
The neighbouring countries of Malawi , Zambia and Zimbabwe are also affected by the abnormally heavy rainfall .
The situation in Mozambique is likely to persist for several weeks as water continues to be discharged from the Kariba and Cabora Bassa dams .
Food shortages are likely to continue until at least autumn this year even if there is no more heavy rain .
WFP estimates they are already feeding 80 000 people and are preparing to feed up to 150 000 .
The Commission pledged a package of aid totalling EUR 73.5 million to the reconstruction programme after the year 2000 floods including a total of EUR 10 million from ECHO funds .
EUR 63.5 million has been committed , of which EUR 23 million has actually been disbursed .
As to Mongolia , ECHO , in line with its mandate , is providing humanitarian relief to the people affected by the extreme weather conditions in Mongolia since last year .
Last year , ECHO allocated almost EUR 2 million of emergency relief to address the basic food needs of the most vulnerable families affected by the severe 1999-2000 winter and the subsequent summer drought in Mongolia .
In 2001 , in response to the appeal for international assistance by the Mongolian government and based on the humanitarian needs assessment by FAO and Red Cross Family , ECHO has launched an emergency funding decision of EUR 1 million .
This decision , currently in the pipeline for adoption , foresees the distribution of food , agriculture inputs and medical items to the most vulnerable strata of society in the affected provinces .
The aid will be provided by the International Federation of the Red Cross and two ECHO partners , Save the Children from the UK and Premier Urgence of France .
ECHO is closely monitoring the general situation in the country to identify potential further needs for humanitarian aid .
I now give the floor to Mr Maat .
Mr President , I do not wish to re-open the debate , but a number of delegates have explicitly raised some questions regarding structural investments using more TACIS funding , also in the light of the special democratisation process which is unfolding in Mongolia .
The Commissioner has not commented on this at all .
I believe that justice would be done to Parliament if he were to devote a few words to this topic .
I am having a quick look in the direction of the Commissioner , since we are not really short of time .
I notice the Commissioner would like to briefly go into this point .
Mr President , I am not in a hurry at all .
I am here the whole evening .
But on the questions , which are totally pertinent , I am not in a position to give , let us say , improvised replies , I will transmit all your questions to my colleagues who are responsible for these matters and they will then inform the honourable Members of Parliament .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 6.30 p.m.
( The sitting was suspended until 5.30 p.m. )
Assistants ' statute
The next item is the oral question ( B5-0010 / 2001 ) by Mr Rocard to the Commission , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , concerning the Commission ' s proposal for an Assistants ' Statute .
I call on the author of this question , Mr Rocard , to introduce the subject .
Mr President , Commissioner , pursuant to the Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament , the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs is competent ' to protect the conditions of life and work , including the work environment ' .
This fine definition authorises us , therefore , to examine the situation of our assistants .
Indeed it obliges us to do so .
It would be odd if the committee I have the honour of chairing were responsible for all workers in Europe , the sole exception being the assistants in the European Parliament .
That has , in fact , been the strange situation up to the present time .
Far be it from me , however , to trespass on the competencies of the specific bodies of the European Parliament !
That is why , Commissioner , when we heard the representatives of the assistants , we did it in the presence and with the cooperation of Vice-President Onesta , who was instructed by the Bureau of our Parliament to deal with these problems .
Now the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs wants to make its contribution to the quest for innovative solutions .
Most of our colleagues are fully familiar with the problems faced by the assistants , which range from job insecurity to the difficulties of legal establishment on Belgian territory , where many of them live .
The Bureau of the European Parliament has already taken a crucial internal decision designed to improve transparency in the management of secretarial allowances , which was mentioned in Mr Onesta ' s report .
I welcome this decision .
It will enable assistants to have an employment contract in the prescribed form , social security cover , which not all of them have , and occupational accident insurance .
There are , however , other problems that have not been resolved .
These relate essentially to the specific situation of assistants , who are de facto cross-border workers , without their rights as such being recognised .
That is why the expert study commissioned by the European Commission contemplated using existing European legislation on the free circulation of workers and to incorporate into it the specific situation of parliamentary assistants .
This solution appears both realistic and reasonable .
It is realistic because much vaunted Regulation No1408 / 71 , which all my parliamentary colleagues are familiar with and which governs the free circulation of workers , students and pensioners , etc , is not a text which has been set in stone .
For more than five years it has been subjected by the Council to a process of simplification , dusting-down and improvement , which is to be wound up under the Belgian Presidency . At least that is what the European Parliament hopes .
This year we are being presented with amendments to the text .
During the last part-session I think I understood correctly that a large number of my fellow Members wanted a general overhaul of the text rather than just technical improvements .
Nonetheless , in February we approved the last amendment that both the Council and the Commission asked us to approve .
In other words this text could easily be modified and adapted to the situation of the assistants and it could enable them to choose the country of establishment when it comes to matters of social security payments and it could guarantee their other rights to social protection .
This realistic solution is also reasonable .
The Council wanted the European Parliament to reform its relations with its assistants in the name of transparency .
This first step was achieved thanks to the decision to which I have referred .
It does not wish to tackle tax issues .
Recourse to Regulation No 1408 / 71 does not make this necessary .
Fine !
The Council does not want to give assistants the status of officials .
This is not what we are asking - it is very different .
What we want is simply to guarantee their fundamental rights to social protection .
In other words , all the conditions have now been met and we can now make real headway in this area . That is the reason , Commissioner , for our question to the Commission , which has always expressed its determination to make headway in this area hand-in-hand with the European Parliament .
The Commission has the political initiative , but we now ask it to make use of it and to formally present a proposal to amend Regulation No 1408 / 71 by adding a simple subparagraph covering the situation of the assistants .
It is then up to the Council to shoulder its responsibilities and to decide whether or not to keep our assistants and ourselves in a state of legal and social uncertainty .
The European Parliament has already embarked on internal work to set the ball rolling .
The way forward depends on the normal legislative process .
It is up to the Commission to put forward a proposal now and Parliament will then be able to complete its work to issue internal regulations to deal with the question of the assistants .
That is the thinking behind our question to the Commission .
Within what timeframe , Commissioner , will this crucial text be proposed ?
The best solution would be before the start of the Belgian Presidency , since our assistants work in Belgium .
It is a pressing matter , Commissioner , and it also affects the ethics and image of our Parliament .
The Commission attaches a great deal of importance to the matter of assistants to Members of the European Parliament .
In 1998 the Commission , with Parliament 's agreement , drew up a proposal to amend the conditions of employment for other staff so that Parliamentary assistants would become auxiliary staff .
I happened to be the Commissioner responsible at the time .
This would have ensured equal treatment for assistants in terms of their salary , employment conditions and tax , with a choice of a social security system .
As you know , however , this proposal was not accepted by the Council .
By agreement with the European Parliament and the Council , the Commission then commissioned an expert study with various solutions that would be compatible with Community law and the interests of the assistants and the Members of Parliament .
The experts suggested that one aspect of the assistants ' legal status could be dealt with by another Community instrument , namely Regulation No 1408 / 71 , which coordinates the social security schemes of the Member States .
The assistants are already covered by this regulation and it brings them , in principle , under the social security system of the Member State where they work .
Vice-President Onesta has contacted my colleague , Commissioner Diamantopoulou , suggesting that the Commission puts forward a proposal to the Council and Parliament for an amendment to this regulation , allowing assistants to chose between the Member State where they work , the Member State where they were last insured or the Member State of which they are a national .
A similar option is already available to auxiliary staff of the institutions .
Such an amendment would only resolve a very specific and small part of the assistants ' legal position and would not exonerate them from the obligations of national law in regard to labour conditions , tax and social security .
However , the Commission has committed itself to finding solutions which are in the interests of both assistants and Members of Parliament .
The suggested amendment can indeed clarify the legal position of the assistants as far as their social security rights are concerned .
It seems that the application of Regulation No 1408 / 71 to this category of workers still gives rise to uncertainty , which can be removed by the amendment .
Once they have made a choice there should be no further misunderstanding as to which Member State ' s system they are subject to .
Moreover , it seems justified to derogate from the general rules of the regulation for persons working on a temporary basis for members of Community institutions , such as auxiliary staff .
My draft then reads as follows : ' Therefore the Commission intends to propose shortly to Parliament and Council the suggested amendment to Regulation No 1408 / 71 ' .
If asked what ' shortly ' means , I can say that it will be before the summer .
That means that this issue can be decided during the Belgian Presidency .
Mr President , since the first direct elections in 1979 I have taken part in all part-sessions of our European Parliament here in Strasbourg from Mondays to Fridays , fifteen of those years as assistant to our unforgotten colleague Otto von Habsburg and now for seven years as a Member of Parliament .
Before this , I dealt with this subject as a journalist for a daily newspaper , so I think I know the subject from all three sides that are particularly involved here .
I would therefore like to say that I welcome the fact that with our provisional arrangement we have found something that both preserves flexibility and affords security and that the Court of Auditors has also accepted as a sensible and workable system , although I do have a problem with changing the contract basis in mid-period .
I think that should really always be settled at the start of the period .
Now we are looking at the final assistants ' statute , and we naturally welcome such an assistants ' statute .
But I would like to sound a warning against excessive bureaucracy and inflexibility .
There are rumoured to be plans for all assistants to be subject to Belgian law .
That would not only be a problem for the many staff we maintain in our constituencies , because the very purpose of that is to strengthen feedback to the constituency , but it would also fail to take account of the structure of our Parliament ' s work , because following the Council ' s decision this House has its seat in Strasbourg and holds its plenary sessions here .
As a result , it is often more sensible for Members from southern Germany and from France , for example , to employ an assistant for Strasbourg and for their constituency than to bring the Brussels assistant to Strasbourg .
Strasbourg is the seat of Parliament .
There is therefore no point in making assistants who work here , for example , subject to Belgian law .
Brussels is an important place of work , but it is just a place of work , like Luxembourg .
I therefore believe the system must be flexible , that there must be a freedom of choice here that does justice both to Parliament ' s three places of work , to the seat in Strasbourg and to the need for constituency work .
I therefore believe that the Council , Commission and Parliament must find an arrangement that gives our assistants security but which , as I said , takes account of this Parliament ' s specific working conditions , which it did not set for itself , and which enables Members to make arrangements under the laws of the Member State where they were elected or to use an arrangement that does equal justice to their manner , structure and style of work and to the legitimate social interests of our assistants .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I think we can congratulate ourselves on having brought a question before this House today which has been pending for far too long .
It is impossible not to be surprised at this inability to resolve a precarious situation which affects the parliamentary assistants , people who assist us on a daily basis , whilst we are competent to legislate on certain aspects of the conditions of life and work of all the citizens of the fifteen Member States ?
It is in fact a question of finding solutions to crucial and fundamental issues concerning social protection , the employment statute , occupational accidents and all the issues of social cover with which we are so familiar , so that we can deal with them in relation to all the workers in the fifteen Member States .
It is also a question of making an effort to clarify the definition of their working conditions , which , I admit , are rather the preserve of internal meetings .
This issue has been raised over a very long period of time by our group and , as we have just been reminded , by other groups as well .
During the previous legislative period of the European Parliament , proposals to formalise the statute came up against the reluctance of the Council to turn assistants into officials and to include the tax dimension of the problem in the equation .
I think that today , however , we should be clear about what our objectives are .
These demands are now no longer written in this way in the agenda .
It is clear that we do not want to turn our assistants into Community officials , just as it would be out of place to want to link the issue of the assistants ' statute to that of Members of Parliament .
Why , as was expressed so well by Mr Rocard , do you vie with each other to complicate an issue where the stakes are so clear and so legitimate , and which may find solutions in procedures that are perfectly ordinary , accessible and simple ?
The real issue today is to see how the Commission is going to follow up the work , which it asked an expert to carry out on this matter .
It is true that the recent developments introduced by the Bureau of the European Parliament - the provision of contracts in the prescribed form and documents testifying to membership of a social security system and of an occupation accident insurance scheme - are good decisions , but the matter does not end there . It would be extremely important , for instance , to be able to check the information which is gathered .
However , the proposal put forward to regard our assistants as genuine cross-border workers so that they can consequently have recourse to Regulation No 1408 / 71 , to which we just have to add a subparagraph in order to cover them , seems entirely appropriate .
Commissioner , our assistants expect the Commission to take the initiative .
The Belgian Presidency would be doing itself credit by bringing this affair to a successful conclusion . However , Commissioner , you have just told us that proposals will be forthcoming before the summer .
Thank you . We look forward to them .
We thank you above all on behalf of all the assistants who work in this House .
Mr President , Commissioner , colleagues , if I may begin on a personal note it is now nearly two years since I was campaigning on an election platform that stressed the need for proper statutes for Members and their assistants .
It is extremely embarrassing to have to admit to the public at home just how slow progress has been where both statutes are concerned .
Of the two , I am more embarrassed in respect of the assistants ' statute because this is a case where as MEPs we are directly responsible in matters affecting the lives of others .
My group is grateful to the Commission for its approach to Professor Vandersanden and for the proposals that he has made .
We have not yet discussed in detail his substantive suggestions as to what should be done within the Parliament 's own rules of procedure .
We may therefore find ourselves disagreeing with these suggestions in various respects .
We do however believe that his methodology which distinguishes between what might be achieved under these rules and what actually requires legislation are a promising route forward .
We are very glad to hear of the outcome of the trialogue and the Commission 's statement today promising proposals for the revision of Regulation No 1408 / 71 .
We would add however that whatever scheme is ultimately adopted , and by whatever means , it must have certain characteristics .
First , it must be simple .
It must be simple both in terms of clarity and in terms of its administration .
Second , it must provide the legal certainty .
This means that it must be comprehensive in its coverage of the employment relationship .
This need not mean rigidity and uniformity .
It means only that , for example , all assistants must be properly covered for any accidents occurring to them in the course of their work .
Third , it must be transparent .
In my own personal view we should be trying to move towards a system where there is equal pay for work of equal value .
Given though that assistants may be employed in a number of different locations and have different tasks to perform , this may be difficult to achieve .
We should at least however seek to ensure that no one is allowed to fall below a certain minimum and that the reasons for any differentials are clear .
I believe that in the long term there can be no substitute for a proper statute but we do at least now have an initial path to follow .
I hope that we move down it as rapidly as we can .
In case you are not already aware , may I inform you that the presidency has charged Vice-President Onesta with the task of carrying the assistants ' statute forward on behalf of the presidency .
Without wishing to pre-empt him , I would like to say that we are all very pleased with his personal commitment to the matter .
We are therefore especially looking forward to what Mr Onesta will say to us .
Mr President , thank you .
Thank you too Mr Rocard , in your role as chairman of the specialist committee , for speaking to you , Commissioner , on behalf of the European Parliament , because it is clear that , as concerns this statute , we are moving very slowly .
Our Parliament has been in existence for so many years yet we are still trying to settle this issue , which should have been taken off the agenda years ago .
You have given us some good news .
The pace is to be speeded up .
We can all rejoice at that .
What is the current state of play ?
The Council asked us to abandon the route towards turning our assistants into officials .
We complied .
We withdrew this document , which had caused the Council so many problems , from the negotiating table .
The Council asked Parliament to get rid of any reference to taxation .
We complied , and the assistants themselves acknowledge that they are prepared to relinquish any reference to taxation as long as they get a proper statute .
The Council also asked us to take all the necessary measures to ensure transparency and , as our fellow Members have reminded us , everything is in hand .
In a few weeks ' time , no Member of Parliament we will be able to have access to their budget line to pay their assistants if they have not first made an appropriate declaration to the parliamentary services - and I did my duty as an employer this afternoon .
They will therefore not have access to their budget line until they have handed in a copy of all their contracts , in the prescribed form , together with proof that their assistants have full social cover and are well protected in the event of an occupational accident .
Finally , in a few weeks ' time , the whole of Europe will know the names of our assistants .
We are really going to come out into the open , because , at present , no Member of Parliament is able to provide the list of all those people who work so hard to ensure that the European Community functions properly .
So , here we are .
We have taken the steps we were asked to take .
We would not understand it if , now , the Commission did not do what it always said it would do in the many varied contacts we have had , that it was ready , when the time came , to take the decisive step to finally enable us to have a legal basis to take us forward .
We would not understand it if , once this step had been taken by the Commission , the Council , which has always told us , whether it be under the Finnish Presidency , the Portuguese Presidency , the French Presidency and now the Swedish Presidency , that it too was ready to do its bit , did nothing .
Parliament has done its bit .
It is now up to the other institutions to do theirs .
What can be done ?
I believe that the report by Mr Vandersanden , which you , Commissioner , masterminded and circulated , is a good working base .
Modifying Regulation No 1408 / 71 is the right thing to do because then we will have something simple and consistent and we will finally be able to give our assistants a statute which does not suffer from any legal debate .
It is not a question of seeking to harmonise social protection systems , but simply to coordinate policies , which amending this regulation will allow .
Let no one tell us that this is complicated , even though unanimity is required in Council . Since 1997 , it has been possible to make no fewer than five amendments to this regulation and always unanimously .
Give us a legal basis .
In the working group I lead , in which all the political groups are represented , Parliament is finally debating this issue with a united voice .
All the political groups are united in asking you to take this decisive step .
Of course , once you have taken this decisive step and , we hope , the Council has followed your example , we will not have a real assistants ' statute .
There will still not be a code of ethics , a collective agreement and a system of equalisation to ensure fairness amongst all assistants , as my colleague from the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party said , where there is equal pay for work of equal value .
This system of fairness can be introduced in the form of an equalisation fund at the level of the European Parliament .
Give us this legal basis and we will do the rest .
We need you to take this decisive step .
Our fellow Members have said so .
Legality , simplicity , transparency and a high level of social protection are called for .
If you give us legality , we will guarantee simplicity , transparency and a high level of social protection .
Mr President , Commissioner , I fully agree with what Mr Onesta has just said .
For too long now our parliamentary assistants have worked without being protected by a statute .
Although the vast majority of Members of Parliament have guaranteed them correct working and salary conditions , it must be acknowledged that the practices of a number of our colleagues has somewhat tarnished the image of the European Parliament .
The lack of control and transparency in the management of secretarial allowances paved the way for abuse .
And , as Jacques Loyau , President of the Association of Assistants , deplored at the time , in the absence of a safeguard , everything was possible and there were considerable disparities .
A survey carried out by the Association of Assistants more than a year ago highlighted a worrying situation .
Fourteen per cent did not have a contract of employment ; 12 % had only external consultant contracts , even though they worked full time , and 53 % did not have any social cover or accident insurance .
This survey served as the basis for the action taken by the parliamentary assistants and their Association , which our group supported from its beginnings .
Some initial results were obtained within the European Parliament with the adoption , by the Bureau , of the amendment to Article 14 of the rules on the costs and allowances of Members of Parliament .
As our President , Nicole Fontaine , stressed at the time that the matter of the assistants had made significant and concrete headway and that the transitory measures which had been adopted reflected the will and determination of the European Parliament to move towards greater transparency and fairness in this area ..
These measures , which came into force on 1 January this year , have indeed enabled us to strengthen our control over the use of the secretarial allowance and to guarantee each assistant a contract of employment , health insurance and occupation accident insurance .
This progress , which has been made thanks to the perseverance of the Association of Assistants and to the efficient work of our Vice-President , Gérard Onesta , served as a base for our negations with the Council .
However , as we have heard , for months now , despite our best efforts , this matter seems to have been deadlocked .
I am therefore very interested to hear that an agreement has been reached in principle between the Commission and the European Parliament to amend the free movement of workers regulation along the lines the assistants would like to see .
I welcome this .
It seems that the way is now clear for us to be able to move forwards very soon towards a European statute whereby , in the words Parliament chose in its opinion of 11 March 1999 , assistants are treated equally and in accordance with the work they carry out .
Mr President , I would like to extend my heartfelt thanks to Commissioner Liikanen , Mr Rocard and Vice-President Onesta for their input today and for all the hard work they have done to date .

Naturally , that does not mean that Members are not first and foremost responsible for their assistants ' having sound labour contracts , including social security , good working conditions and insurance policies .
It is primarily up to us to put proper arrangements in place .
Unfortunately , we have now discovered that we have failed in this respect , and that there is now an extra need for a sound statute for our assistants .
The EDD Group is lending its unqualified support to the assistants ' legitimate wishes .
I would like to make one final remark in this connection .
Vast discrepancies between the EP permanent staff , the temporary staff of the groups and the assistants are not justified , particularly as they , to a large extent , do the same type of work .
The Council should perhaps reconsider precisely what now constitute unjustified discrepancies .
Indeed , we must repudiate discrimination at all times .
The freedom of assistants to choose the social system under which they want to work is of great importance , in my view .
I would , however , like to concur with Mr Posselt who has warned against too much red tape .
It is already very complex and time-consuming to act in the correct manner .
Members should also have the freedom to employ assistants in their own Member States or in Brussels , and we should not be restricted in this choice in future .
Mr President , I have some speaking time left , but Commissioner Liikanen has managed to reassure me to a great extent .
I wish him a lot of success and hope that the activities will indeed be completed before the summer .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , my heartfelt thanks go to Mr Rocard for bringing up the issue of the assistants ' statute again in his oral question .
He was right to raise the matter again , authoritatively , clearly and incontrovertibly , since Parliament has repeatedly made commitments on the issue .
I would also stress , in addition to the indisputable nature of these commitments , the role of the socialists who , particularly within the Committee on Budgets , have fought on the front line every year to ensure that these commitments are included in the budget lines , and they will do so on this occasion with regard to this operation too .
This evening , the Bureau and the Vice-President and Commissioner Liikanen have made somewhat significant commitments .
These commitments are a step in the right direction although they are still not a full response .
We need to provide a definitive , comprehensive response dealing with national insurance contributions , tax and salaries , and the rights and responsibilities associated with an - albeit temporary - position .
There is a need for swift action , for it is our duty to ensure the greatest possible transparency and total legality of a relationship , certain aspects of which still make a mockery of respect for workers ' rights and the principles which we desire to uphold for all and which we must protect , especially for those who work with us .
It is our duty to guarantee respect for the dignity of these professionals who , moreover , make a valuable , high-quality contribution to our work .
Mr President , I believe that this is the first time that the debate on assistants to Members of the European Parliament has had the honour of being discussed in the open , in other words , in a plenary sitting .
I therefore wish to begin by welcoming in particular the initiative presented here by our colleague , Mr Rocard , to bring into the open a debate which must be conducted with the utmost transparency .
Ladies and gentlemen , from a personal point of view , I would even argue for a common statute for parliamentary assistants based on the categories currently laid down in the Staff Regulations .
The revision proposed as a joke by Commissioner Kinnock might even be a good opportunity to lay down a decision of this type .
In any event , I suspect that we are a long way from that point .
We must therefore do the best with what we have and with solutions which may be enshrined in European instruments , such as the Staff Regulations , but which represent only one possible approach towards a future European statute .
We all know that the new rules adopted by Parliament on the situation of parliamentary assistants are nothing more than internal regulations .
We must ensure the transparency of the contracts , public recruitment procedures , the requirement for an effective system of social protection and the payment of tax in each of the Member States .
These rules are an expression of our political will but they also reveal the weakness of Parliament ' s powers to regulate an entire statute for parliamentary assistants , which involves , of course , much more than just these issues .
In any event , now that these rules have been agreed on , I am sure that there is a broad majority in this House , and this can be seen in the Bureau , in the Contact Group and in the speeches that have been made here , that wishes the Council to frame in law what is already being practised , affecting only our institutions , through an amendment to Regulation No 1408 / 71 , which is a general rule covering migrant workers .
Ultimately , by means of the amended base Regulation which applies to all the Member States , we want parliamentary assistants to be given the right , as migrant workers , to be able to choose to be governed by the legislation of the country that is most relevant to their work , which is divided between Brussels , Strasbourg , Luxembourg and the country of origin of the Member of the European Parliament for whom they work .
We have been informed today , by Commissioner Liikanen , that the Commission is , at last , going to get the ball rolling on this dossier .
We will then begin to emerge from the tunnel in which we are stuck if the Belgian Presidency manages to close this dossier .
Later , if the Belgian Presidency is successful , we will have to conclude the work . That , however , Mr President , is simply a matter of tidying up loose ends .
Mr President , Commissioner , everything has been said .
When the European Parliament ' s Committee on Employment and Social Affairs took the decision to put this question to you , it had three objectives .
The first was to assure our assistants publicly that this matter was being taken on board by the European Parliament .
We have done that .
The second was to make sure that the Commission , which itself had commissioned the expert , Mr Vandersanden , was prepared to capitalise on its work and to follow it up by taking precise administrative action .
You have pledged to do this .
Our third objective was to have a timetable , which was particularly related to the fact that the Belgian Presidency was just around the corner and that the problem essentially concerned Belgian social security .
The Belgian Presidency must therefore deal with this matter , it cannot escape it , but the preparatory work must be done first .
You have just given that assurance , for which I thank you .
Just now , our fellow Member , Mr Pittella , justifiably called on us to arrive at a full and final solution to the problem of the assistants , and he was right to do so .
We all know , however , that this will take time and it will involve a number of different stages and much effort . We need the involvement of the three institutions : the Commission , the Council and Parliament .
We can , though , only do our work once you have done yours .
The essential stage is always the next one . Thank you for pledging to help us get through it .
I thank Parliament for this very clear message .
I will pass this on to my colleague , Commissioner Diamantopoulou and also to President Prodi to guarantee that our internal procedures will be fast enough so that when the Belgian presidency is in office the proposal is on the table .
We normally expect the Commissioner to speak for 10 minutes , but today he has spoken for only 10 sec