Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 28 March 1996 .
Welcome
Ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the House let me welcome a delegation from the Grand Committee of the Finnish Parliament , i.e. , the European Affairs Committee of the Finnish Parliament , led by its chairman , Mr Erkki Tuomioja .
I bid you a warm welcome !
We are pleased at this visit , which reflects the increasingly close cooperation between us and the national parliaments in the Union , and I wish our Finnish colleagues a pleasant stay in Strasbourg and , of course , useful and interesting discussions in this House !
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of the sitting of Thursday , 28 March 1996 have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , on behalf of my fellow-members from the Committee on Agriculture I should like to ask you to change a few things in the voting about the BSE resolution .
Obviously one or two things have gone wrong .
Points 16 and 17 now contradict one another whereas the voting showed otherwise .
I shall be passing on to you some comments which you could perhaps take up with regard to the voting .
I will have to look into that , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten .
I cannot say anything at this stage .
We will consider the matter .
Mr President , it concerns the speech made last week by Mr Fischler on BSE and reported in the Minutes .
Perhaps the Commission or you could clarify a point for me .
It would appear that a speech made at the weekend by Mr Fischler indicates a change of his position .
I welcome this change because he has said that he will eat British beef and that the ban was imposed specifically for economic and political reasons .
Could somebody clarify that he has actually said this please , Mr President , because it is a change of views .
Mr Sturdy , I cannot see what that has to do with the Minutes .
Mr President , on exactly the same point as Mr Sturdy has raised .
If Commission Fischler has made this statement , then he has said that it is not a matter of public health .
If it is not a matter of public health , he has no legal base , if he has no legal base then he may very well face legal action from the people his statement has damaged .
Mr Smith , the same applies to your point ; it has nothing to do with the Minutes .
Mr President , again on BSE .
If Mr Fischler has changed his views does this mean the Commission has ?
This was actually referred to in the Minutes .
He said that any funding would also go towards supporting workers who had directly lost their jobs .
So far nothing has come of this in any scheme that has been put forward .
Does this mean the Commission has changed its view on supporting workers who have lost their jobs through this scare ?
I note that there are no comments on the Minutes .
( Parliament approved the Minutes )
Mr President , since our last meeting in Strasbourg there was a report from the news agency AFP on 26 March that thirteen irregularly employed workers were identified in a police blitz on the building site of our new hemicycle .
Eight of these workers were undeclared and five others were citizens of one Member State employed by a building contractor in another Member State who were drawing unemployment benefit in France .
Now that is clearly a fraud on the French taxpayer as well as a fraud on the European citizens .
Can we ask the Bureau to look into this fact .
When the European Parliament , that so frequently insists on workers ' rights and proper social protection , is building a hemicycle , it should make sure that the contracts concerning those employed in the buildings should provide for full social protection and full payment .
Can we ask you as President to make sure that is happening with the taxpayers ' money for which we are collectively responsible .
Mr Tomlinson , would you please give me the documents concerned .
Then I will look into the matter , both in the presidency and with the other organizations in question .
You yourself know best how difficult and complicated the legal situation is between Parliament and the firms contracted to build the hemicycle .
After all , we have in you an expert who is in any case closely concerned with these matters .
Mr President , I should like to deal very briefly with two matters .
First , since we condemned at the time ETA 's terrorist murders and kidnappings , today we can give you the news that the hostage who beats all records in Spain - almost a year 's captivity , 342 days , - has been freed , not , it is true , by the forces of public order , but he is at liberty .
And I should be very pleased - and so , I think , would all Members , particularly the Spanish Members and perhaps still more those who are distinguished by being Spanish Basques - if you would send a message to the hostage 's family to congratulate them on his freedom .
Secondly I should like to point out , before the agenda is settled , that the importance of the bombardment of Lebanese territory by the State of Israel will make it necessary to ask for a statement from the Council .
These indiscriminate and unfair bombardments not only infringe human rights but may also pose a threat to the independence and integrity of the State of Lebanon , which is guaranteed by international law and by Resolution 245 of the United Nations Security Council .
Thank you !
Order of business
Mr President , I should like to ask a question .
We were too late to hand it in , but it has been discussed with a number of Members .
It is the following . I think that in view of present events in the Middle East , we ought to ask whether the Council can make a statement on Wednesday afternoon about the way things are going .
We note that the situation is changing every day .
We see that the French Government has sent a mediator .
We hear nothing from the presidency .
Nor have we heard anything , unfortunately , from the Commission .
That is reason enough for us to be put in the picture .
I should like to ask you to see whether it is possible for the Italian presidency to do that on Wednesday afternoon .
We recognize that the agenda is very full .
I might suggest that , at least as far as the EPP Group is concerned , we could perhaps take this question up on Wednesday afternoon and then omit the Chernobyl question , otherwise I think we shall not get through .
Then we could deal with Chernobyl some time later .
I offer that as a suggestion , Mr President . If you would like to arrange things some other way so that we do not need to take Chernobyl off the agenda that would suit us just as well .
Mr President , my group is certainly of the view that what is happening in the Middle East is very significant and that we cannot let this week with Parliament in full session pass without any response or discussion .
Could we leave it to you , Mr President , to see whether the Council is prepared to make a statement on the Middle East and what is happening in the Lebanon ?
Could we then look to you to see what is possible .
I am reluctant , as I know many of my colleagues are , to remove Chernobyl from the agenda , as suggested by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten .
However , it would be possible for us to come back to the issue of Chernobyl which does not have such immediacy although it is the tenth anniversary .
We could take this in two weeks ' time , whereas the issue of Lebanon is crucial at this moment .
Perhaps , Mr President , we could ask you to look at this with the Council and see what would be possible .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think it is important that we should discuss the situation in the Middle East this week .
We all agree on that .
But I think it is equally important that we discuss Chernobyl this week .
I cannot support this proposal .
The whole world is talking about the tenth anniversary .
A major conference was held in Vienna .
There was a tribunal .
And then we say we will postpone it to whenever .
I really think it would show Parliament in a poor light if we do not discuss it on Wednesday .
We must not turn it into a competition between Chernobyl and the proposal to ask the Council to report on the situation in the Middle East this week and to debate on it , and then put Chernobyl in second place !
There are various other options .
We can listen to the Council on the subject on Wednesday morning , but please not just in a week 's time .
At a time when the whole world is discussing Chernobyl and the effects of that disaster , we in this Parliament cannot say , we shall hold back and say nothing about it !
Mr President , I have already given you the reasons why the Council should make a statement about the bombardment of Lebanon .
In discussing the Euro-Mediterranean Conference , to which we gave the greatest prominence , we cannot then wash our hands of it and leave it to the European powers to take diplomatic steps in the Middle East outside the necessary agreement within the Union .
That would be a bad sign for the Intergovernmental Conference and for the future of the European Union .
But I think , like Mrs Roth , that we cannot make the subject of Chernobyl and the subject of the Middle East compete in the ' free market for news items ' .
We must seek out the opportunity to discuss both subjects .
Mr President , like previous colleagues , I believe it to be absolutely essential that the Council make a statement on Wednesday about the Middle East situation , particularly in southern Lebanon .
What is happening there is worrying and distressing because the whole peace process that has been under way for several months could be threatened .
And the most important task is to stop the fighting and give priority to diplomatic moves , wherever they come from , provided they finally lead to the silencing of the rockets and guns and some real progress towards peace and stability in the region .
We should also remember Lebanon itself , which has been ravaged for many years , under the domination of one foreign power while part of its territory is occupied by another .
So it is surely our duty to make a statement on the subject : we are witnessing events which , I am convinced , should persuade us to find a slot in Wednesday 's agenda for such a statement and the subsequent debate .
Ladies and gentlemen , this is one of the cases where there is no satisfactory solution because someone is bound to be disappointed and any decision is bound to be to the detriment of someone 's interests .
Let me describe the situation to you as I see it .
First , let me please establish whether the Council is prepared and in a position to make a statement .
If that should be the case , there is no point our making any changes to the agenda for Wednesday because as it stands now it is not possible to include an additional statement by the Council .
My proposal then - not now - will probably be that we postpone the scheduled report by Mrs Gonzáles Álvarez on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection on the proposal for a Council decision establishing a Community action programme in the field of civil protection to a later date and shorten Question Time by half an hour .
The only other options would be to reduce the duration of our debates quite drastically , either at the cost of Chernobyl , which a large number of Members does not want , or at the cost of the Oostlander report and the Council and Commission statement on the Turin European Council .
But it would be neither right nor a good idea to shorten that debate since the Italian President-in-Office of the Council will be here on Wednesday morning .
So the only possible compromise is to postpone the Gonzáles Álvarez report and cut Question Time by half an hour .
I realise that to do so would be at the cost of Members who have questions .
That is regrettable .
It is not that we will satisfy everybody this way , but if we are to try to find a solution , I am convinced that is the only possible one .
The order of business for this week is thus established .
Energy efficiency
The next item is the report ( A4-0088 / 96 ) by Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , on the proposal for a Council Decision ( COM ( 95 ) 0225 - C4-0603 / 95-95 / 0131 ( SYN ) ) concerning a multiannual programme for the promotion of energy efficiency in the Community - SAVE II .
Mr President , the SAVE II Commission proposal on energy efficiency in the European Union which is to run for five years is a continuation of the SAVE I programme .
Unfortunately , however , the Commission has not made use of the results of the evaluation of SAVE I in SAVE II .
Overall , this proposal is very vague and general and , sadly , contains no real topics or projects .
The legislative level has been disregarded entirely , although the evaluation of SAVE I showed that 80 % of the successes of that programme were achieved by means of legislative measures .
Many of the proposals for directives and action programmes planned by the Commission have for some obscure reason never seen the light of day .
For instance , it has been estimated that the introduction of calorimeters would have yielded savings of approximately 4.75 million tonnes of crude oil units and a CO2 reduction by the year 2010 of 12 million tonnes per year .
The savings from the introduction of an energy certificate for buildings would have been far higher than that even .
This list could be extended forever .
It is clear that whenever the practical will is not there , subsidiarity is brought up as an argument .
But the principle of subsidiarity is totally out of place here , firstly , because of the transfrontier nature of the CO2 problem and the need to harmonize environmental standards in the EU and , secondly , because progress has stagnated with regard to increased energy efficiency in the Member States .
That is why the responsibility for achieving the efficiency target and at the same time reducing CO2 lies with the Community , which in fact takes action when an objective can be achieved more effectively by Community measures .
Strictly speaking , it is the credibility of the EU that is at stake here .
The Commission and the Council have constantly declared how vital it is to reduce CO2 and to save energy .
The Council has set objectives in a series of resolutions , for example in its resolutions of 16.9.86 and 29.10.90 and in the commitments it made in Rio and Berlin .
So far , however , there has been no more than grandiloquent announcements and reams of paper .
The Commission itself estimates that the CO2 emissions will rise by up to 8 % in the period from 1995 to 2000 .
So one may well ask : is the Community actually taking its own practical declarations of intent and obligations towards its citizens , and towards the international community , seriously or is this just a theatre of the absurd ?
If it really is being serious , words must finally be followed by deeds .
We urgently need genuine measures to combat the greenhouse effect and increase energy efficiency .
The situation is too serious to allow for any further delay .
A beginning might be made with a genuinely ambitious SAVE II programme , as proposed by the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy .
That is why the amendments tabled by that committee should quite definitely be adopted .
The objection that such programmes can only be disruptive given the current economic climate and unemployment level in many Member States is unacceptable and merely ridiculous .
For in addition to their environmental dimension , they can also have a substantial positive impact on the economy .
According to the Commission , apart from its effects on the quality of life , these savings would also have positive effects on employment . That is something I will not contradict , so that logically you must approve our SAVE II report as it stands , given that SAVE II is the only programme the EU has at present in order to fulfil the obligations we entered into in Berlin and Rio and in many other undertakings we gave .
Let me repeat that I deeply regret that the committee did not accept my proposal that we extricate ourselves from this unholy cooperation procedure and aim at a co-decision procedure .
It would have been more sensible for Parliament always to apply the co-decision procedure .
If we give the money we should also be able to say that we would like to see legislative measures .
For that is the decisive point here .
Let me suggest a deal : if the Council says it does not really want to spend any money , as it likes to say in the case of renewable energy , then we should suggest that we will agree to less money as long as we see legislative measures instead .
Mr President , firstly I congratulate Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz on the amazing feat of achieving consensus in the Committee on Research . Technological Development and Energy .
I think she is well placed through her excellent report to achieve consensus in the plenary session of Parliament .
Energy efficiency is of fundamental importance both to the environmental and the competitiveness policies of the European Union .
As far as the environment is concerned , we are a long way off meeting the targets which we set ourselves in Rio .
We are suffering widespread climate instability because of that failure .
As far as competitiveness is concerned , we see a reprehensible and incredible waste of money throughout the European Union ; billions and billions of ecus are being wasted in energy usage that is not necessary .
Think of the purchasing power which those billions could release to our economy .
Larger firms are , of course , aware of this .
Our target through this programme has to be the smaller firms and individual households .
They must make the decisions which will allow us to save that energy and save that money .
If we look at the history we see very rapid action following the oil shock in 1973 .
Since then , however , there has been major regression tempered only by the recession which has hit most of our countries .
The energy / intensity use in most of the European Union is worsening .
That is unacceptable .
The SAVE I programme was very small beer , a very small amount of money .
It is being evaluated , fortunately , before we move on to SAVE II .
One would have hoped the lessons from SAVE I would be learnt .
That is not so , as I shall explain later on .
One of the lessons from SAVE I was that far and away the best thing to do is to bring in binding legislation which Member States have to enforce .
There were ambitious plans for legislation .
Very little of that legislation has appeared .
It is true that we have legislation on the efficiency of boilers , fridges and freezers , labelling , and there is more to come .
But that is not enough .
We know that the main obstacle has been the predictable resistance of manufacturers .
They have no vested interest in energy efficiency and that is clear from their stance .
Let us look at the lessons .
Firstly , legislation is what works .
Secondly , you must have targets and you must monitor them .
The target in SAVE II is not ambitious ; 1.5 % increase year-on-year is not ambitious .
I would like to see an indicative programme issued by the Commission and monitored throughout the Member States .
Another lesson that is important , not from SAVE I but from the regional programme , is that you must incorporate measures on energy efficiency into the regional work of the EU and its policies .
They help impoverished regions .
Of course the same would apply to third countries .
I would like to see far more emphasis in our dealings with countries in Central and Eastern Europe and the Mediterranean areas on energy efficiency .
One area which must be emphasized above all is transport .
Transport takes almost half the energy cost and it uses almost half the oil .
We have not done enough in that sector .
Then there are domestic and industrial appliances , insulation for the heating of homes , and in some parts of the EU for the cooling of homes .
There is a good home rating scheme developed in my own constituency which should be far more widespread .
It must be made easier for third parties to finance energy-efficient measures and for the growing industry of energy services to be helped .
This makes us competitive , remember .
Combined heat and power is another very sensible measure which needs encouragement ; as do education and information throughout the EU , particularly to the target groups .
We need millions of people to make decisions which do not seem obvious to them .
Employment would be greatly helped by an extension of energy efficiency .
This has been proved in study after study .
I am therefore deeply disappointed at the negative attitude of the Council of Ministers which cannot even be bothered to get a proper legal base for the SAVE II programme .
That is indeed reprehensible , given the urgency .
I think we will see this week a very clear expression of the will of the European Parliament representing people in every Member State .
That will is to say : ' Let us have much stronger measures for energy efficiency ' .
SAVE II is nowhere near ambitious enough .
It has not learned all the lessons from SAVE I. It is a very limited , minimal approach but it is absolutely essential that the Council of Ministers knows that the European Parliament is backing it very strongly indeed .
Mr President , on behalf of the European People 's Party I too would like to congratulate the rapporteur , both on the content of her report and on the consensus that she fostered in the committee .
That consensus has led to a number of common conclusions which I will not spell out in detail now .
However , it is worth pointing out once again that with this programme we are seeking to promote environmental improvement and to increase the competitiveness of Europe 's undertakings .
As Mrs McNally has stressed , this competitiveness must , above all , be focused , through the programme , on small and medium-sized enterprises , because that is where the lowest efficiency in the use of energy is to be found and where the greatest return can be gained .
The Commission 's proposal to treble the resources for the SAVE II programme , as compared with the SAVE I programme , is certainly encouraging . But having said that , there is the situation , which pertains for many of the European Union 's programmes , in which either we put all the financial resources into the first two or three years , which means that in the case of a five-year programme we are unable to take advantage of emerging new technologies as the programme moves towards completion , or , as often happens , we allocate all of the spending to the final two years , which makes it impossible for us to monitor our research programmes closely and to shape them as they progress .
SAVE II seems to be pointed towards the second of those two paths . However , it would perhaps be better if the funding could be allocated as evenly as possible over the whole duration of the programme .
SAVE II endeavours to strengthening pilot actions that were undertaken in the first programme and also makes provision for new actions .
As has already been said , the programme ignores the positive results that have stemmed from legislative measures and the possibility of achieving a further increase in energy efficiency via the same route .
Although I do not believe that legislation would help us down that route , I feel that we should not disregard the experience that we have gained from the past at a very heavy price .
I would therefore advise the Commission to look for a middle way , so as to provide an impetus to small and medium-sized enterprises in particular , as I said before .
Mr President , allow me also to say that in the Commission 's proposal the supporting limits and guidelines for all of the actions and measures are determined on the basis of economic efficiency and energy-saving potential .
However , it would also be useful if the Commission were to take account of the need to achieve convergence between the Member States in the area of energy efficiency .
Mr President , I support Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz 's report . She introduced it with her usual efficiency .
It is important that we support the continuation of the SAVE energy efficiency programme with a budget of ECU 120m for the period from 1996 to 2000 .
The SAVE initiative , which dates back to 1991 , is one of the cornerstones for the European Union policies to stabilize carbon dioxide emissions at 1990 levels by the year 2000 .
The renewal of the SAVE programme may be timely as the European Commission reports that the carbon dioxide target is being exceeded by 5 % .
However , I cannot emphasize enough , without reiterating all that has been said by Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz and other speakers , that the consequences of the worldwide increase in temperatures include the raising of sea level , climatic changes and an increased incidence of skin cancer .
Indeed , according to estimates , carbon dioxide accounts for 50 % of the greenhouse gases now present in the atmosphere .
Between 1991 and 1994 the SAVE programme funded a total of 203 pilot projects in the energy efficiency field .
In Ireland alone we undertook 12 pilot projects with the assistance of SAVE funds .
So I fully agree with the objective to improve energy efficiency by a further 1.5 % per annum within the European Union .
It is important in this context that the SAVE initiatives should be coordinated with other European Union energy initiatives such as THERMIE and SYNERGY .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am pleased first of all to compliment the rapporteur on the excellent report on SAVE II .
This report makes a contribution to the difficult but important battle for a sustainable environment and a sustainable development of our economy .
For the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party sustainable development means a situation in which the natural raw materials are so used that future generations can also make use of them in the same way .
Liberals start with their own responsibility and do not shuffle it off on to succeeding generations .
That of course means that there must be sustainable management of natural resources .
There is a price-tag on pollution .
So the environmental costs of consumption and production must be made visible in the economy .
The Committee on Energy has approved 35 amendments , four of them from the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party .
I should like to explain two of them .
In Recital 15 the committee states as its point of departure that by the year 2000 between 80 and 200 million tonnes of CO2 emissions could be avoided by a 5 % improvement in energy efficiency compared with conventional expectations .
A shift , ladies and gentlemen , in the use of energy sources , in particular in the direction of renewable energy sources , could make these figures considerably more attractive .
That should be encouraged in the framework of SAVE II .
In Amendment No 12 the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party wanted to emphasize that it is not only politically but economically desirable to open the SAVE II programme to the countries of Central and Eastern Europe and the associated countries in the Mediterranean area .
It is essential to apply modern energy technologies and to switch to cleaner industries in Eastern Europe .
That is good for the environment and good for the economy and benefits both the Union and third countries .
That is what makes this collaboration so significant .
Mr President , it is certainly appropriate that at least one representative of a Nordic state should take part in this debate on the programme for the promotion of energy efficiency .
It is extremely pleasant to come to warm Strasbourg from cold Finland , where the ice on the lakes is still half a metre thick , making it quite possible to drive over the ice to one 's island holiday home to go fishing .
There is quite a lot of snow too .
In the North , particularly in a country dominated by the paper industry , industrial users of course consume an enormous amount of energy , but we also use a lot of energy in heating . This winter has been particularly cold , and this has meant that considerably more energy has been used than normal .
Of course , we cannot do anything about the forces of nature .
We can , however , do a lot to improve energy efficiency .
In Finland , for example , there are currently enormous quantities of wood , of waste wood , which nobody uses .
And in order to make use of these forms of energy , we need money for research ; there is also plenty of room for improvement as regards all the existing forms of energy .
The directive on refrigerators , which the next speaker Mr Macartney has reported on , may even now be being debated in the Council .
Indeed , Parliament has only just debated this directive , and it must be said that in many developed countries the objectives set out there do not represent anything new .
We need to set more ambitious objectives and ensure that the old , wasteful sources of energy are modernized .
The SAVE programme is of great importance in all this improvement of energy efficiency , but in itself it does not help as much as it could .
I hope that this SAVE II programme will be adopted but there is much that could be done to improve it .
Mr President , I should like very much to congratulate my colleague , Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz on this excellent report and on the all-round consensus that has been achieved in the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy on this issue .
I have to say that it is a bit like motherhood .
Everyone supports energy savings , everyone is in favour of motherhood .
But where are the real supports .
The Commission has failed with these proposals to give us real support , key legislative proposals .
Parliament has stepped in and , correctly , pointed this out .
We do not have very much time left before the year 2000 to achieve the objectives we have set ourselves .
Let us have some real legislative proposals this time around .
The most important thing we have done recently is to evaluate the SAVE programme .
We have done an excellent evaluation and have come up with the real result that you need legislative proposals .
We need teeth to make the SAVE proposals sink in .
Unless we get teeth the Member States will not do the work .
We will not get the results we need .
We have to harmonize with other programmes .
We have to harmonize with THERMIE and SYNERGY and we have to export these ideas to third countries , particularly the East .
But let us show an example ourselves .
Where are the SAVE programmes for the European Parliament ?
Where are the energy saving programmes for the Commission ?
Let us do some real work ourselves on our own buildings .
Buildings are shooting up here and in Brussels .
Where are the real energy saving proposals there ?
We pontificate about what third countries and peripheral states should do all the time .
Let us do something real here in the heart of Europe where we have money .
Let us do it legislatively and with fiscal instruments .
I do not accept that we cannot use fiscal instruments .
It is about time we got back to using them .
Mr President , I wish to respond to the point made by Mrs Stenius-Kaukonen that those of us who live in the more northerly parts of Europe suffer from colder winters !
It is something which is fairly obvious when you state it but clearly it has profound implications for the people who live in those climates .
In particular , the Scots should take a leaf out of the book of the Finns , the Swedes and the Norwegians on how to insulate their houses .
A lot of lessons could be learned by our people and these could be applied right across Europe to everybody 's benefit .
This is an example of something which could be promoted right across Europe , and it is a great pity if some governments take refuge in subsidiarity and say that you cannot apply it to us and so miss the chance of doing something significant about the targets which Europe agreed to at the Rio Summit .
Our problem with the Commission and the Council of Ministers is not that we have any quarrel with their rhetoric or their good intentions , but is simply a question of their lack of ambition to translate this into resources and real measures .
Later on in this Parliament we shall be returning again to the subject of domestic freezers and fridges , which is a subject that often causes eyes to glaze over , I have to admit .
But when people realize how much energy the fridge or the freezer in their house consumes all the year round , I think they will realize this is important .
We are going to have a battle as a Parliament to get the fairly modest but realistic measures we put forward last time agreed upon and we will have to grit our teeth and say to the Commission and the Council of Ministers : tell us , do you really believe the rhetoric that you indulge in ?
Do you believe the targets that you agreed to at Rio ?
Then we can look forward to a kind of level playingfield Europe by all means , but also to one in which energy savings can offer a very great contribution towards the targets which we all believe in .
Mr President , almost three years ago today I stood in this spot and delivered the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection on the SAVE I programme .
At the end of my speech I said that we do not want to have to come back here in two or three years ' time to say : ' we told you so , so please try to strengthen this instrument ' .
Well , here I am doing just that , on behalf of the Environment Committee again , because , despite Parliament 's pleas , the SAVE I programme was not strengthened .
In fact , it was watered down to such an extent that the final text bore almost no resemblance to the original proposal .
This was a result , of course , of the pathetic lack of political will of Member State governments to tackle the greenhouse effect .
SAVE I , which Parliament criticized for having insufficient finance and ambition , detailed 13 legal actions and standards that would be undertaken .
In practice , only four directives emerged and it is unacceptable that the present proposal makes no reference to the failure of SAVE I as a legislative programme .
For instance , we still have no directive on energy efficiency of buildings .
It is sad that the current proposal does not contain more ambitious targets for energy saving .
In order to meet the EU 's Rio commitments people have already said that a 2.5 % per annum improvement in energy efficiency is needed .
The preamble to the SAVE II programme makes it clear that over the past decade little more than a 1 % improvement has been achieved across Europe , and there is very little in the Commission 's proposal to suggest that even this minimalist improvement will be sustained in coming years .
If the SAVE programme really is the cornerstone of the Community 's CO2 strategy - as the proposal states - then that strategy lies in tatters .
The lack of EUwide energy efficiency targets to date has meant that Member States have failed to implement the necessary energy-efficiency measures and the proposed targets are not sufficient to make up the deficit .
With the carbon tax stalled , it is more essential than ever for Europe to have an ambitious programme for promoting energy efficiency and curbing CO2 emissions .
Unfortunately , despite its increased budget and inclusion of targets , the Commission 's proposal gives little cause for optimism : ECU 150 million over five years is really derisory in the face of the problem we are facing .
It is , however , all we have at the present and , to that extent , I commend Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz 's excellent report to the House .
Mr President , clearly we welcome this report .
In energy conservation everybody wins .
At one stroke it protects the environment , conserves resources , boosts the economy and saves consumers money at the same time .
Energy efficiency and conservation are often forgotten altogether and Japan and our Scandinavian colleagues have shown how economic growth can actually be decoupled from the use and growth of energy .
At the time of Rio there was great excitement .
We believed in those targets .
This programme does not go far enough to meet those targets .
Energy strategy is a part of environmental policy and therefore must be decided at European level and that is why we must get serious .
So this is not enough .
What we need to have as well is energy taxation which gives out strong market signals , not the voluntary system we have at the moment but one that affects all states in unison , not an additional taxation but a way of reducing tax on employment and other areas .
I welcome this report very much , but it is only one part of the jigsaw .
Let us see the others .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , allow me first of all to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz , for her very important report , and also the draftsmen of the opinions of the parliamentary committees .
The SAVE I programme which ended in 1995 was initially devised as an energy efficiency programme .
However , as it progressed it became the cornerstone of the European Union 's strategy for reducing carbon dioxide emissions .
Following the presentation of the findings of the evaluation of the SAVE I programme the Commission took very serious account of many of the observations in the evaluation , and I can say that many of those observations and proposals have already been incorporated into the SAVE II programme .
However , we have also been guided by another factor , namely the lack of progress on the question of an energy tax .
And it is precisely that which has led us into developing SAVE II as a wider and fuller initiative .
I fully understand , and to a great extent share , the anxiety that very many Members , and in particular Mrs von Blottnitz , Mrs McNally and Mrs Ahern , have expressed regarding the programme 's legislative dimension .
Nevertheless , allow me to say here and now that the SAVE programme is not a framework for legislative initiatives by the Commission .
As you know , the Commission is able to propose new legislation whenever it thinks it necessary , and I am absolutely sure that given the European Parliament 's support we shall have the opportunity to discuss new legislative measures here in this House in the coming months .
What this programme does provide , however , is the potential for the funding of actions such as studies to investigate the possibility of legislative measures and to prepare the drafting of such measures .
In any case , before proposing legislation the Commission would like to exhaust all of the other possibilities , such as self-binding agreements , the CEN authorizations for energy efficient models and the procurement of technologically advanced products .
Please allow me at this point to deal with Mrs Pollack 's comment .
I cannot agree that the Commission 's legislative initiative in the framework of SAVE I was a failure , because , and I must emphasize this , nine of the thirteen legislative proposals have been adopted already and , in addition , work is proceeding on two others .
That said , however , I think that everyone will agree that the task facing us is to convince ordinary citizens , industry and the competent state authorities of the benefits of investing in energy efficiency and energy-saving .
If we can make a reality of the very considerable energy-saving possibilities that exist we shall be able to reduce our energy dependency .
We shall also be able to revitalize our industry and , as Mr Argyros has said , small and mediumsized enterprises in particular .
In addition , we shall be able to reduce public sector spending and to promote the use of new energy technologies .
Lastly , and perhaps this is the most important point , and many of you have mentioned it in your speeches , we shall be able to create a large number of new jobs , which will be a very important thing in itself .
In my opinion the budget of 150 m ECU that we have set for SAVE II is very modest in relation to the political and economic benefits which will flow from this programme .
Energy and environmental problems are not , however , confined to the European Union .
In the countries of central and eastern Europe which are preparing for accession to the Union there is enormous scope for improvement in energy efficiency .
We have a duty to give them the opportunity to participate in SAVE II .
In addition , following a request from the countries of the European Economic Area , the programme will be open to Norway , Iceland and Liechtenstein .
We are also looking at the possibility of involving Cyprus and Malta .
The costs involved in opening SAVE II to non-member countries will be covered by contributions from those countries themselves and from existing Community resources , and not from the SAVE II budget which covers the Community countries only .
Mr President , SAVE II is an important tool , a tool which can bring results only if it is given the fullest support .
I therefore request you to look upon SAVE II as a complementary action which is thus not intended as a substitute for actions taken by the Member States themselves .
With reference to the amendments , I have to say that the rapporteur has made an extremely important contribution .
The Commission can accept five amendments without reservation , namely Nos 2 , 3 , 6 , 7 and 8 .
We can also agree in principle , subject perhaps to a slight redrafting , with 12 others , namely Nos 1 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 , 15 , 19 , 22 , 28 , 32 , 33 and 34 .
As regards Amendments Nos 12 and 33 , which seek to open the programme to the associated countries in the Mediterranean area , the Commission can accept only one measure corresponding to that of the SOCRATES programme , under which the programme was opened only to Cyprus and Malta .
As far as Amendment No 29 is concerned , the Commission can accept the spirit of the second part of that amendment .
We cannot accept the first , third and fourth parts because we do not wish to upset the existing agreement on comitology .
The Commission does also have the power , and intends in the future , to propose a legislative measure aimed at improving energy efficiency in the Union , after , however , as I said at the beginning , exhausting the existing possibilities such as the self-binding agreements for industry .
Allow me to say also , on a general note , that no legislative initiative by the Commission is dependent on approval being given to a particular programme .
Hence Amendments Nos 5 , 10 and 16 , which seek to commit the Commission to legislative initiatives , cannot be accepted at this point .
Amendments Nos 17 , 18 , 20 , 21 , 23 , 24 and 25 relate to new actions of low interest , and , of course , to the funding of them .
These actions are either already encompassed , at least in part , by the Commission 's text or are well outside its framework , or , in fact , are covered by other initiatives .
As a result they cannot be introduced into the text .
The Commission believes that respect for the treaties and balanced allocation of the budget are requirements that go without saying .
That being so , Amendments Nos 26 and 27 cannot be included in the text .
The same applies to Amendments Nos 30 and 35 which would reduce the flexibility of the programme management procedures .
The Commission supports complementarity between SAVE II and the corresponding national programmes and therefore cannot accept the blurring of this concept contained in Amendment No 31 .
We believe that despite its shortcomings SAVE I has contributed to energy efficiency in the Community , and therefore we cannot accept Amendment No 4 .
Lastly , Amendment No 9 is not directly related to the potential for intervention built into the proposal in question and therefore it cannot be included .
In concluding I should like to thank Parliament again for its contribution , Mrs von Blottnitz personally , and , of course , the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy .
Ladies and gentlemen , I hope that you will support this proposal following the improvements that have been made to its text via the amendments that are being accepted .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like you to tell me when you will be presenting the legislative proposals .
You said it would be very soon .
I would like you to be more precise .
Then you said this programme was useful for study purposes .
Do you not agree that we already have enough of those ?
You also said that of the thirteen legislative measures announced in SAVE I , nine had already been implemented .
That really is not true !
In fact only three of them have been implemented and that is the ones on hot water boilers , the labelling of household appliances and the labelling of freezers .
What you present as a major success - and which really would be one if it had happened - is the SAVE directive of September 1993 , and that is precisely what we are discussing .
We are calling for legislative proposals and you say they have already been implemented .
Surely that is not the case .
The directive merely refers to the measures , while it is left open to the Member States whether they implement them or not .
But they have not done so .
After all , we all know what this is really about : energy certificates for buildings , lower heating costs , air-conditioning , encouraging third-party financing of energy-saving investment in the public sector , insulation of new buildings , regular inspections of boilers , energy estimates in undertakings with high energy consumption .
There are no laws on this in my country and I am willing to bet they do not exist in most other Member States either .
That is precisely what we need in SAVE II .
After all , it is useless simply to leave the implementation of such measures to the Member States .
If you rate what you just read out as success , then it is of course clear that you will obtain a rate of nine out of thirteen .
But you will have to agree with me when I say that in real terms only three out of the thirteen have been implemented , namely the three I just mentioned .
All the rest is declarations of intent .
In this context I would also like you to answer the question of how we can speed up the whole business a little so that we can fulfil our obligations and not stop at declarations of intent !
Mr President , Mrs von Blottnitz , first of all I should like to make it clear that the Commission is not opposed to legislative initiatives . On the contrary , it has pursued that option before and will pursue it again .
However , the difference between SAVE I and SAVE II is that with SAVE II , at this juncture , we are putting the main emphasis on studies to explore and prepare the ground for the institution of legislative measures rather than on legislation as such .
As far as the measures put in place under SAVE I are concerned , I insist that about nine proposals for legislation have been adopted by the Council . However , you are right in saying that you can see only three such proposals .
The reason for that is that six proposals were incorporated into one , and on that basis the number does become three . But in actual fact the Commission presented about nine legislative proposals , and six of them were joined into one .
Even so , I must remind the House that the extent of implementation in the Member States will depend , firstly , on the political will of the individual governments and , secondly , on exertion of the maximum possible political pressure by Parliament , the public at large and , of course , the Commission itself .
In this latter respect , as you well know , the Commission has pursued a very constant line on the carbon dioxide tax and in general on the policy for reducing carbon dioxide emissions , and has certainly exerted pressure in every way possible , either through its own initiatives or via specific communications to the Member States , aimed at guiding the Member States towards a stabilization of carbon dioxide emissions at 1990 levels by the year 2000 .
The Commission therefore believes that it has shown total consistency in exerting pressure from the European Union for the stabilization of carbon dioxide emissions .
Responsibility for the fact that we have not achieved our objectives does not lie with the Commission , and it is not for us to shoulder it .
The responsibility lies elsewhere , with other institutions . We do share the view of the European Parliament of course , and we are exerting all the pressure that we can to get the measures which will truly reduce carbon dioxide emissions adopted .
However , SAVE II is a very different programme , precisely because it takes account of the factor that I mentioned earlier , namely the failure to achieve substantial progress in the desired direction .
We want to explore the way forward , to share the responsibility for promotion of the policy for reduction of carbon dioxide emissions and the improvement of energy efficiency , and that is why we are insisting that this programme should be broader in form than SAVE I. But that does not mean in any way that the Commission will halt its legislative endeavours or stop forwarding proposals with a legislative content . Quite the reverse .
We have the positive experience gained from the directive on refrigerators to draw on .
You will be aware that the Council adopted that directive at the end of the Spanish presidency last December . It is a pleasing outcome .
Of course , we are waiting for the second reading by the European Parliament before proceeding .
The debate is closed .
The vote on the Bloch von Blottnitz report will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Synergy programme
The next item is the report ( A4-0065 / 96 ) by Mr Soulier , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , on the proposal for a Council regulation ( COM ( 95 ) 0197 - C4-0432 / 95-95 / 0126 ( CNS ) ) adopting a multiannual programme to promote international cooperation in the energy sector - Synergy programme .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I do not think it could possibly be disputed that the energy matter in all its aspects is now an important element in the Union 's foreign policy and external relations .
In the light of that , the REX Committee , in tabling its amendments , has sought , on the one hand , to emphasize the inseparable link between the European Union 's energy policy and its economic and trade relations , and , on the other , to point out that precisely because of that the Union 's proposals for international cooperation on energy issues must form an integral part of its foreign policy .
Ladies and gentlemen , the securing of energy sources and the security of those sources is , as you understand , a matter of the highest priority .
Given that , anything that contributes to the political , economic and social stability of those regions which hold the keys to the supply of energy must be supported .
Mr Soulier has provided some figures which indicate how the general energy picture is likely to evolve in the immediate future .
I will not repeat them , but I do agree .
In the light of those figures the SYNERGY programme assumes particularly great importance because in focusing on third countries and providing them with assistance it will help those countries formulate and implement energy policies of their own .
As everyone knows , the European Union has been providing that assistance informally to those countries for at least the last 15 years .
We now believe that this is the best time ever to give SYNERGY a legal base and to establish it as a multiannual programme .
This request , this assessment , from the Commission must be supported .
Lastly , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , allow me to say that I , too , agree with Mr Soulier 's comments concerning the need to bring order to energy issues , particularly as regards coordination of the energy matter within all programmes .
I would venture a step further and say that I think that the time has come for us to look at the energy matter in the European Union 's various policies and to move to a point at which we can decide that it should become a single integrated policy .
Mr President , let me by way of introduction remind you again of the position of the Committee on Budgets , namely that no important measures should be financed from the general budget without an appropriate legal base .
The Community contribution to the SYNERGY programme is supposed to be of two kinds : up to 100 % of finance experts seconded full time to the authorities in nonmember countries and up to 50 % for projects undertaken with non-member States .
This differentiated breakdown shows that the SYNERGY programme gives a greater financial contribution to the administrative costs than to the operational projects .
To avoid expert-tourism under the cover of development and cooperation , we now propose inverting the percentages , i.e. , only up to 50 % of the experts ' expenses should be cofinanced , which could of course also be considered as vocational training measures for third countries , and up to 75 % of projects financed from Community resources .
We also strongly disagree with the idea of funding the operating expenses of the Secretariat of the European Energy Charter Treaty even in part since the Community was not responsible for the delay in the signing of the Treaty by the USA .
The companies certainly benefit from the Energy Charter and certainly have the financial resources to finance the Secretariat .
For that reason , the citizens of the EU cannot be asked to continue paying for this .
The Committee on Budgets already pointed out when the Treaty was signed that it must not imply any significant budgetary burden on the EU , and that , we believe , is how it should remain .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , the first step is indeed always the most difficult one but we must take it now because we cannot go on like this with the energy policy we have been pursuing to date .
We need a change of energy policy .
Let me briefly raise three aspects .
Firstly , the 25 billion tonnes of CO2 emissions we puff into the air every year damage our climate and destroy our natural environment .
Secondly , the potential of nuclear energy is limited .
We already have some 120 000 tonnes of radioactive waste and nobody knows what is to be done with it .
Thirdly , of course there is a growing energy demand because everyone on this earth has a right to quality of life .
We need this change in energy policy and these are global problems that we can only resolve by working together .
That is why the Commission 's proposal to develop a strategy of cross-frontier cooperation is most welcome .
However , a programme of this kind , which after all accounts for ECU 50 million , must also satisfy certain requirements .
The kind of strategy on which it is based must be clarified .
Here I think three points are particularly important .
First , I consider it important for it to be made clear in an annex what direction the projects are to follow .
To create an abstract programme and then , as once put by a German football trainer , to take the line ' let 's see how we go ' is something we find unacceptable .
We must know exactly what measures will be implemented and how .
So in addition to the annex , it is equally important that we reappraise this programme on a continuous basis and receive reports on the activities undertaken on a continuous basis .
Secondly , I believe that in view of the global problems this ECU 50 million will of course be nowhere near enough .
That is why we cannot do everything we want with it and will have to concentrate on certain areas .
I am thinking of two important aspects here : the development of renewable energy sources and the development of rational energy use .
Other objectives will have to take second place .
Cheaper energy and strengthening the global position of the energy industry are not urgent objectives of SYNERGY either .
We must concentrate the funding on the development of local resources , on regional plans , on training and qualifying people to save energy and on models for increasing energy efficiency .
Of course there are areas with a growing energy requirement in which renewable energy sources could be a decisive solution .
The second aspect on which we should concentrate is the coordination of national energy policies .
Only if we coordinate our objectives can we make a genuine contribution to global risk prevention .
Then we can work hand in hand and reduce energy consumption through coordinated action .
Nuclear safety policy cannot be included among the priorities .
For one thing , we are already spending a great deal of money on that in other programmes - PHARE , TACIS , etc .
Secondly , given the ECU 50 million available to us , the money for that area really would just be a drop in the ocean and disappear .
So we should exclude that area .
The third important point is this : it is quite clear that this programme must not overlap with other EU programmes .
After all , we want SYNERGY precisely in order to avoid efficiency losses resulting from overlaps , unclear structures , duplication of work .
So SYNERGY can contribute towards the coordination of EU policy as a whole .
A few final remarks : the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy has laid great emphasis on a sensible handling of the comitology question .
The original proposal would have created a risk of the programme being implemented on an independent basis ; that is why we want to be more closely involved .
As has been said , there have been forerunners to this SYNERGY programme .
It would of course have been useful to evaluate the preceding projects and reports in a consistent manner before formulating this multiannual programme .
Unfortunately that was not done .
Since serious efforts were made , however , I nevertheless consider it justified for Parliament to give it the green light .
However , in my view it is quite essential for the annex and table to be incorporated in the programme if we are to approve it .
I would therefore ask the Commission whether it is prepared to support these proposals , which were adopted unanimously in committee .
Unfortunately , ladies and gentlemen , there is at present no sign of movement in the Council on this vital matter of a change of energy policy .
It has put THERMIE II is on ice , is resisting SAVE , resisting SYNERGY , backing away little by little from the question of an environmental and job-creating tax reform .
Whereas what we need - and here I am addressing the Council again - is in fact movement and not stoppage .
The first step is indeed the most difficult one .
But let us venture to take this step together !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Liberal Group I should like to compliment Mr Soulier on the report he has produced , although it has become very detailed .
One of the Liberal Group 's basic principles is that an integrated approach to energy and environment is necessary for a sustainable development of our economy .
The SYNERGY programme may make a contribution here .
CO2 emissions are a cross-border problem and require a European approach .
The eco-tax is an excellent means for that .
The Netherlands are at present the only Member State to have energy taxation , but CO2 emissions are not only a European but a world-wide problem .
At the same time therefore , the European Union will have to try to prevail upon the United States and Japan to introduce similar taxation , otherwise Europe will be putting its industry at a competitive disadvantage as against other continents .
The Liberal Group is in favour of a phased introduction of an energy tax with a dual purpose : first , limiting the use of energy , and secondly reducing CO2 emissions .
That may help to reduce the greenhouse effect and will ensure that all forms of energy help to pay for the cost of environmental effects .
In addition my Group thinks that CO2 money must be deployed where it will yield the best return .
That is at present in Central and Eastern Europe and the rising markets in the developing countries , which in ten years will emit more CO2 than the whole western world .
Transition to modern technologies will unmistakably contribute to energy efficiency and economy .
Recent research has shown that the Union has a leading position in the field of environmental and non-nuclear energy technologies .
I am also strongly in favour of the Netherlands ' choosing sustainable energy as the central point of its presidency of the Union in 1997 .
Mr President , I believe that the objectives of this programme are excellent .
I thank the rapporteur for his detailed proposals .
Promoting sustainable development , reducing the emissions of greenhouse gases and pollutants , enhancing security of supply and improving energy efficiency are all things that we wish to do .
I wish we could do them in the European Union .
So far as we have seen in our earlier debate on SAVE II , we are not really getting there .
However , that does not mean that we should not try to have a more global approach , that we should not try to have synergy with countries in Central and Eastern Europe and with the developing countries .
I would like to add one proviso .
I would like to see more emphasis on renewable sources of energy .
There are many applications where renewable energies could be developed in the Mediterranean world and in the Third World .
I would like more emphasis in this kind of report in particular on the great potential for renewable energy , particularly in the solar energy field .
I should also like to say , along with another colleague , that nuclear safety does not belong in such a programme .
We have other programmes devoted to nuclear safety .
I think it would be regrettable to confuse the two .
There are great problems in trying to export nuclear technology to developing countries .
For example , we have not solved the problems of waste .
We , in our group do not support nuclear technology , as you know .
But even at a committee level we cannot start exporting nuclear technology to countries when we cannot guarantee that the waste will properly dealt with .
To say that nuclear safety should be part of this programme - I do not see the logic of it , frankly .
Finally , concerning the rational use of energy and sustainable development , we need to be developing them through fiscal instruments in particular .
I agree with a global approach on this level .
We should follow the Rio agenda .
Mr President , I wish to begin by giving my warm congratulations to Mr Soulier on his excellent introduction , which widened our horizons considerably in the way that we need to do when we are looking at the whole question of energy consumption .
I would take issue with the REX Committee in saying that the top priority was security of supply within Europe .
The problem and the challenge is much wider than that .
I would commend the approach of looking particularly to the Third World and perhaps pushing the Commission and the Council in that direction , as a very important contribution .
The reason why I think the Third World is so important is , first of all , that it offers the greatest promise for making fairly obvious gains in energy consumption .
Likewise , the Third World often suffers from having very limited resources and limited alternatives because of the poverty of the countries concerned and the revenues available to their governments .
For example , as part of the European Parliament 's mission recently I went to the Kingdom of Lesotho in southern Africa - the Switzerland of Africa , they call it - and there was hardly a tree left in that country .
It is very like my own country , Scotland , where we cut down all the trees and then we had to start burning coal , which , of course , causes all kinds of problems and is a fossil fuel .
The lesson we have to learn is that the Third World countries should not repeat the mistakes we have already made .
So , instead of coming across sometimes as preaching to the Third World in a kind of neo-colonial approach - we know best , you do what we tell you , not what we do ourselves - we should say : look , we have learned from the mistakes we have made .
As Mrs Ahern said , we should practice what we preach within the European Union .
I warmly commend this report and I very much hope that this will be taken on board so that we can not only assist the Eastern European countries , which , of course , we are already doing , but make a major contribution to combating the global-warming effect by assistance to the Third World .
Mr President , co-ordination between national policies in the area of science and technology has been Europe 's Achilles heel , It is one of the reasons for our lagging behind the United States and Japan and our loss of competitiveness .
The co-ordination of energy policies in relation with third countries is a priority and should not just be seen as an appendix but as part and parcel of any future European energy policy .
I must point out the importance of co-ordinating co-operation with African countries which have particular and pressing problems , in particular in terms of training decision-makers in the energy sector and transferring techniques , experience and information .
I hope that the recent proposal by the Portuguese Foreign Minister to hold regular Euro-African summits can open up opportunities in this area .
For the European Parliament , the energy policy of the European Union is of particular importance and that is why we think it is indispensable that we should be called upon to intervene in the SYNERGY programme , and given a chance to express our opinions on the list of actions to be undertaken as well as being regularly informed of the progress of the European Union 's energy strategy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I should like to thank Mr Soulier for his marvellous report .

Allow me also to thank Mr Dimitrakopoulos and Mr Telkämper , the draftsmen , respectively , of the opinions of the Committee on External Economic Relations and the Committee on Development and Cooperation , and Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz , the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Budgets .
As you know , the actions for international cooperation in the energy sector began in 1988 with budgetary entries at the disposal of the European Parliament .
Initially these covered the provision of assistance for energy planning in countries of Asia , Latin America and the Mediterranean basin .
Later on the same entries were used for countries in central and eastern Europe and of the Commonwealth of Independent States for the development of cooperation on matters of energy policy .
The implementation of actions was characterized by a high degree of flexibility which permitted , for instance , immediate intervention in the autonomous Palestinian territories and , recently , in Sarajevo .
However , the absence of a legal base was an obstacle to the development of medium-term strategies and to the monitoring of individual projects , and it also made it difficult to blend the actions in with actions that were to be undertaken in the framework of other Community instruments .
In submitting this proposal for a regulation we are seeking to combine the objectives of the programme with the wider objectives of the Community 's energy strategy as set out in the Commission 's Green Paper and White Paper .
I do not think I need to explain in detail to Parliament why international cooperation in the energy sector is so important .
Mr Soulier has provided a very clear analysis of the objectives of this energy cooperation .
Indeed , Parliament itself has very frequently drawn attention to the value of such cooperation , which , of course , has been a factor in motivating the Commission to develop this proposal .
Mr Soulier has expressed a wish that we now go a step further and institute a dialogue to determine the specific guidelines and priorities for the actions of this programme .
Following the exchanges of view that we have had , we believe that the indicative guidelines and orientations in the annex of the regulation retain the necessary flexibility .
However , Parliament 's legitimate wishes will be taken into account .
The Commission can accept Parliament 's proposal within that framework .
The rapporteur has also requested that the function of the programme with regard to the coordination of structural actions on matters of international cooperation in the energy sector be clearly set out .
We share your anxieties and hence agree with the specific proposals submitted by Parliament .
In addition , the report contains a request that Parliament be regularly informed about the execution of the programme .
We consider that to be a legitimate wish and therefore accept the idea of carrying out a mid-term assessment in addition to that provided for when the programme comes up for renewal .
I must also say that the evaluation of the actions that were developed over the period 1990-1995 - which was carried out by independent experts - reinforces our desire to work from a multiannual basis .
The Commission believes that all of the improvements proposed by the experts must be incorporated in the amended proposal which will include Parliament 's own proposals .
In the same context , the Commission , as well as informing Parliament and the Council annually about the implementation of the SYNERGY programme , will also provide them with information about the entire range of the actions that it undertakes on matters of international cooperation in the energy sector .
I wish to emphasize yet again the very positive contribution achieved by the rapporteur in presenting such a brilliant report to the plenary .
Wishing , also , to reply to Mrs Ahern 's comment about the inclusion in the SYNERGY programme of actions relating to nuclear technology , I should like to say that the SYNERGY programme does not have the advancement of nuclear technology and the establishment and organization of better channels of communication and cooperation in the field of nuclear technology among its objectives .
What the programme does carry provision for , however , is the promotion of training and cooperation seminars on nuclear safety , not on nuclear technology .
That facet of the programme provides a response to the European Parliament 's demand for the promotion of cooperation on the safety of nuclear reactors across Europe as a whole .
I turn now to the amendments . Out of the 27 which are proposed , 24 bring real improvement to the programme and can be accepted .
On the other hand , Parliament 's desire to involve itself very closely with the work of the advisory committee envisaged in the regulation leads us to believe that we are treading into an extremely delicate and difficult area , and in my opinion , therefore , this is a subject that needs to be given careful examination in the framework of the interinstitutional discussions that are currently in progress .
Given that view , the Commission is unable to accept Amendments Nos 22 and 23 .
The Commission accepts the first part of Amendment No 26 on the indicative action programme , but we think that the table based on the second part of the amendment runs counter to the priorities of the programme .
The proposed apportionment is at odds with the guidelines set out in the first part of the amendment .
Nevertheless , the Commission will give consideration to the indicative guidelines of the table , and we will pay particular attention to the expressed wish for a higher percentage of actions in Africa .
However , SYNERGY is a cooperation programme rather than an aid programme , and the opportunities for cooperation in the sub-Saharan area of Africa , apart from South Africa , at the level presented in the table , would appear to be very limited .
In addition to that , the greater part of the resources of the SYNERGY programme must be channelled towards preparing the accession of the associated countries of central and eastern Europe , which is a priority for everyone .
The Commission considers the table presented by the rapporteur , and , indeed , the original compromise table now being proposed again via Amendment No 27 , to be more suitable .
Having said these things , Mr President , I wish to thank Mr Soulier again and to express the hope that the plenary will approve the amendments which can improve the proposal for a regulation and which we accept .
Mr President , this is not to express my thanks . I simply wish to say that the French version of my text had been curtailed .
The necessary corrective action has been taken as regards my amendment .
Mr Soulier , it is amusing that the version in which there is a mistake is that of your own language . But there seems to be no problem with the other languages .
The debate is closed
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Interoperability of the high-speed rail system
The next item is the recommendation for the second reading ( A40077 / 96 ) on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the common position adopted by the Council ( C4-0002 / 96-94 / 0112 ( SYN ) ) with a view to adopting a directive on the interoperability of the trans-European high-speed rail system ( rapporteur : Mr Castricum ) .
Mr President , if I have understood correctly , the Ministers for Transport have recently been doing some soulsearching about the future of goods transport by rail .
It is about time too .
Even more important is the question what results that yields , because Council , Commission and Parliament may well talk about the need to breathe new life into the railways , but when we see how hard that is , how long it takes and what great internal problems are still facing many railway companies we get the feeling that the day will never dawn .
The directive on the interoperability of the trans-European high- speed rail system and its history and content still do not bring that dawn .
Seven years have gone by between the initiative and this second reading .
It took almost a year to come to a common position , whereas in the previous years an unprecedented amount of talent on the part of representatives of the Member States , the railway companies and industry had been devoted to the subject .
What is the result of all that ?
Movement backwards , which the often strained relations between the national authorities and the rail companies seem to confirm . ' With the amendments made by the Council to the proposal for a directive the aims sought by the Commission in its original proposals have been drastically altered .
Those amendments have in fact tended to reduce interoperability to a technical compatibility of structural subsystems and in addition to place restrictive conditions on technical specifications for economic reasons , giving preference to the retention of the existing national railway networks . ' That is the end of the quotation , with my apologies for the involved wording .
That quotation is the Commission 's conclusion which above all stresses once more the wish to take account of users ' needs and expresses regret at the Council 's attitude .
I whole-heartedly agree , Mr President .
The second reading must make it clear to the Council once more by the proposals for amendment the essence of what is involved in the matters we are discussing together today . The appeal of a cross-border railway system and , as a consequence of that , satisfied customers who have the feeling that Europe not only talks and thinks but also acts in the interests of the citizen .
I sincerely hope that the approach of the Commission and Parliament will still be apparent in the directive which eventually comes into force .
Anyone who in considering the citizens ' network still thinks in terms of Member States ' frontiers is wide of the mark .
In the long term that is the least possible service to a common European transport policy .
Mr President , I began with transport of goods and I shall end with it .
I have gathered that a misunderstanding has arisen or might arise through Amendment No 3 in which a link is traced between the high-speed system for passengers and the possibilities for transport of goods .
That amendment aims at least to take account of the opportunities which a European network of high-speed trains may provide for certain forms of goods transport .
I naturally cannot yet see container trains too speeding over that high-speed network .
I should like to say that governing means looking ahead and stagnation means decline , but I have already pointed that out in my brief exposé .
Mr President , I should first like to comment that interoperability does not often attract the interest of the media , the general public or , indeed , many of our own colleagues .
However , it is of vital importance not only to this Parliament but also to the future development of a prosperous , efficient and environmentally-sustainable Europe .
I should like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Castricum , on his work and his efforts to continue to advance the goal of a European high-speed rail network in the face of attempts by the Council of Ministers to undermine the worthy and far-sighted proposal of Commissioner Kinnock .
Europe 's rail systems must be compatible .
They must work together .
They must share the same technical standards .
They must do that if Europe 's railways are to fulfil their potential to shift passengers and freight from our congested roads and airspace so that we meet our environmental objectives .
Secondly , we must realize our potential to become more competitive as Europeans and to foster growth and employment .
However , we can only build Europe 's railways for the 21st century if we standardize our national railway systems that were created in the 19th century .
It will cost money .
It will cost millions , perhaps even billions , of ecu over the years to come .
But every ecu spent will be an ecu well spent in terms of the dividends that our economies will secure .
We must look at this as a long-term investment in the future and in the future of Europe 's competitiveness and its ability to tackle environmental problems .
In this debate we must also remind the Council of its commitments which it freely entered into at Maastricht when it committed itself not merely to a trans-European rail network but to an interoperable trans-European rail network .
It made that commitment unanimously when it agreed the Maastricht Treaty and today we should call it to account and hold it to the agreement it made then .
As Mr Castricum has said , we must harmonize the technical standards and , most critically , the standards for users , common ticketing , reservations and information .
This evening I wish to focus on the need for passengers to have easy access to the whole of the European high-speed network .
That includes passengers with disabilities .
A case in point is the marvellous , high-tech , high-speed Eurostar train which now serves my constituency and links London to Brussels and Paris .
Marvellous , unless you are a disabled passenger .
Access to the train is only by steps .
A 21st century train using a 19th century concept .
A wheelchair user who wants to travel from London to Brussels must ring Eurostar in advance , wait at a special spot on the platform for disabled passengers for a ramp to be hauled into place and , in some cases , be carried on to and off the train to one of the two wheelchair spaces which are allocated in two separate first class compartments .
If two disabled passengers travel together they have to sit separately .
If you travel with your family you have to sit apart from them .
It is quite unacceptable that Eurostar should have spent millions of pounds of taxpayers ' money on a European train of the future without adequate disabled access .
I hope this evening that the Commissioner will agree with me not only that disabled access is a basic right but also that we must insist that in the future at least all European high-speed trains allow easy access for all .
It is my contention that we all , as Europeans , will benefit from high-speed trains .
We will all be paying for , and investing in , high-speed trains .
Therefore it is only right and proper that all Europeans , whatever level of disability they may have , are able to access and enjoy and use and frequent high-speed trains .
Mr President , I would like on behalf of the EPP Group to welcome the common position and the Castricum report .
The Commission proposals recognize that the existing systems are incompatible and , as a result , engines and railway staff usually have to be exchanged at frontiers .
That is not exactly the sort of exchange and free movement associated with interoperability of the trans-European high-speed rail system .
The proposal is particularly welcome as its purpose is to promote the interlinking and interoperability of this highspeed rail link and the creation of conditions for the development of an open and competition-orientated market in the high-speed rail sector .
We support the common position and its emphasis on the technical compatibility of the national systems .
It is right that technical specifications should be harmonized insofar as this is essential for trans-frontier high-speed transport , while the structure of the national networks is generally to be preserved .
The costs incurred will be borne primarily by the Member States ' railways .
A number of Committee on Transport and Tourism amendments adopted and put to the House today aim to bring the common position closer to the original Commission proposal .
A number of amendments were accepted and adopted in the common position , notably on the progressive interoperability of trans-frontier regional transport , rapid goods transport and eventually the entire rail transport system .
These provisions should ensure that the public will have easy access to the whole network .
For these reasons we will support most of the amendments in the name of the Transport Committee , with the exception of Amendments Nos 5 , 6 , 7 and 8 , as we feel that the original text of the Commission proposal should be carried in order to ensure the desired interoperability and the necessary technical specifications .
We welcome the amendment by Mr Soulier and hope that both the Commission and the Council will adopt it , thereby ensuring that existing lines or lines already upgraded will not necessarily be prejudiced by this last proposal .
With these provisos we recommend and commend the proposal and the Castricum report to the House .
On a personal note , can I just add that I have recently had a medical examination by the European Parliament .
My eyesight was pronounced near-perfect .
I challenge anyone in the Chamber , however , other than those of you sitting at the top table , to read the names on the new television screens .
It is absolutely impossible to see one 's name on the screen .
I urge you to bring this to the attention of the authorities so that we can actually see when we are about to be called .
Miss McIntosh , we shall try to put this problem right in the way that you suggest , but I must say that we have just tested the new system today and will do everything we can to put the problem right .
Mr President , my reason for speaking in this debate is to emphasise the need to take account of the environmental considerations and public opinion and , particularly , to use them in subsequent work on the directive on high-speed rail links .
As far as I can see , though it is not totally apparent , both the environment and the public have had their positions weakened in the common position .
All else being equal , it must be assumed that an integrated high-speed network would benefit both users and the environment , but clearly the original proposal suffered from the lack of a thorough investigation into the environmental aspects .
This could have been done far more clearly , and it is rather shameful that the Commission makes integration of the environment one of the most important instruments of future environment policy , and then ignores obvious opportunities , such as interoperability , when they arise .
However , the Commission must now make good these omissions and be more forceful than hitherto in bringing the environment into subsequent debate so that we can set up an integrated high-speed network which is absolutely vital to the further development of Europe .
Each one of us who has spent hours of frustration at airports , which has definitely been the case this winter , and in traffic chaos on the roads , which has also been the case , know just how imperative it is to create an efficient rail system linking the whole of Europe .
Without it we will not be able to meet the transport needs of the future .
So let us now convert words into action and not allow the special interests of individual countries to stand in the way , and let us use logical arguments such as an improved environment combined with a more efficient transport system as one of the means of exerting pressure on countries when they resist , as they appear to be doing at present .
Mr President , it is vitally important for our future that we should change our transport system .
One definite necessity is the adaptation of the railway systems so that they can actually use one another 's track and can actually be interoperable .
That sounds all very nice , and it is important .
It applies too to the high-speed lines .
Furthermore it is just as important for the systems to be interoperable also in the sense that they become more attractive for the user .
Then you are talking not only about technical interoperability but also about possible connections for example with regional lines or buying tickets , which really is a nightmare in Europe .
I think I am one of the few Members of Parliament who tries from time to time to travel through Europe by train instead of flying .
Buying tickets is still not so easy .
If we conclude that interoperability leaves something to be desired , then we must look not only at technical matters but also at how we can make things more user-friendly for the citizen in order to make these systems attractive and so that our environment is rather better preserved for the future .
Mr President , I am speaking on behalf of Mr Van der Waal , who cannot he here because he is ill .
The Commission 's proposal on interoperability of the European network for highspeed trains has been drastically altered by the Council .
Instead of striving for a European network of high-speed trains the accent is now placed more on preservation of the existing national high-speed networks , which have been made interoperable only where necessary or where desired .
The reason for this is clear .
The Member States , particularly Germany and France , which already have a high-speed network , may be forced to spend vast sums because of the compulsory adaptation of technical specifications for interoperability .
Adaptation of existing or planned infrastructure costs a lot of money - money which , incidentally , is not available , amongst other things because of the EMU criteria .
With hindsight it is very much to be regretted that European standards were not in force before the construction of the national high-speed networks .
It is to be feared that the Council 's attitude is penny wise , pound foolish .
The existence side by side of the different high-speed train systems , which are only minimally interoperable , makes it harder for carriers to provide over long international routes a service which can compete with air transport because train-units must be made suitable for various systems and will thus be more expensive or because there must be a change of locomotives .
Moreover a restricted interoperability hinders the desirable liberalization of international passenger transport .
In addition competition between the various railway industries is limited by restricted interoperability .
Finally , when in the future we still need to adapt high-speed lines to European standards that may well cost more money than is now being saved .
With the exception of Amendments Nos 5 and 6 I can support the report of the Committee on Transport , which tries to bring the Council 's text back on to the Commission 's lines .
I think that the interoperability of the functional subsystems , operation or users , can be regulated by the sector itself , at least if liberalization of international passenger transport is taken seriously .
I interpret Amendment No 3 about rapid goods services as transport of express goods such as postal items for which rapid delivery is required .
I can agree with that .
I thank the rapporteur for his detailed explanation .
Apart from that there is every reason for adopting measures quickly in order to improve traditional goods transport by rail .
Today 's speeds of some 27 to 37 kilometres an hour must certainly be tripled. in order to avoid having highspeed trains used before long for unsuitable purposes .
Improvement of the logistics of conventional goods transport by rail must thus certainly not be held back .
Mr President , Mr Castricum has done a good job including , and above all , in terms of the difficulties involved in coordinating the requirements of the various countries to allow the directive on the interoperability of the European high speed train network finally to be adopted .
Those difficulties are apparent if we bear in mind that certain factors - environment , users and management - vary from one country to another .
It follows that if we wish to achieve interoperability of the European networks , we have to guarantee interoperability of the factors that go hand-in-hand with this , for example the energy system , the control-and-command systems , signalling and , not least , the rolling stock .
That is why the Council moved away from the original Commission proposal and , in some respects , Parliament 's amendments .
In short , because of the financial situation of a number of Member States and a number of railway companies interoperability of infrastructure cannot be guaranteed .
It is therefore desirable that interoperability be gradually achieved in relation to transfrontier traffic , the rapid transport of goods and , at a later and none-toodistant stage - the whole of rail transport .
The rapporteur , Mr Castricum , is right then - and this links up with what I said at the start - when , realizing that the common position represents a necessary compromise for the purposes of which many elements contained in the original proposal have been omitted , he proposes that the amendments be accepted - and I shall not enter into the details here - to allow the high speed trans-frontier network to be set up in a relatively short time .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the opening up of the markets in transport services and capital equipment and the driving force of competition in the railway sector as a whole depend of course upon first creating a legal framework containing binding technical specifications for interoperability and harmonized standards to ensure the interoperability of the European railway network .
It is equally clear that the programmes intended to guarantee interoperability of the networks , particularly in the field of technical standards , require and will continue to require enormous technical effort and investments , seeing that the Member States ' networks have been developing for a century and a half with a vision far removed from the possibility of a market without frontiers and the part which infrastructures would play in the process of its creation .
Here there is an implied attitude which is debatable from the point of view of a broad vision of the process of developing the networks and providing services .
To be specific , from a reading of the provisions of this proposal for a directive the lack of interoperability emerges as a fundamental problem as it creates internal frontiers which hinder freedom of movement .
The interoperability of the networks is therefore a question to be solved first. previously .
Once the problem has been expressed in those terms it must be recognized that as long as there is no interoperability there will be no freedom of movement .
But a statement like that is in itself little more than tautology .
Seen from another angle it is possible to ask to what extent the problems of interoperability obey fundamental causes and are an inexcusable point of departure , or alternatively to what extent they are an instrument applied more or less deliberately in order to restrict freedom of movement with other policies or other interests in mind .
Only by looking at it in that way is it possible to understand the lack of interoperability in the various high-speed railway networks which have developed in most recent years and which are still being developed at the present time .
If this second hypothesis is correct , the problem would have to be solved the other way round , starting by requiring freedom of movement in order to see how the obstacles to interoperability would then lose their instrumental role and fade away of their own accord , but only to the extent and at the cost appropriate to the actual requirements of freedom of movement .
And , Mr President , I should not like to end my remarks without congratulating Mr Castricum for his excellent work .
Mr President , the progressive development of a European high-speed rail system from existing or planned national systems , requires the interlinking and interoperability of infrastructures , of fixed equipment , of logistic systems and of rolling stock .
Various problems arise , however , one of them being the cost of such work .
The development of a trans-frontier high-speed rail system creates huge costs , which will be largely borne by the Member States ' railway companies since the Community budget will make hardly any contribution .
That being the case , how will France , or more precisely the SNCF , be able to finance new infrastructures and rolling stock when it is already heavily in debt ?
The cumulative deficit of the SNCF , which is supported by the State , that is the taxpayer , is FF 175 billion .
In 1995 , the SNCF cost the French taxpayer FF 49 billion , with a deficit of FF 12 billion .
Will the SNCF be in a position to make new investments for the development of an open and competitive market in the high-speed railway sector ?
The Commission favours an almost complete opening up of the high-speed rail network in a single step .
Would it not be preferable to opt for a gradual opening up along the same lines as for air transport ?
Too rigid an application of the law on competition may harm the development of European rail transport , which already suffers from a structural disadvantage in comparison with roads .
How can we not condemn the European Commission when , seeking competition at any price , it makes substantial changes to the terms of an agreement concluded between Eurotunnel on the one hand and British Rail and SNCF on the other ?
These two companies had entered into commitments for 12 years , but the Commission finally decided on 13 December 1994 to allocate 25 % of the available timetable slots reserved for them to their competitors , thus threatening the economic balance of the agreement .
To conclude , and on the basis of what I have just said , we should be wary of such an ultracompetitive policy .
Mr President , I am pleased to advise the House that the Commission can accept all the amendments proposed in the recommendation of the Committee on Transport and Tourism relating to the interoperability of the trans-European high-speed rail system .
These amendments reflect the stance taken by the Commission in its communication to Parliament on the common position , and I am always pleased , as members of the Transport Committee will know , when there can be such ready agreement between ourselves .

The Commission cannot , however , support the amendment from Mr Soulier - Amendment No 12 - because it would complicate the interoperability framework which we are establishing , and that contradicts the efforts to achieve simplification .
The House will be aware from our communication that there is much in the common position which causes us concern - even if , like the rapporteur , Mr Castricum , we have some sympathy with the fact that the less ambitious common position of the Council is in part a response to the difficult financial situation of many of the Community 's railways .
That said , however , all governments should avoid reducing the scope of the meaning of interoperability to such an extent that it relates only to the technical capacity of structural subsystems in a way which gives priority to preserving existing national networks .
That cannot be the right approach in a time of change when for every sensible transport and economic reason , we should think continental .
It is very obvious that in the very nature of high-speed train systems , interoperability is absolutely essential for the economic viability of high-speed trains is fundamentally undermined by the delays that otherwise will continue to take place at borders and prevent a meaningful network of high-speed trains across this continent .
Obviously , it is contradictory and fanciful to suggest that the interoperable trans-European high-speed rail system which is needed can be achieved without requiring the existing integrity of national networks to be extensively adapted .
The Commission 's approach , which is , I believe , generally supported in this House , is to strive to achieve an integrated trans-European high-speed rail system which is capable of competing with other modes of transport on fair terms and in meeting passenger needs .
That , of course , means the needs of all passengers , including those whose mobility is impaired .
The House is in the debt of Mr Watts who drew specific attention to that issue in the course of this debate .
It is Parliament 's emphasis on interoperability that makes me welcome the amendments of the Transport Committee which are before the House today , and I hope that they can be supported by all sides of the House .
In particular , I urge Parliament to give backing to Amendments Nos 6 , 7 , 8 and 9 relating to the technical specifications for interoperability .
These technical specifications constitute a new and welcome approach in a directive and they apply the proposed directive 's technical provisions to lay down standards or norms .
The amendments also seek to restore the full force of our original proposal to the environment , operation and user subsystems .
Different national laws on operation and the environment can obviously be a real obstacle to interoperability , so these aspects must be incorporated into the directive , otherwise the good work done in ensuring interoperability of technical standards will be wasted .
Finally , I particularly commend Amendment No 11 , because it reintroduces the concept of consumer protection as an essential requirement in this proposal .
As Mr Watts said , high-speed train interoperability is hardly an inspirational rallying cry .
Although , it must be said that if your train is held up for a long time at a border because of the need to make crew or technical changes , it is possible to develop quite a revolutionary set of feelings about the barriers which still cross our transport system , especially if you are late for a meeting or if it a very hot day and the children are thirsty .
So , high-speed train operability will , as high-speed trains become more extensive , enter the main stream of political vocabulary .
I know Mr Castricum and others will welcome that civilized development .
The delays that are encountered can be ended for high-speed train passengers in the near future .
Then we can make further progress by fostering the interoperability of so-called conventional trains .
I am sure that Mr Castricum and other Members of this House will want to be part of that advance .
I welcome their attitude and their effective work and I hope that it is an attitude that is increasingly shared in practice by Member State governments throughout the whole of the Union .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Transport of dangerous goods by rail
The next item is the recommendation for second reading A4-0074 / 96 ) on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the common position adopted by the Council ( C4-0003 / 96-94 / 0284 ( SYN ) ) with a view to adopting a Council Directive on the approximation of the laws of the Member States on the transport of dangerous goods by rail ( rapporteur : Mr Cornelissen ) .
Mr President , our Group thinks that strict measures are necessary for the transport of dangerous goods in view of the potential dangers .
That applies also to rail transport , which is relatively safe , but often large quantities are involved and railway lines often run through urban areas .
So we are happy to collaborate in the introduction of a uniform system for transport of dangerous materials for the whole territory of the European Union .
Such a uniform system must guarantee an acceptable level of safety and eliminate existing obstructions to free movement of goods between the Member States in the field of means of transport .
The Council 's common position complies with these requirements and we can therefore support it , but on two points we are not convinced .
We wish to give the Member States discretion to adopt special rules for transport operations of local significance - I stress local significance - for example transport by narrow-gauge , dock or mountain railways , naturally subject to due regard for Community law and on condition that such rules are not contrary to freedom of movement .
The second point concerns informing the competent authorities in advance where transport of extremely dangerous goods is concerned .
The railway accident in Flanders on Thursday last week made it clear once again that in spite of good safety standards accidents can never be ruled out .
That applies also to transport of extremely dangerous goods .
We think that in the event of an unexpected accident involving particularly dangerous transport operations it is important for the competent authorities to be informed about the operations .
I appreciate that it is not easy to lay down practicable criteria for the concept of ' extremely dangerous goods ' .
For that I shall rely on the creativity of Directorate General VII .
Two final remarks .
I am not entirely pleased with the new Article 5 ( 2 ) ( a ) and ( b ) which , for transport via the Channel Tunnel and tunnels with similar characteristics , gives the Member States concerned the power to impose more stringent conditions .
How does the Commissioner think of applying the concept of ' tunnels with characteristics similar to the Channel Tunnel ' ?
Is it a question of the composition of concrete ?
I can imagine a whole series of ' similar characteristics ' .
What I am concerned about is that the Commission must see to it that this article is not misused to put a spoke in the wheels of the internal market for rail transport .
I understand from a letter which I have just found on the fax that the association of European railway companies is also worried about this .
I should be glad to have a clear answer from the Commissioner on this .
Finally , how does the Commissioner see the development of transport of dangerous goods in the rather longer term ?
Does he expect a considerable further growth of dangerous goods transport ?
If so does he see any reason or opportunity to take action to control it ?
Because we are living in a very densely populated part of the world .
Mr President , this proposal has the very commendable objective of harmonizing safety principles within Member States as regards the transportation of dangerous goods .
It is also proposed to transpose into Community law the rules contained in the RID regulations as they are applied to international rail transport to include operations within Member States .
These moves are strongly supported by my group .
At the first reading , concern was expressed about the safety standards of railways in Eastern Europe in particular and also about the advance warning to the public authorities when dangerous goods are being conveyed by train .
In its common position the Council has amended both the Commission 's text and Parliament 's opinion .
While we as a group can support the position adopted by the rapporteur and the Committee on Transport and Tourism , we have some reservations about the number of derogations introduced by the Council , particularly in Article 5 .
We believe this could have the effect of putting rail at a disadvantage compared to other modes of transportation .
My group has always been of the opinion that more freight and in particular freight designated as dangerous or hazardous should be moved by rail .
We know that like us the railways themselves favour a harmonized approach based on the RID principles .
In the previous debate we heard about interoperability of highspeed trains .
My group would like to see this interoperability extended to all modes of rail transportation including , more importantly , freight .
However , we still believe that notification of public authorities is important in the pursuit of safety .
In conclusion , my group will support the report put forward by the Committee on Transport and Tourism but I should like to emphasize the reservations we have about the Council 's position , particularly as regards Article 5 .
Mr President , the Group of the European People 's Party welcomes the common position and the opportunity to transpose into national and European law the standards reached by the UN agreement on the transportation of dangerous goods by rail .
The aims are clearly to achieve the highest level of safety and to establish a single market for these transport services within Europe .
Also , the remaining obstacles to free movement of goods between Member States relating to transport equipment such as wagons , cylinders , tanks , packaging and safety devices should be removed through these proposals .
In Article 7 of the common position the Council has accepted the amendment tabled on first reading by Parliament to allow Member States the right to undertake rail transport operations with states of the former Soviet Union which are not contracting parties to the COTIF , and that is something we welcome .
We also welcome the possibility for Member States to retain in very specific cases their national legislation with regard to the transport of dangerous goods via the Channel Tunnel and other similar tunnels of unique construction in the future .
Therefore not just the Channel Tunnel but also - as I am sure the rapporteur will appreciate - other fixed links such as those between Denmark and Sweden .
This and other derogations set out in the common position are restricted in scope to have only local effect and are not likely to hinder the achievement of a single market in rail transport .
We also support the two other amendments , in particular Amendment No 1 calling for the advance warning of the various national authorities in the event of the transportation of extremely dangerous goods .
Also , Amendment No 2 that the rights of Member States should not be restricted as regards the adoption of special rules governing the transportation of dangerous goods on narrow gauge or mountain railways , for instance .
These two amendments enhance the common position .
We commend these amendments and the common position to the House .
Mr President , Mr Cornelissen has done a good job and done it relatively quickly , bearing in mind that it was not until January 1996 that he took over responsibility for the problems inherent in aligning the laws of the Member States on the transport of dangerous goods by rail .
And so , although assigning responsibility to the individual Member States , giving them the opportunity of assessing the various cases that may arise , the rapporteur has tried to achieve as uniform an application as possible of the laws on the transport of dangerous goods by rail within the individual Member States and between the states .
For instance , it has been made compulsory for the Member States to notify the competent authorities so that they can alert the emergency services throughout the territory to be crossed .
The derogations relating to the Channel Tunnel and the transport of extremely dangerous goods such as dioxins and furans are also right and proper .
I should like to begin by thanking the Committee on Transport and Tourism and in particular , the rapporteur , Mr Cornelissen , for the recommendation for a second reading of this proposal relating to a uniform regime for the safe transport of dangerous goods by rail throughout the whole territory of the Union .
The proposal is intended to remove existing obstacles to free movement of goods between Member States .
Having the same regime for all transport of dangerous goods obviously adds transparency and clarity for the user and ensures greater safety .
Clearly , the Commission recognises that existing national regimes for the transport of dangerous goods have developed separately and diversely .
We naturally appreciate that harmonization cannot be achieved overnight .
We therefore provided for a degree of flexibility in the proposal and allowed Member States to retain more stringent requirements or certain derogations where these do not interfere with the principle of the internal market and free provision of transport services .
The Council increased the flexibility provided for in our original proposal .
I am glad to say that two of Parliament 's first reading amendments have been incorporated into the common position , and in certain cases a more restrictive regime for Member States was agreed , a change which reflects the spirit of a third amendment proposed by Parliament at its first reading , as the House may recall .
Turning to the amendments before the House today , I have to say that we consider the first to be unnecessarily bureaucratic and it is also impractical .
It requires all rail consignments of what are described as extremely dangerous goods to be subject to a prior notification procedure .
Since there is no specification of what is meant by ' extremely dangerous ' and since very dangerous goods such as radioactive substances are already subject to a notification procedure , we in the Commission see no useful purpose in adding what would be a significant administrative burden with no obvious increase in safety .


The second amendment , which was particularly referred to by Mr Cornelissen , is already addressed in Article 6 ( 11 ) and the new 6 ( 14 ) of the common position , which allows Member States to apply less stringent rules to transport which is conducted wholly within a port or airport , within the confines of an industrial site or between two distinct industrial sites .
This amendment is therefore unnecessary .
On the Channel Tunnel point raised by Mr Cornelissen , a delicate political compromise was reached at the Council - as I think he recognizes - to allow continuation of different , more stringent practices through the Channel Tunnel for reasons of safety .
Member States could not accept that existing stricter provisions than the RID would be deleted through this directive .
The unique technical characteristics of the Channel Tunnel and also the Øresund Tunnel , as Miss McIntosh reminded us , were recognized in the Council discussions .
The Commission considers the common position reached in the Council to be a carefully balanced compromise which was arrived at in order to secure an important Community step forward in improving safety in the transport of dangerous goods by rail .
I believe that it is generally the view of Mr Cornelissen and his committee that this is a significant advance .
I thank them for their support and understanding of the fact that it is not always easy to achieve what would be our maximum preferred position by the very nature of the Council which is representative of Member States with a divergence - or at least a diversity - of interests in this and other spheres .
Mr President , I thank the Commissioner for his answer , although he must understand that I do not agree with him in all respects .
But I would ask him to be rather more specific in answering my question about how the Commission will manage with the concept of ' tunnels with characteristics similar to the Channel Tunnel ' .
Does that mean quite specifically that we must think for example of the tunnel under construction in Denmark and that it will be restricted to that kind of tunnels ?
It does not say ' similar tunnels ' but the directive says ' tunnels with characteristics similar ... ' .
That makes us a little dubious .
Mr President , I am happy to respond to Mr Cornelissen .
' Similar characteristics ' establishes a broadly understandable concept but , in addition , in order to ensure that there is careful assessment , a qualified group will be empowered to undertake rigorous analysis of the major tunnels that could be subject to this legislation .
There is no question , therefore , even within the broad terms of this legislative proposal , of a casual attitude being adopted or of a Member State or Member States discovering some means of evading the effect of the legislation in the case of a major tunnel simply because of some anticipated disparity or some anticipated deficiency in the definition in the proposal .
By their very nature these tunnels are huge pieces of infrastructural development .
By their very nature they must be secure for the purpose of the transport of dangerous goods .
By the very nature of the legislation , and the position of Member States and the Commission , the fullest and most careful examination will be made of the specifications and potential of a tunnel to ensure complete adherence not only to the legislation we have before us , but to the best standards of practice in the transport of dangerous goods .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 7.50 p.m. )
Decision on urgency
Madam President , the Committee on Fisheries has agreed to accept urgent procedure and to ask for this to be placed on the agenda for the procedure without debate .
( Parliament agreed to urgent procedure )
The report will therefore be put to the vote on Friday morning .
The deadline for tabling amendments is 12 noon on Wednesday .
Madam President , the Committee on External Economic Relations yesterday unanimously adopted the request for urgency on the report by Mr Pex , as you rightly said .
We hope that the House will do the same .
( Parliament agreed to urgent procedure )
This item is also placed on the agenda for Friday .
The deadline for tabling amendments is 12 noon on Wednesday .
Customs 2000
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0083 / 96 ) on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the common position established by the Council ( C4-0006 / 96-95 / 0087 ( COD ) ) with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council Decision adopting a Community action programme on customs ( ' Customs 2000 ' ) ( rapporteur : Mr von Wogau ) .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we are voting today at second reading on the common position established by the Council with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council Decision adopting a Community action programme on customs known as ' Customs 2000 ' .
The aim of the programme is to assimilate and increase the efficiency of customs procedures and customs administration .
Many of the working methods and organizational structures used by the national customs services vary widely and urgently need to be brought more closely into line with each other .
At first reading we adopted a number of amendments to the programme , many of which the Commission has incorporated in its amended proposal .
The Council , however , has made it clear in its unanimously adopted common position that it has different priorities from those of Parliament .
This is obvious even from the title of the programme , which the Council calls a ' Community action programme on customs ' , whereas the title proposed by the Commission and approved by Parliament was ' action programme for Community customs ' .
We had a detailed discussion with the Commission and the Council in the committee on whether or not we have Community customs .
We feel that since we have common external tariffs , we can definitely say that the European Union has common customs which all share the same rules and objectives .
The recommendation before you at second reading lays emphasis on the further development of the European internal market into a proper European home market with open internal borders and a common external border .
Particular attention is to be paid to the associated countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
As a first step towards an eventual common customs administration , customs officials are to wear the twelve-star symbol of the Community to make it clear that they belong to a common service .
On the subject of training , the decision itself proposes the establishment of a European Customs Academy , not to replace the training provided by the administrations in the Member States , but to supplement it and help to bring the Union 's customs services together .
Finally , as part of the urgently needed computerization of the customs services in the Union , we propose that they should have the right of access to certain data in the Member States ' data bases , and that a common data bank should be set up .
In my opinion , this last point is particularly important and could be especially useful in protecting the Community 's financial interests .
Fraud and customs evasion has cost the Community considerable sums of money , a fact which has also led Parliament to set up a committee of inquiry into the Community 's freight transport procedures , where there is a particularly high incidence of fraud .
The people who will be most affected by this development are freight carriers , who are liable to the customs administration for the proper execution of the transport procedures .
There are huge sums of money involved here , and the carriers are required to provide the customs office with security for their liability .
Cases of fraudulent evasion of customs duties which are discovered by the customs authorities result in enormous penalties for the carriers .
In the Netherlands alone , carriers have had to pay almost ECU 900 million , the situation in Germany being almost as bad .
For Europe as a whole , the figure is estimated at around ECU 3 billion , and it is often only fairly small-scale firms which are involved .
Individual firms have faced demands for more than DM 50 million , for example , and for many this can spell financial ruin .
In calling for the customs services to be fully computerized as quickly as possible , Parliament therefore hopes to help prevent fraud and protect jobs .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , having arrived at this stage of the discussion following the European Parliament 's adoption last October of a strong text after the Council had adopted a rather insipid common position lacking in force and depth , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy has sought to restore a more real and direct force to the Customs 2000 programme by voting for a number of amendments .
Among other things , we have sought to reaffirm , through these amendments , the concept of the domestic market to which we attach considerable importance ; we have also sought to give more substance to the notion of Community customs with a whole series of distinctive signs and symbols in this area ; finally , we have sought to ensure the beginnings of genuine mobility for customs officers between the 15 Member States , common training and exchanges and , of course , the harmonization of controls in quantitative and qualitative terms .
In the field of legislation too , efforts are being made to achieve harmonization between Member States , and there must also be a certain homogeneity between them in the way they interpret this legislation .
But I should like to place particular emphasis , as most members of the committee sought to do , on the fight against all forms of fraud , and fraud arising out of transit operations in particular .
As you know Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , a committee of inquiry has been set up to investigate fraud involving Community transit operations and its initial findings have already shown that there is a great deal of fraud and a great deal of effort required in the matter of TIR documents , computerizing the Community transit system , data exchange , and effective checks on these data .
Finally , in regard to the committee 's amendments , we urged increased cooperation with third countries , and the CEEC countries in particular , through training programmes such as the Matthaeus programme .
We stress that sufficient funds should be made available under this programme to enable the declarations of intent to be expressed in action in the field .
Such are the conclusions of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy and at this point I should like to thank our rapporteur and chairman Mr von Wogau .
I will end by inviting Parliament to approve these amendments , without which this programme , which is important by the very fact of its existence , would risk being seen as no more than an artifice by many people .
I repeat , if we want to be credible we must combat all the many forms of fraud which abound within the Union and which prompt nationalist reactions .
Madam President , a single market needs common protection .
This common protection needs harmonized and strong customs at the Community 's borders , and that is precisely the subject of this report which we would like to see reinforced by a vote in favour of a number of our amendments .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should first of all like to thank the rapporteur on behalf of my group for the great commitment he has shown over a number of weeks while working on this recommendation .
His goals of ensuring the successful operation of the internal or , as he calls it , home market and helping to combat fraud and illegal trade are objectives which we all share .
There are two points which I should like to raise . As I see it , this programme needs to ensure that customs controls are equally strict at all border crossings , including ports and airports , and it is up to you , Commissioner , to see that this happens .
People are not happy that revenue should be lost and fraud encouraged because of slack controls at certain border points in the Community .
The Community has uniform customs legislation and should therefore ensure that customs controls are applied equally strictly everywhere .
I think the programme you have proposed will be helpful here , but you will also have to monitor it in practice .
The second point I would like to make concerns a completely different aspect of the programme .
I welcomed the Commission 's proposal - which was approved by the Council in the common position - that the interests of those involved in external trade should also be taken into consideration , in other words that importers and exporters should be involved .
I think it is an excellent idea to examine whether the customs rules can be simplified , since complicated rules merely encourage mistakes and fraud , whereas simpler controls would be much more effective .
I therefore welcome the fact that the Commission has said it is prepared to try to help importers and exporters by considering ways to simplify procedures .
I also think it is excellent that instead of simply handing down instructions from on high , the Member States wish to reach agreement with the freight carriers , importers and exporters on how computerized procedures can be used to simplify controls and apply them in practice .
I think that this form of partnership between economic operators and customs authorities is a very good idea and should definitely be followed up .
Finally , we should point out to the Council once again - assuming that it ever reads our proceedings - that there is no point in proposing a joint decision on improving customs if the Member States do not then provide their customs services with the funding and technology needed to put the decision into effect .
In my view , there is a good deal of ground to be made up with the installation of decent computer systems at all border controls throughout the Community , and this is something for which the Member States are responsible .
Madam President , the issue we are again discussing today - in the hope of being able to arrive at a definition of it - is of the greatest importance for the European internal market .
We clearly welcome the fact - and he has the support of my group - that it is actually the chairman of the Committee on Economic Affairs , Mr von Wogau , who is dealing with it , because there is , basically , broad consensus within the committee on the objectives put forward .
I would remind honourable Members that those objectives are crucial to the creation of a genuine internal market : what is involved here is in fact applying the common policies , regulating and facilitating trade both inside and outside the Community , collecting duties and taxes , securing compliance with fiscal and statistical rules , guaranteeing the protection of the Community 's financial , economic , commercial and industrial interests , combating illegal trafficking and , above all , guaranteeing protection of the Community 's environment and cultural heritage and of consumers .
There is one aspect in particular - and indeed it is one which came to light earlier - to which I would like to draw attention once again , namely the importance of identifying the customs authorities to which the ' Customs 2000 ' programme is addressed .
It is very important to define the powers of customs officers , and these have , of necessity to be uniform throughout the Union .
We welcome then the extension and automation envisaged and the setting-up of an information system with a common data-base which has a twofold function : firstly , to eliminate the incompatibility between the various systems of data preparation and , therefore , simplify customs procedures and , secondly , to serve as a useful instrument to combat fraud and illegal trafficking - a task that has assumed great importance since the creation of the single market and one to which the customs authorities can now devote all of the resources that are gradually being freed up .
We firmly believe that this proposal may represent a vital step towards the completion of the internal market .
Madam President , the Customs 2000 programme is very important and it is still more important to launch it with realistic objectives .
In this respect Parliament is perhaps attempting to achieve rather overambitious objectives too quickly .
For a long time to come we will be aiming rather at speedier cooperation between customs systems than at a separate common customs system - not least because there are still very sensitive issues associated with the external borders .
The Greens wish to stress the importance of customs cooperation with third countries and the European Union 's immediate neighbours .
In our opinion at least one-fifth of the Customs 2000 funds should be used to develop those countries ' customs institutions and cooperation with them .
It is also important to remember that , when the common data banks are set up which are essential in the fight against fraud , data protection will be needed to prevent these data banks being removed from the citizens ' control and used against them .
Madam President , both the proposed programme and Mr von Wogau 's report are something of a curate 's egg .
It appears from various sources that the introduction of free movement has led to a sharp increase in the incidence and scale of fraud in the export , import and transfer of goods , so we now need to focus our efforts on taking adequate measures to combat fraud .
The possibility of exchanging real-time information through computerized data banks and mutually accessible computer networks will spearhead these efforts , and as far as I am concerned , setting up a joint training institute comes much further down the list of priorities .
I am astonished at the proposals for customs officers to wear the European Union emblem on their uniforms and for the creation of a single Community customs service , which are purely symbolic gestures amounting to nothing more than window-dressing .
One last point .
The planned accession of the countries of Central and Eastern Europe will mean extra work for the European Union , and we should start now to prepare the ground for future cooperation with the customs services of these countries .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , Mr Jarzembowski welcomed the fact that the programme specifically includes economic operators .
But if only we had included them in the past and heeded their warnings , we would not now be planning to extend the T1 system to cover the Visegrad states .
Freight carriers - who were mentioned a moment ago and who really do face enormous financial penalties which they have not themselves incurred - and their associations have repeatedly warned against extending the T1 system to the Visegrad states or others at the present time , not because these countries are not to be trusted or because we do not wish to have them in the system , or because we do not know how important these first moves towards enlargement are , but because the T1 system is now no longer working even in the European Union and the EFTA countries and is , according to the Commission , on the point of collapse .
To put it bluntly , there is no point in having talks with economic operators or with the customs authorities if we do not draw the appropriate conclusions .
If all that happens at the end of the day is that a political decision is taken which cannot be justified in practical terms , then even the most constructive talks are useless .
Nevertheless , we would of course welcome the continuation of talks as part of this programme .
I have a comment to make about Amendment No 16 , which has caused some misunderstanding because it calls for direct customs control to have priority over every other method .
This does not mean , of course , that every lorry has to be unloaded at the border or its destination , which would , as we all know , be quite stupid .
But the approach adopted by the Commission and the Member States at the moment , of demanding higher guarantees , asking for individual sureties , extending the periods during which controls may be carried out , carrying out audits which produce statistics on fraud instead of preventing it , and then claiming payment retrospectively from the operators we have talked about so often - all of this is wrong .
The aim is not to find a scapegoat and hold them responsible for as long as possible .
The aim must be to take deterrent and preventive action , and this is only possible with controls .
What has been happening in the past few weeks with the abolition of securities for certain products and the introduction of individual sureties for sensitive products is already ruining some firms , and this is surely not what anyone here wants .
Madam President , it is obvious when a programme like ' Customs 2000 ' was thought up there is no doubt that everyone who created the single market had no doubt that ending customs barriers would means more fraud , more unfair competition and more crime within the European economy .
Noone was in any doubt about that .
And there is no doubt that the romantic symbol of gold stars on the customs officers ' new uniform is going to do anything to solve this problem ...
The measures which must be taken are well and truly enshrined in Articles 7 and 8 .
Will those measures be taken ?
Will there be really any interest among the Member States to take these measures ?
Will not many top officials in various Member States be interested in making sure that there is a certain freedom in terms of fraud so that competition takes place and their products can be sold ?
To what extent can Member States be made responsible for ensuring that provision already taken should actually be executed ?
The problem here is that of making the Member States shoulder responsibility since there are European citizens on blacklists and it will certainly be necessary to point out which governments and administrations fail to comply with the rules set within the Council of Ministers and the Commission .
Otherwise the whole of this can have no effect and the Customs 2000 programme will just be another document worked out by the Commission and the Council of Ministers .
However , I would like to see political will be made compulsory and I would like to see the states held in check because , Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , unless states actually play their part it will be almost impossible for their to be fraud in current proportions .
Madam President , I have only a few brief comments to make on a report whose conclusions I largely support .
As regards Amendment No 5 , of which I am in favour , I believe that it is important to stress that if it proves possible at Community level to agree criteria for the scale of customs controls , those criteria should be for a minimum level of checks .
This means that the individual Member States should undertake to achieve at least a certain standard of control but that they will be at complete liberty to introduce a stricter system of checks if they so wish .
In the debate in the Committee on Economic Affairs Mr Von Wogau also confirmed that the criteria would be of this minimum nature .
I should like to point out that there is considerable concern in my country that the single market may make it more difficult for us to carry out effective customs to prevent the importation of drugs .
An overwhelming majority of the population want us to be able to step up inspections if we so wish .
For this reason I am also critical of the formulations in Amendment No 3 .
I believe that we can , without in any serious way having to obstruct the free movement of goods and services , preserve a certain measure of internal border controls , precisely in order to prevent various forms of cross-border crime , such as that involving drugs .
Finally , Madam President , I have my doubts about the value of customs officials ' uniforms bearing the EU logo with the twelve stars .
Insignia indicating authority on police and customs officers ' uniforms , for example , should after all refer to the underlying legal powers , that is to say , in the case of Swedish customs officials , the Swedish state and the Swedish legal system .
I therefore regard the twelve stars as a worthless symbol .
I admit , however , that this issue is completely insignificant and it does not affect my positive attitude to Mr Von Wogau 's report .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , let me begin by congratulating the rapporteur , Mr von Wogau , for the important work he has done .
As stated in the report , the vital precondition for creating a genuine internal market is that there has to be joint protection of external frontiers .
That kind of joint protection is designed to guarantee the security of economic operators in the European Union ; to protect the Community 's financial interests and provide everyone , traders and citizens , with the same treatment in their dealings with the customs authorities .
Bearing in mind those fundamental objectives , the Commission put forward this text on 6 April 1995 , and it was first considered by the House on 25 October last .
Of the 34 amendments you then tabled , 23 were taken up by the Commission in its amended proposal of 21 November , and 14 adopted by the Council in the common position of 22 December 1995 .
As I emphasized to the House at the time of first reading , this programme forms part of the policy that the Commission has been applying since 1993 , designed to set in place a framework that will encourage cooperation between the authorities of the Member States and between those authorities and the Commission , thereby improving the administration of the internal market .
In compliance with the Treaty - and it has clearly to be taken into account - this is not intended to take the place of the responsibility of the Member States for implementing Community law or collecting own resources : the intention is rather to create a form of constructive collaboration to secure better coordination of those activities .
The ' Customs 2000 ' programme is in no way intended to interfere with the organization of the public authorities or national administrations or to intervene directly in the area of customs cooperation strictly speaking , a sector in which , under Title VI of the Treaty , the Commission has no power of initiative .
Similarly , this decision does not of itself represent the main instrument devised by the Commission to tackle serious but specific problems it has identified in relation to fraud , particularly as regards transit .
Those issues will be specifically dealt with , in separate proposals , in a different context .
Nonetheless , the ' Customs 2000 ' programme will provide a framework particularly suited to developing a genuine policy of prevention to combat customs fraud .
And it is in the light of those objectives that the Commission has weighed up the amendments tabled in your draft decision on second reading .
The House proposes incorporating 23 amendments into the common position of the Council - on which the Commission gave its view on 11 January .
Many of them are the product of discussions held with representatives of the Council and the Commission as part of an informal tripartite dialogue ; others take up again amendments from first reading that were not adopted by the Council or , in some cases , the Commission , Some , finally , are not , in our view necessary because they are already present in the text of the Council 's common position .
Consequently , the Commission is able to accept , as currently drafted , Amendments Nos 1 , 3 , 5 , 7 , 9 ( 2 ) , 15 , 21 and 23 ; it can also accept , with some changes to the wording , Amendments Nos 2 , 4 , 8 , 10 , 11 ( 1 ) , 19 and 20 .
The Commission cannot , however , take on board those amendments which , in its view , run counter to the principle of subsidiarity and seek , one way or another , to shift what is properly the responsibility of the Member States to the Commission or the Community : that applies to Amendments Nos 6 , 9 ( 1 ) , 11 ( 2 ) , 14 , 17 , 18 , 22 and 25 .

Even though the latter amendments cannot be accepted as such , the Commission believes that the ideas underlying some of them reflect objectives endorsed by the Commission .
That being so , the Commission undertakes to include those issues in the work that will be done in implementing this programme .
Finally , there are three amendments which we consider unnecessary because they reflect amendments from the first reading which the Council has already included , in substance at least , in the common position : they are Amendments Nos 12 , 13 , 16 and 24 .
To conclude , the Commission welcomes the great interest that the ' Customs 2000 ' programme has generated in the House and the active support our proposal has been given .
Thank you , Mr Monti .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Industrial policy for the pharmaceutical sector
The next item is the report ( A4-0104 / 96 ) by Mrs Soltwedel-Schäfer , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament ( COM ( 93 ) 0718 - C3-0121 / 94 ) on the outlines of an industrial policy for the pharmaceutical sector in the European Community .
Madam President , I should like to begin by saying how much I have enjoyed working with my colleagues on this pharmaceutical report , especially recently in the various rounds of votes and compromises , and I should like to thank them all for their help and cooperation .
Ladies and gentlemen , this report is sure to provoke very widely differing views on the industrial policy we should pursue in the pharmaceutical sector .
This is certain to be the case , since the report is supported by a majority in Parliament , but the Commission , so I was told by one of Mr Bangemann 's press officers , is anything but happy with it , saying that we are ' making a lot of work for the Commission ' with it .
So we clearly do not see eye to eye on this .
I should like to pick up on this point .
The Commission communication , Mr Bangemann , unfortunately devotes far too little attention to the quality aspects of innovation in the pharmaceutical sector , the need for patients to have objective information on drugs , and ethical issues relating to their licensing and production .
We in Parliament , and I as rapporteur for this report , demand that an ethics committee be set up at the European Medicines Agency in London , and that patients ' representatives be appointed to its management board and scientific committees .
Mr Bangemann , we were at the EMEA conference in London together , and I assume that you , as a forward-thinking consumer protector , will also support these demands .
I would like to stress that certain passages in this report have been watered down as a compromise , to ensure that it would receive a majority .
This is , of course , not the ideal way to produce a report , but in the end the wording is always some sort of compromise .
On the subject of patent protection periods for generic medicines , I have not only emphasized the vital role which these medicines play in social policy terms , but also the fact that more and more pharmaceutical companies are becoming heavily involved in the generics sector , either directly or through participation in research .
Further aspects covered in the report which , I am glad to say , most of my colleagues in the committee voted for , include calls for restrictions on animal testing , opening up the European market for herbal and homeopathic medicines , and the close monitoring of mergers in the pharmaceutical sector , which have a considerable impact on employment .
We are also calling for a responsible export policy in the pharmaceutical sector , with the introduction of a code of conduct .
I am delighted that at its last meeting at the end of March this year , the Council adopted a decision on the implementation of guidelines for an industrial policy in the pharmaceutical sector , which puts forward a number of suggestions and calls on the Commission - and I should like to hear what you have to say on this , Mr Bangemann - to bring forward proposals for improving transparency in the sector and taking greater account of the interests of generic and herbal medicine producers .
I am particularly pleased because these are things that we also emphasize in the report , and they are evidence of a modern approach which considers the interests of patients and consumers as well as those of the industry itself .
In conclusion , I should just like to say that I think the Conservative and Liberal groups here in the House have been very unconstructive in tabling amendments which directly contradict this modern approach , and it shows that they have simply swallowed the very intensive lobbying from the industry .
Let me be quite clear about this .
A modern industrial policy must not be geared towards either producers or customers .
It must be geared towards society and its legitimate needs , and above all , Mr Bangemann , it must have the courage to innovate .
In my view , the report should be adopted as it stands .
I assume that Parliament has the courage to innovate , and that the House can tell the difference between the Commission 's proposal , which was very much geared towards the industry , and the committee 's carefully considered and jointly adopted alternative .
I hope that it will be widely supported , and I would be delighted if it helped to give the people of Europe confidence in our ability to protect those who are ill .
Madam President , I should like to start where the rapporteur has left off .
As Commissioner Bangemann knows , no one has fought harder for the principle of industrial policy in this House over the last three years than myself and some of the other Members who will be taking part in this debate .
We have to recognize , however , that the idea of having an industrial policy for the pharmaceutical industry is rather different from the other industries we have dealt with in the past .
We have to acknowledge that the pharmaceutical industry is intimately linked to health issues and to the national social security systems of our Member States .
When we determine an industrial policy - which we should do for the pharmaceutical sector - we have to recognize that it is a much broader sector than the other industries we have looked at in the past .
At a time when governments are trying to cut their budget deficits , we have to look at the costs involved in buying the pharmaceuticals for the health of our nations .
To ensure that we have healthy citizens we have to ensure that drugs are as inexpensive as possible .
The Socialist Group supports an industrial policy .
We do not believe that we should cherry-pick .
We want to see a comprehensive industrial strategy for the European Union and we do not believe we should only look at industries which are in decline .
Therefore , we welcome the Commission 's proposal to look at the pharmaceutical industry .
Indeed , we want the Commission to come back in the very near future with a new communication on the pharmaceutical industry based on the consultations they have taken on their 1994 proposal and recognizing the rapid developments taking place in this sector .
There is global competition in this sector .
We recognize that with global markets we have to look at this key industry and ensure that it is competitive within the European Union .
That is why the report we have produced looks at a number of key issues .
We want to encourage innovation .
We want adequate protection of new medicinal products .
We want the availability of medicinal products for citizens throughout the European Union .
But in addition - and we see no contradiction in this - we want the development of an EU-based generic pharmaceutical industry as a positive contribution to competition .
There is no contradiction if we recognize the importance of the pharmaceutical industry for the health of our citizens and for our national social security systems .
We also want close monitoring of mergers , specific action towards emerging activities such as biotechnology , on which we are trying to cooperate with Commissioner Bangemann at the moment to secure rational proposals for the European Union , and of course we want the promotion of responsible selfmedication .
So , we want a well-balanced industrial policy but we want to make sure that this balance recognizes the responsibility that the pharmaceutical industry has in Europe .
It has its industrial responsibilities but also a responsibility towards every single citizen that may need to use these products in the future .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission report has been out for two years now , and the House has discussed it in great detail over that period .
It is a good thing that Mrs Soltwedel-Schäfer can now tell us that the wording of various passages has been watered down , because the proposals she originally put forward were completely unworkable .
But there are still plenty of points in this report that we do not agree with , and I think it is too simplistic to claim , as Mrs Soltwedel-Schäfer does , that every argument put forward by the industry must be unconstructive .
This is not the right way to go about things .
After intensive discussions , there are now four points on which we have tabled amendments with the Liberals : firstly , the question of whether the best way to ensure the future viability of the sector is through greater competition or more regulation ; secondly , the role of genetic technology and biotechnology in the development of medicines for the future , particularly for previously incurable diseases ; thirdly , the research and development of innovative products ; and fourthly , closely linked to that , the question of generic medicines and selfmedication .
We feel that the Commission report paints a relatively accurate picture , but the proposals which it puts forward still need some improvement .
We agree with the Socialist Group 's analysis here .
However , I do not believe that price controls and other measures which restrict competition are the way to ensure future viability . What we need instead are measures which promote competition and thus give firms the opportunity to establish their innovative capacity on a long-term basis , and to offer people better medicines for the future .
The future role of genetic technology and biotechnology is still in dispute , and although we need to take account of people 's concerns and fears , this does not mean that we should simply reject this vital field out of hand .
We must analyse the situation carefully , and if Europe 's industry is to remain competitive , we cannot afford simply to say ' this is all too dangerous for us ' , otherwise we shall soon see the entire sector move to the USA .
The most controversial subject in the committee was the issue of generic medicines , on which there was fierce lobbying from the industry .
We feel that we should keep to the compromise we reached earlier , which was that we should encourage the prescription of generic medicines in general , but without jeopardizing the level of innovative research being carried out in the industry , and so the agreed protection periods should be maintained .
What we could do , however , is to harmonize the durations of these periods , which vary between six and 36 months in Europe for generics , with an average of 18 months after the expiry of the patent period .
This is one area where we can actually achieve something , and I think it would be a good way to promote greater transparency and more competition on the market .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , the Liberal Group feels that if our policy in the pharmaceutical sector is to be successful , we need to strike a sound balance between public health requirements on the one hand , and on the other the need to have a competitive pharmaceutical industry as the jewel in the European economy 's crown .
In recent weeks , however , I have had the distinct impression that some people in this House see government cutbacks in healthcare as the only reason for introducing a policy for the pharmaceutical sector in the Union , and regard generic medicines as the ideal solution .
There are a number of factors which they have completely overlooked , however .
First and foremost , there is the importance of medical progress .
Research and progress in the pharmaceutical industry depend entirely on having a watertight patent protection period .
Ten to twelve years of exclusive rights are absolutely vital when you know that out of tens of thousands of active substances , only one or two will produce a marketable drug .
Secondly , we must not forget that the market for generics is a purely commercial one and involves only products which are commercially successful .
Thirdly , the comparison with the situation in the United States does not hold water .
The United States does not have price regulation , so the pharmaceutical industry can recover its research costs more quickly .
The same goes for the United Kingdom , the Netherlands , Denmark and Germany , where the free pricing system has already produced a flourishing market in generic medicines , whereas in Belgium and France the market is practically non-existent .
The solution lies in free pricing , not in cutting down on the patent protection periods .
The American market is also not fragmented as it is in the Union , where the protection period is calculated from the first time a licence is granted in any of the Member States .
Finally , the innovative pharmaceutical sector is one of the leading generators of employment .
It has a much greater multiplier effect on other sectors and itself employs 530 000 people in Europe , 80 000 of them highly skilled .
Apart from her desire to reduce the patent protection periods , it is the rapporteur 's views on genetic technology and biotechnology which cause me the greatest anxiety .
I wonder which is the more ethical : encouraging scientists to carry out genetic research into diseases which cannot yet be treated , or thinking that we politicians can judge how this genetic research should be developed or curbed .
I hope that when you vote , ladies and gentlemen , you will put the interests of medical progress and a competitive pharmaceutical industry in Europe first .
Madam President , in relation to this report it is important to emphasise the special nature of the pharmaceutical industrial sector . It is umbilically linked to public health and , as point E demonstrates , we should first of all aim at the objective of providing the whole population with safe and efficient medicines .
This undeniable priority comes up at Community level against the differences between the health systems and social security regimes in the different Member States and various national peculiarities .
On one hand it is a sector which illustrates in the extreme and with many contradictions the process of private transnationalisation leading to the destruction of national industrial sectors .
From this point of view various factories which are technically performing well and which have very good laboratories have been put out of action , abandoned and transformed , because of mainly financial transactions , into mere warehouses or places where labels are changed .
The case of Portugal would be a perfect example of this accelerated and perverse evolution which has made the production and trade in medicines completely dependent on the outside .
We can only ask , as hinted at in part I , whether it will be inevitable that the European pharmaceutical sector should suffer the same fate as other national sectors , given that Europe is the biggest medicine market in the world , as is pointed out with emphasis in the opinion issued by the Committee on Social Affairs .
These remarks took on particular expediency when the ' mad cow ' crisis took over the front pages and became one of the main preoccupations of the public , bringing to the fore the question of medicines and their control , a control which the exclusive interests of transnational capital accumulation have gradually taken over and turned into a problem of recovery .
It is obvious that the pharmaceuticals industry demands huge resources and calls for extremely burdensome research spending . However it is very important to prevent that research and development from being exclusively at the service of private interests rather than mankind as a whole or public health .
The delicate nature of these questions and the dimension of the interests at stake are both reflected in the report which should deal less with the market and prices .
But that is how things are .
We must emphasise and point to Vote 26 / 24 behind this motion for a resolution and the clearly trade-biased orientation of some of the amendments , and we wish to point to the top priority which the pharmaceuticals industry should aim at and which is its raison d 'être - helping public health .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , what we are doing here is developing a European industrial policy for a particular sector .
In the pharmaceutical sector , we need to reconcile a number of different interests .
First of all , there is our common heritage of biodiversity and acquired scientific knowledge , the latter being a basic prerequisite for the development of pharmaceutical products .
Secondly , there are the interests of society , since our social security and healthcare systems are greatly affected by price levels in this sector .
Thirdly , there is our common interest in lasting innovation for the future , which means that we will always need industrialists , and they in turn will always need a challenge .
Big profits are not enough , otherwise we would have seen a flood of industrial innovation in Europe in recent years , which has clearly not been the case .
Those who have invested in the sector , however , quite legitimately wish to see a return on their capital .
Mrs Soltwedel-Schäfer 's report , as adopted by the committee , contains a number of acceptable compromises , and I think it would be most inadvisable to reject these in the hope that giving the industry carte blanche is the right thing to do .
It would be wrong for us to introduce a German-style industrial policy which simply allows the economy of this sensitive sector to govern itself . What we need is to achieve a democratic balance of interests which presents a challenge to the pharmaceutical industry , and thereby stimulates the innovation that is required .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this is a commendable report , despite a rather unfortunate title .
Is not an industrial policy for the pharmaceutical sector reminiscent of the planning we used to see in the iron curtain countries ?
The argumentation without discussion is cast in the same mould .
While it is admittedly impossible to harmonize the management policies in the pharmaceutical sector , there are certain major subjects of concern which this report fails to address .
Let us first turn to what are known as ' orphan drugs ' , meaning those withdrawn from the market as they are not profitable due to insufficient use .
A specific approach to this problem is essential due to the appearance of new forms of nonepidemiological illnesses .
A medicine exists because it provides treatment , irrespective of whether it is profitable or not .
Japan and the United States have awarded orphan drugs special status .
In Europe there is a legal vacuum in this area .
The legal status of orphan drugs in the United States means that they enjoy privileged status for clinical trails , tax credits , etc .
They are not withdrawn from the market ; they do not stop producing them ; they are not marketed - but they are made available to the medical profession .
This question of orphan drugs leads us to the whole matter of public health .
Europe should endeavour to promote this protection of life at all levels , without excluding the so-called risk groups or the victims of rare diseases .
A healthy notion of public health must allow every individual to obtain treatment according to his real needs .
This communication from the Commission seems to be seeking to ascertain how best to restrict the supply of health care .
This is unacceptable .
The report 's conclusions show a certain boy scout enthusiasm , proposing an industrial policy for this sector which amounts to creating a multispeed Europe in the health sector and thus for the individual .
When you then add to this a failure to understand the market economy , the potion becomes all the more poisonous .
Just one additional question : How do people view the merger of Ciba-Geigy and Hoffmann-Laroche , which is a result of this report ?
Madam President , I wish to record my thanks to the rapporteur for her important work on this key industrial sector in the European Union .
The difficulty that the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy has had with this report , to which the rapporteur and Mr Donnelly have alluded , is that we have no context in which to set this work .
We have no real public health strategy for the European Union , and this is an important omission , which perhaps we can rectify in other pieces of work .
The rapporteur has rightly drawn attention to some of the problems of the sector and particularly to the way in which companies in the United States of America are in many ways making gains .
She has drawn attention to the employment consequences of mergers and other changes , and she has rightly drawn attention to the problems of exporting into poorer countries drugs which are not allowed to go on sale within the European Union .
The area I wish to concentrate on particularly is responsible self-medication .
It is a difficult area , because , on the one hand , Parliament would want to support the patients ' right either to choose or to be involved in the choice of what drug treatment is the most appropriate for them .
There is also an important cost element here and sometimes these two objectives can be in contradiction .
All over the European Union - indeed all over the world - policy-makers are concerned about the costs of health care and there is a temptation to make drugs available over the counter that ought more properly only to be prescribed by a doctor or a pharmacist .
This leads me on to the important role of the pharmacist in the sale and prescription of over-the-counter medicines .
We need effective labelling , effective and comprehensive testing and pharmaceutical advice if patients are to make a genuine , informed choice about over-the-counter prescriptions .
It is difficult to balance the need for adequate regulation and the safeguarding of patients ' rights .
I also wish to draw attention to the part of the report that states , and I quote directly : ' Growth [ in the pharmaceutical industry ] cannot be a political aim in itself since there is no direct relationship between the consumption of pharmaceuticals and the health of the public . ' Now , perhaps that might be more tenuous were we to look at it in a worldwide context .
But certainly to look at the pharmaceutical industry and its effectiveness without placing it in the context of the link between poverty and health , between housing and health , between employment and health , between education and health , means a serious omission .
I welcome the report .
I welcome the innovation .
I do not agree that we need a pharmaceutical industry with price controls as they are at the moment , but this is an important contribution to a key-sector policy development .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as a practising pharmacist and someone with research experience in the pharmaceutical industry , there are two points that I should like to make .
I tabled an amendment on self-medication in which I urged that medicines which are no longer to be prescription-only should still be available only from pharmacies , and only issued once the pharmacist has been able to advise the patient .
The most obvious thing that the medical profession does is to advise patients and help them with self-medication .
The transition of medicines from being prescription-only to being available over the counter must be carefully monitored .
I am thinking here in particular of patients who were addicted to phenacetin and often used to take headache pills just for fun , and I see the same warning signs with the uncontrolled consumption of aspirin , which people now seem to regard as a panacea .
Moving on to the question of support for generic medicines , the main thing as far as I am concerned is that while generics are certainly of considerable value , the same competitive conditions must apply for them as for innovative drugs .
Only those who have no idea of the huge costs involved in researching new drugs could be in favour of granting earlier licences for generics .
The comparison with the United States , it must be said , simply does not hold water .
As has already been pointed out , patents are protected for 16 years nationwide in the US , whereas in Europe , protection only takes effect once the product has been licensed in the various individual countries .
I am not in favour of making generics prescription-only , since I think it is better to leave them to market forces .
As for the use of genetic technology in the production of pharmaceuticals , I can only see the huge opportunities which this offers , and I feel that there is no point in discussing the risks until we can assess the advances that are likely to be made in the treatment of diseases which present a major threat to mankind .
Madam President , few reports have been the subject of such intensive lobbying by the industry concerned and I think this is always instructive .
I have been part of a minority - but a substantial minority - in the Liberal Group in welcoming this report , although I feel that the criticisms of the Commission in paragraphs 3 and 4 are perhaps unjustifiably harsh .
The absence of a free market in pharmaceutical products is regrettable .
It is unhelpful to the companies producing research-based innovative drugs ; it is unhelpful to the consumer who enjoys less choice , and it is unhelpful to society which eventually pays a higher price in terms of a weaker industry and fewer jobs .
I suspect that the cost of moving to a free market would be much lower than we imagine but , of course , once the psychology of restricted markets has taken hold it is hard to get over that .
But if we need a free market we also need normal patent procedures .
Why cannot we allow , as they do in the United States , companies producing generic medicines to begin their development work in advance of the expiry of patents ?
We know that this work is done for European companies in Turkey and in Iceland , for example .
It is costing us jobs here in the European Union .
There is more than a little hypocrisy among the large pharmaceutical companies , most of which have generic subsidiaries .
They want to hunt with the hounds and to run with the hare .
In the United States they see the generic medicine sector as an important job creator .
This report calls for the opening of that sector .
It also calls for other important changes : for the establishment of an ethics committee in the European Medicines Evaluation Agency ; for measures to reduce the extent of testing on live animals ; for the promotion of alternative treatments , so important especially in the homeopathic field , and for responsible selfmedication ; for a ban on the export to developing countries of medicines we would not allow here ; and for the harmonization of registration requirements for pharmaceuticals .
All of these would lead to a safer , healthier society with more sustainable medicinal practices and a pharmaceutical industry better geared to meet the challenges of the future .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , a large part of our European identity is based on our system of social protection and , in particular , our system of health insurance .
Despite the disparities between various Member States , this remains one of the most developed in the world , to the point where it is a reference for half the population of the planet for whom the prospect of illness spells disaster .
In this respect , Mrs Soltwedel has drawn up a very clear and detailed report which deserves our praise .
At the international level , the pharmaceutical sector is going through a period of upheaval , caught between the globalization of competition and cost-cutting measures applied to public health systems .
Although Europe has a large medicines market , it also fortunately has a great scientific and industrial tradition : something known as good manufacturing practice , a notion which must be preserved .
Medicines are an essential factor in protecting health .
The availability , quality , effectiveness and safety of medicines must all be improved - on this point the report is categoric - in order to guarantee treatment or cure for everybody , and also prevention .
In this respect we must always remember the importance of information and the essential health safety on which insufficient stress is laid .
Any fudging in this area is to be rejected .
We must impose strict regulations and not leave the market to impose its own rules .
In regard to reagents , which were recently the subject of a debate in this House , we must of course refer to the sad case of the ' Abbot ' AIDS screening tests .
I repeat , it is essential to prevent any backsliding and to establish sufficient health safety not only between the Member States but everywhere .
Let us learn the necessary lessons from the situation caused by the bovine spongiform encephalopathy prion .
We must not limit the action of the public authorities in this field and confine the pharmaceutical sector to the area of industrial policy alone .
There is also the matter of health and people 's lives to be considered .
I repeat , that is what health safety is all about .
We must also endeavour to increase price transparency , although I know that the treaties do not , unfortunately , yet allow us to cause governments and laboratories to make an effort on this subject .
I am in favour of the use of generic medicines , but we must not dismantle the system of patents , without which there would be no research or investment , the costs of which are a growing burden .
As to gentle and homeopathic medicines , these attract me but also leave me sceptical .
As chairman of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , I should like to add a word on the need for the public authorities to assist orphan drugs and a whole range of treatments which are vital to the third world - such as vaccines - but which are not profitable enough to allow laboratories to produce them or conduct the research prior to production .
Finally , I welcome the creation of the European Medicine Evaluation Agency .
I see this is an excellent first step towards Community regulation .
I should like to end by looking at the need for bioethics and also add that I see Europe 's increasing drug consumption as harmful .
There are countries which stuff themselves with tranquilizers , but I do not know of any pill against misfortune or unemployment .
The general public should be made aware of the good use of medicines and , perhaps , of the difference between what is learned at the faculties of medicine and the reality of the situation , which has changed .
Madam President , first of all I should like to say that the communication from the Commission on industrial policy for the pharmaceutical sector is appropriate and balanced , although in the future there will have to be more ambitious proposals to make innovation possible .
It calls the attention of governments and of public opinion to the need to create a social climate conducive to therapeutic research .
Certain mistaken scientific , economic and social policies in the last 25 years have led to the European pharmaceutical industry 's losing almost 25 % of its competitive edge in introducing new medicines on the world market .
We cannot support the report presented by the rapporteur .
The Group of the European People 's Party has therefore tabled a block of amendments which we think it is essential to approve .
It must not be forgotten that therapeutic progress would be best served by the promotion of innovation as would lightening the future burdens on social security systems .
The best protection of the interests of patients as consumers is the availability of high quality , safe and effective medicines .
We forget that a medicine is an active substance coupled with a process of pharmacological and clinical research , plus information and civil and criminal liability .
Medicines known as ' generic ' , which make no contribution to therapeutic or social progress , contribute nothing to that .
It is only a factor of selfregulation and must be taken as such .
Many of the speeches made by distinguished fellow-Members on this report forget that there is very full legislation in the European Union and that this communication deals only with the perspectives of an industrial pharmaceutical policy .
If we had concentrated on that , perhaps we should have achieved a better result and practically full support for the Commission 's proposals .
Madam President , I too am a small but active minority within the Group of the European People 's Party .
Pharmaceutical research is both costly and time-consuming , and it can take up to ten or twelve years before a new medicine is ready to be put on the market .
In 1993 the average cost of research and development was estimated at ECU 275 million .
You can well imagine that sums like this can only be generated by companies with sufficient cashflow throughout the ten years which it takes to develop a new product .
And not only are the costs high , there is also a considerable element of risk involved .
All of this means that it is only the really big companies that can spare the money for research and development .
The recent report by the Commission on the state of Europe 's industry indicates that the European pharmaceutical industry is smaller than its American rivals , which would imply that Europe 's industry finds it much more difficult to finance research and development .
Twenty years ago , 50 % of all new medicines were still developed in Europe , whereas now the figure has dropped to 30 % , though I hesitate to say whether this is a cause or an effect of the difference in market share .
I obviously do not want American patent-holders to carry on benefiting once the patent has expired .
The patent period was the reward we offered the industry under the previous GATT system , in return for its investment in developing new products .
At the same time , there is a risk that all our technological know-how will move to America and Japan , where you can start research before the patent expires , if we do not provide the same conditions in Europe .
So we need to introduce an exemption in Europe to allow research into generic medicines to start before the patents on them expire .
We need to allow products to be developed and marketed as soon as possible , so that production costs can be recouped as quickly as possible .
If the House does not support paragraph 17 , we shall simply be relegating our industry still further down the table .
Producers in Asia and America , where there is a research exemption , will pull further and further ahead , and in ten years ' time we could be reading a Commission report which says that only 10 % of products are now developed here .
Madam President , this debate has shown that our communication was very necessary and , in my view , that we still need to discuss this issue further .
A number of questions have been raised here today which need to be examined in detail .
The Commission - and Mr Watson is right to defend us here , I think - absolutely rejects the rapporteur 's claims in paragraphs 3 and 4 that we have not taken account of basic aspects of the industry and that we expect competition to be the magic solution .
Our communication clearly shows that this is not the case .
I would refer the rapporteur to the start of Chapter 2 , where we say that if the Community is to take action to maintain and increase the competitiveness of its pharmaceutical industry , it must take account of the particular aspects of the sector which Alan Donnelly and others have already mentioned , firstly because its products have an important part to play in the field of public health , and secondly because the cost of medicines has a direct impact on the social security budgets of the Member States .
The Community 's industrial policy in the pharmaceutical sector needs to take account of both the public health and social security aspects , without undermining the Member States ' powers in this field .
So how anyone could reach the conclusions they have , I do not know , but I have no intention of letting them monopolize our discussions .
Maybe attacking the Commission is just a good way of enlivening the debate , and it is something we are quite accustomed to .
What are the problems here ?
This is an industry which , as Mrs Peijs pointed out , was until recently a world leader , playing a prominent role in research and development and in the creation of new jobs .
In the 1980s , employment in the sector could be expected to grow by more than 2 % a year on average .
In 1993 this trend came to a halt , and since 1994 employment in the sector has been falling : minus 1.8 % in 1994 and minus 2.8 % in 1995 .
As Mrs Peijs said , the situation with patents is also looking rather bleak , and this may also explain why employment has fallen .
Between 1975 and 1979 , 61 % of all new pharmaceuticals were developed in Europe , but the figure dropped to 48 % , in other words to less than half the total , between 1990 and 1994 .
Over the same period , the United States ' share grew from 26 % to 31 % and Japan 's from 11 % to 31 % .
If we include biotechnology , which is of course one of the major fields of innovation and will become particularly important over the next few years , the situation looks even grimmer .
Patents at the clinical and pre-clinical development stage account for 58 % and 48 % of all patents held by American firms , in other words around half .
For European firms , however , the figures are only 26 % and 16 % .
What this means in policy terms is that we are dealing with an industry which is very competitive , even on the international market , but which is also in decline .
This is something the communication naturally also deals with - it is , after all , a communication on industrial policy .
Mrs Read is of course right to say that health also depends on factors such as how you live , where you live , environmental conditions , social conditions , nutrition and so on .
But this is not a health report , and health is not one of my responsibilities .
What is more , the Union is not responsible for all health policy matters , and this is a problem I shall come back to later .
The report instead tries to suggest ways of making Europe 's industry more competitive and thus providing better protection for people 's health and , of course , for the interests of consumers in this field .
The link here is obvious , because the pharmaceutical industry would not exist if it did not work in tandem with the healthcare and in particular the social security systems .
On the other hand it is also true , Mrs Soltwedel-Schäfer , that consumers , or in this case patients , cannot be supplied with a decent range of products if we do not ensure that our industry is competitive .
We would seem to be caught in a vicious circle , and it is up to us to find a way out .
The first thing we proposed was to establish a single market in this sector , an idea which has never actually been disputed .
Pharmaceutical products should be subject to the rules of the single market , just as other products are .
This does not mean that they should always be treated like other products .
We have already taken a number of measures , as Mrs Soltwedel-Schäfer , who was with me at the Agency in London , will testify . We are not just sitting down now to discuss what to do , this is something we have been dealing with for some years , and it was the reason why the Agency in London was set up .
We have introduced a licensing procedure which has , in my opinion , come up to the mark so far , and we shall have to see how it progresses in future .
This was why we visited the Agency .
I also have no objection to involving consumers and other organizations in assessing the results of this procedure and in evaluating medicines and the licences granted .
I have no objection to setting up an ethics committee , Mrs Soltwedel-Schäfer .
But if you do , you will have to accept its findings , even if you do not agree with them .
This is not the case here , Mr Langen .
I am a very open person , as you know .
I am even prepared to be friendly , which shows you just how open I am .
What I cannot tolerate , however , is for people to demand an ethics committee and then refuse to accept its findings .
We have an ethics committee on food production and labelling , and I would remind you that it endorsed our views .
We did not ask it to do so , and there was no lobbying .
The members of the committee are completely independent , and they said the Commission was right .
But some sections of the House set very little store by this , which is really most regrettable , because if you want to have such a committee , it is because you expect it to be independent and neutral , but you must then be prepared to accept its decisions , however much you might disagree with them .

While I have no objection to doing more in this area , I would point out that we already have the Agency , and a licensing procedure which ensures that pharmaceuticals have a chance on the market , but only if they meet strict requirements .
We have already dealt with the self-medication issues .
Medicines are licensed as prescription drugs , pharmacy drugs or over-the-counter drugs , which means that the system is suitable for use throughout the Union .
And - something which is particularly important with new drugs - we have already put in place some of the legal protection called for in this report .
The protection offered by patents can now be extended , in the sense that the unfortunate situation whereby the testing period had to be deducted from the length of the patent no longer exists .
This has already been dealt with , and we do not need to discuss it further .
The USA and Japan have even followed our example .
So we are by no means starting from scratch , and what we have to do now is consider what to do next .
We are left with the four problems that Mr Langen mentioned , which summarize the situation very well .
First of all , which will be more useful : more competition or more regulation ?
I think a combination of the two would work best , both for the industry , for cutting costs , and for consumer supply .
Some regulation will of course be required , and we have no desire to limit the powers of the public authorities here .
We need them to exercise their powers , as is entirely right and proper .
But this too is no guarantee .
Take BSE , for example .
One of the main reasons why BSE grew to become such a serious problem in the UK is that the public authorities allowed lower temperatures to be used in producing feed from animal remains .
It had nothing to do with competition or the Commission , it was the public authorities who allowed it .
Experience has shown that making a public authority responsible for something is unfortunately not always the best thing to do .
But this does not , of course , mean that we do not need public involvement in this particular field .
Think of it this way . Priests can never hope to get their full message across because they are mainly preaching to the converted , while the others whom they might convert do not come to church in the first place .
This is why I am convinced that experience is best of all .
You only have to look at the second question Mr Langen raised , about generic medicines and self-medication , which Mrs Read also mentioned .
What is the situation here ?
In some countries , consumers can obtain generics for self-medication without prescription and at competitive prices , since the only chance generics have is to squeeze the market leaders out through competitive pricing .
In countries which do not have competitive pricing , such as Spain , Mrs Soltwedel-Schäfer , where there are fixed minimum prices for medicines , there are practically no generics at all .
90 % of the market for generics is concentrated in four countries : Germany , the United Kingdom , the Netherlands and Denmark , because they allow price competition , and this gives generics a chance .
So anyone who wants to bring prices down for the consumer should not run away with the idea that fixed minimum prices are the way to do it .
The opposite is actually the case , since consumption tends to increase with fixed minimum prices .
In other words , Mrs Soltwedel-Schäfer , total expenditure is greater with fixed minimum prices than if competition is allowed to set price levels and influence consumer behaviour accordingly .
These are basic market forces , but it is always difficult to have confidence in them , because they seem to be such an artificial mechanism which will inevitably produce bad results .
But this is not what happens .
Mrs Read is right .
Look at how little of the total healthcare budget goes on medicines , for example : 14 % a few years ago , now down to 12 % , and even less in some Member States .
Hospitals account for the largest proportion , and even there the costs have fallen .
And when you consider that the sensible use of medicines can in many cases eliminate the need for in-patient treatment , it becomes quite clear that medicines can be very effective in reducing costs .
So when we are looking at ways of reducing costs , we should also think about how we can make this work better for us .
This brings me on to the question of how what we do affects the social security systems in the Member States .
The Council has not said a word on this , nor will it answer any questions about it , for one simple reason .
You are , of course , aware that any interference in these systems has enormous political implications , and we have absolutely no intention of harmonizing the Member States ' healthcare systems .
What we actually want to do is to remove the price element from the social security system mechanisms and allow it to be determined by the market .
This will produce two results : low , competitive prices and at the same time proper social protection for patients .
If we succeed in doing this - and we have urged the Member States to comply in a special protocol to this communication to the Council - we shall already have achieved a great deal .
Biotechnology is an extremely important issue here , and will come up again when we look at the patentability of technological discoveries .
I hope that we have now made some progress in this field and that Parliament is able to accept the proposal , because there is a very real danger here .
I am not saying this because I want to put pressure on you , but the fact is that people are moving to America because they have had enough of the poor conditions in Europe , and I do not see how this is supposed to help us if it simply means that we will have to use American medicines at prices we have no control over , prices which patients will have to pay with their hard-earned money .
It will not bring us extra jobs either , so what good is such a policy ?
As we can see , biotechnology is really a very important aspect .
Finally , there is the question of generic and herbal medicines .
For the first time in the history of the European Union , the licensing procedure we have introduced at the Agency allows homeopathic remedies to be licensed as medicines according to the same criteria as those which apply to other drugs .
So don 't shoot me , I 'm only the piano player , and I shoot back !
On the subject of generics and patent-protected medicines , here too the best idea is to allow both to exist alongside each other .
Without innovations there would not be any generics , but at the same time generics play an important role in preventing innovations from becoming so prohibitively expensive that the health sector cannot afford them .
There is a symbiosis between the two : they live off each other .
I find it hard to welcome the idea that laboratory testing is to be allowed before the patent period has expired .
A patent covers only some of the costs that can be incurred in research today , which can run to enormous figures .
Someone also pointed out how few medicines have been coming onto the market from research recently .
This is why we need innovations and why they need to be protected .
They can start to compete on price with generics later .
One final comment about mergers , which we also mention in the communication .
Of course the competition rules must apply here .
When we looked at the Sandoz-Ciba Geigy case after they informed us that they wished to merge , we were astonished to discover that these two companies , which are so important in Europe , and indeed worldwide , share only 4.8 % of the world market between them .
The biggest pharmaceutical company 's share of the market is just under 10 % .
So even among the largest firms , the spread is so great that there will always be competition .
I hope that I have now answered all the points that were raised in the debate , though I am sure that we shall have a good deal more to say on this subject .
We will continue to monitor the development of the Agency , and if we really get to grips with the problem , looking at all the facts rather than just listening to people 's opinions , I am sure we can develop a decent policy for this industry .
It is certainly a sector that is still worth fighting for , but subsidies are not the answer , nor are they what it wants itself , thank goodness .
But it is an industry that is losing its competitiveness , and this is what we must take action to prevent .
Mr President , please let me put a supplementary question to Mr Bangemann , since he was given five times as much speaking time as I was .
Before I come back to the pharmaceuticals report , I should just like to put the record straight about BSE .
This does not concern you directly , Mr Bangemann , since it is not one of your responsibilities .
In October , when I went to see Mr Marchand at the Commission to discuss European measures in connection with BSE , much was already known which was not made public until six months later .
There was more to it than just the fact that animal carcases were being rendered at lower temperatures because the public authorities were incompetent ; there was also , above all , enormous pressure from the meat lobby , and I think that the influence this brought to bear will become increasingly clear , Mr Bangemann .


Turning back to the pharmaceutical report , I first of all welcome the fact , Mr Bangemann , that you are very much in favour of setting up an ethics committee and have indeed almost given it your approval , and I gather you feel the same about the management board and the other measures which we mention in the report and which were approved by the committee .
I am delighted to hear this , and I think it will help to provide much greater protection for patients and consumers .
I was not so clear - and this is why I would like to ask a supplementary question - about whether you seriously cannot accept the compromise that we propose in the report , namely that patent protection should be shorter with regard to generic medicines , so that the time can be used to begin research .
I should like a straight yes or no on this .
I think you owe it to us to make a clear statement on this point , instead of just referring to what Mr Langen said .
My final question will probably also be very important for us .
What follow-up will be given to this communication on the pharmaceutical industry ?
Can we expect directives or other more compulsory measures for the industry in the next six or twelve months , or will there only be the communication for the time being ?
Mr President , Mrs Soltwedel-Schäfer , if you think back very carefully to what I said about rendering temperatures , you will remember that I was merely responding to a comment to the effect that when national authorities deal with such matters , they can be expected to come up with reasonable solutions .
There was no more to it than that .
I did not say anything about the BSE problem as a whole .
Of course we could talk about it for hours , but all I actually said was that the example of BSE shows that this is not always the case .
I think we would get a good deal further if you did not always suspect me of saying one thing and meaning another .
I am very rarely devious , and I always warn you in advance , so that you know when it is coming .
I made it quite clear - and I really do not think I need to repeat this - that I am not in favour of allowing generics producers to begin research or experiments using data which is protected by a patent before the patent protection period expires , so that they can have a product ready for marketing as soon as the patent has expired .
I said this quite clearly and categorically the first time , and now I have said it again .
Naturally a communication such as this is always the basis for further measures .
I do not think that we shall be putting forward proposals for directives straight away , but what we aim to do is to discuss with the Member States in very practical terms just how far it is possible to take the price element out of the social security systems , so that we can establish a proper single market for pharmaceutical products and avoid the constant problem of parallel imports , and so on .
This will probably be the next item on our agenda , so we shall really want to clarify a few of the points we have mentioned before we produce any further proposals .
There is also the proposal concerning patentability , which I feel is quite important .
Once we have dealt with this , we could discuss what else is necessary .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
Prevention of drug dependence
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0093 / 96 ) on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council Decision adopting a Community action programme on the prevention of drug dependence within the framework for action in the field of public health ( 1996-2000 ) ( rapporteur : Mr Burtone ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , for this second reading also we have taken into consideration a number of key factors . The first is that drug dependence is no longer a marginal issue .
Unfortunately , it is widespread among all social classes and within different ideological groups : it is the scourge of almost all of Europe 's cities - the model cities and those with more rundown districts .
A second element on which we based our report is that there is no one reason that leads to drug dependence ; these are the causes : the breakdown of the family , the lack of values , the social context and many , many other varied reasons .
Drug-addicts are not therefore martians : they are , sadly , our children , those who live alongside us .
And if this is our approach to the problem , our starting point , then our response cannot be simple , simplistic , superficial or oversimplified .
What we actually need is to be tough in tackling the problem but also to be willing to talk .
If we are to respond , then we cannot set ourselves apart with our policy or scientific technique - we have to be able to communicate with those working in the field and seeking genuinely to combat drug dependence .
The work with which we , as a committee , tried humbly to make progress is at risk of being undermined .
I want to make that very clear - including to some members of my own group ; I am very much opposed to some of the amendments tabled by the European People 's Party also .
I disagree with those who - in good faith - do not approve of the approach taken in my report , because they have looked at it superficially , simplistically , influenced perhaps by a number of schemes devised solely on the basis of national experience . But I most particularly disagree with those in the House who are deliberately trying to undermine a vital piece of work , obeying the diktat of certain governments .
I particularly condemn the superficial approach of those who operate on the basis of hearsay ; those who jump from one report to the next without considering the issues in depth .
We cannot tolerate that kind of destructive and superficial attitude to the tragedy of drug-addicts and their families , this social tragedy . We need - and have proposed this - to make progress on the path to dialogue rejecting all radical approaches .
We have said ' no ' , and we say it again , to the liberalization or legalization of any drug , and we have defended that position with scientific rigour , and with great respect , vis-à-vis those who take the contrary view .
We have spoken of biological damage but also of the psycho-emotional influence of all drugs , be they soft or hard drugs . We have described the sociological link between soft and hard drugs , but we also said ' no ' for ethical reasons because we are opposed to drugs sanctioned by the state .
But , just as firmly and energetically as we say ' no ' to liberalization and legalization , we are also opposed to the criminalization of drug addicts because prison neither saves nor rehabilitates them . Prison is a place of damnation : it is in prisons that , very often , drug dependence spreads further .
Of course , if a drug addict becomes a pusher , then it is right and necessary that he should pay and answer before the law also .
But the amendment tabled by the Committee on the Environment , Health and Consumer Protection sought , in cases of that nature too , to place the accent on rehabilitation and not punishment .
A specific commitment to establish certain priorities thus became apparent .
What is most baffling , and I want to make this point very strongly , is that those people who say that they want to combat drugs are opposed to taking measures to treat , rehabilitate and reintegrate , at the very time at which the scope of projects is being extended beyond primary prevention to include other objectives ; they are not therefore confined to trying to reduce the demand for drugs - which is huge within the Community - they are seeking to use information and education to reach young people , to talk to them and prevent drugs playing a decisive role young people 's lives .
In our programme , we have , however , sought to take stock of the dramatic nature of the problem , we have undertaken , without prejudice , all possible measures to treat , rehabilitate and reintegrate , because we are persuaded that , in dealing with drug dependence , it is crucial to understand that , sadly , people take drugs and need to be rescued .
To conclude then , Mr President , we say ' no ' to liberalization but , at the same time , no to the criminalization of young drug addicts .
We do not know what the result of the vote will be but we certainly want to convey a message , a very powerful message : you can get escape from drugs and a young person who emerges from the abyss of drug use is a real living example which we should take into account in drawing up programmes of primary prevention .
I therefore ask you to reject some of the amendments tabled by the European People 's Party , because , as I said at the outset , we cannot take a superficial approach .
We are engaged in a war in which we should all be fighting because we should all consider ourselves very much involved .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would strongly urge the Members of this House to approve Mr Burtone 's report , and the Commission and the Council to give it their closest consideration .
Mr Burtone has succeeded in adopting a pragmatic and realistic approach which studiously avoids the usual platitudes .
I would also stress that at first reading , the Burtone report was approved by the vast majority of the House , and that this present report also secured a sizeable majority in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
However , in recent weeks a great deal of nonsense has been talked about the action plan , and in particular about the report itself .
So let us be quite clear about it : this report is not about legalizing or liberalizing any drug whatsoever .
The rapporteur , myself and others who support this report have been deluged by postcards from Sweden telling us to stand up for liberalization , but whether we are in favour of it or not , there is absolutely no question of standing up for liberalization here .
This is a report on a public health issue and certainly does not come under the third pillar .
So let that be an end to all the nonsense .
Secondly , at no point does this report approve the taking of drugs .
Thirdly , the report stresses the importance of harm-reduction in prevention .
Harm-reduction is not defeatist , and accepting harm-reduction does not mean that we think the fight against drugs is lost , but that today 's reality demands urgent new measures to protect people 's health and the quality of life in our society .
And what is today 's reality ?
Despite the ' war on drugs ' , the amount of drugs available has anything but dropped , and despite the billions spent on campaigns , production has not been curbed and the number and variety of drugs has actually increased .
No more than 10 % of the growing supply of drugs is intercepted .
What this means is that drugs are not only still available , they are becoming increasingly available .
Let us come to terms with this hard fact , and stop trying to pretend that we will eventually have a drugs-free society , no matter how attractive the idea may seem .
If we are prepared to accept reality , then we can be much more efficient at every stage of prevention .
Some people think that the police should have a greater role to play .
Let me tell you what Raymond Kendall , the Secretary-General of Interpol , has to say about this .
He points out that it takes USD 35 million invested in harmreduction compared with USD 246 m in police measures to achieve a 1 % reduction in the use of cocaine , in other words harm-reduction is seven times more efficient .
He is in no doubt that we need to fight drugs , but we are not likely to see any great improvement on the streets , even in the long term .
Paul Cook , a police officer from Manchester , said much the same at a recent conference in Brussels which was organized by the Commission under the Spanish presidency .
We should not just invite such people to come to our conferences , we should also act on their advice .
Some people here maintain that methadone treatment , needle exchanges , help centres and sensible primary prevention all actually pave the way to addiction and simply encourage drug-taking .
I would point out that substitute treatment keeps the use of opiates to a minimum , reduces crime , discourages third-party drug use so that there are fewer new addicts , promotes social reintegration and discourages risk behaviour in general , thus preventing the transfer of viral infections .
There is also a great deal of prejudice against needle exchange schemes , but serious research has shown that there are no new users coming , that people tend to inject less rather than more , and that injectors do not go back to their old ways .
So the results are all extremely welcome .
I think it is a great pity that some people now , at the last minute , seem to feel the need to undermine this broad compromise that Mr Burtone has been working on for months , and I hope that when we vote shortly , the voice of reason will prevail over all the slogans and hysteria , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten .
Mr President , I and my entire group are most grateful to Mr Burtone for his expert guidance in leading us through the first and second readings of this report .
The main focus is on prevention .
How can you stop young people turning to drugs ?
How can you help addicts to give them up ?
How can you limit the health risks ?
The funding available , HFL 12.5 million a year , is merely a drop in the ocean , and is only enough to pay for exchanges of experience , unfortunately .
Providing funding for specific projects such as methadone or other substitute treatments or distributing syringes can help to improve care for addicts , but it cannot be paid for by the European Union and remains the responsibility of the Member States .
Use European funding for exchanges of experience by all means , but not for specific projects .
We have tabled a number of amendments on this point , and I think it is actually what Mr De Coene himself would like to see .
There has been a good deal of very high-minded talk about drugs policy , and it is regrettable that instead of joining forces to take a firm stand against the constant appearance of new drugs like Ecstasy , which tend to contain increasingly dangerous combinations of ingredients and are very popular with young people , we are actually not learning anything at all from each other , while the policy-makers simply argue amongst themselves .

The policy of tolerance pursued in the Netherlands is not the answer .
It simply makes drugs more easily available and acts as a magnet for addicts from other countries , increasing crime rather than reducing it .
Making addiction a crime also does not work .
We wholeheartedly support the harm-reduction policy which the report recommends , and this means that we firmly believe that no distinction should be made between hard and soft drugs .
We have no sympathy , however , with the fatalistic approach adopted by Mr De Coene , who would have us believe that the fight against those who supply drugs is a lost cause .
Tolerance and liberalization are not the answer , since they lead to a vicious circle in which society has to give more and more ground .
On television in the Netherlands last Sunday a leading socialist , Mr Tobback , said : ' What has our policy in the Netherlands achieved ?
I am the mayor of a city with 35 000 students , and there has not been one single case of a drugs-related death . '
What we in the PPE Group want is for the Commission and the Council to come up with a programme in the near future which takes a close look at the results of Sweden 's anti-drugs policy . This is the one that our group prefers , and it may turn out to be a viable approach for many other countries in Europe .
Mr President , within every political group in the House there is a majority view and a minority view on the action programme on the prevention of drug dependence .
It is on behalf of the majority of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party that I should like to congratulate Mr Burtone on his report .
We must be clear that this report and the action programme itself are not about combating the trade in drugs , but about the public health aspects of the drugs problem , and our guiding principle here must be that a humane , tolerant and pragmatic approach - and I see that even as I speak Mrs Oomen-Ruijten is leaving the Chamber , which is a great pity - is a more effective means of prevention than treating drugs users harshly and repressively .
A repressive approach is much more appropriate when applied to large-scale drugs trafficking and organized crime , but it will do nothing to help drug addicts .
It is also right to assume that a completely drugs-free society is nothing more than a pipe-dream , which is being just as realistic as acknowledging that we have a society which uses alcohol and tobacco .
As Mr Burtone said , we are not talking about life on Mars here .
I think it is a pity that the report does not distinguish between hard and soft drugs .
In my country , the Netherlands , drugs policy is based on this distinction and has produced very good results in the public health field , compared with other countries in Europe .
We have a relatively small number of users and low incidence of AIDS contamination and drugs-related deaths , and the statistics show that compared with other countries in Europe , fewer young people are moving on from soft to hard drugs and that the use of hard drugs is declining .
I am pleased to see that there are a number of amendments which adopt this line in calling for disinfection sets and sterile syringes and needles to be provided in order to combat infectious diseases such as AIDS .
There are also some very welcome calls , such as in Amendment No 23 , for substitute treatments such as methadone to be recognized .
Mr President , I think the basic problem is summed up in a report by Sir Jack Stewart-Clark for the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs .
In that report it is stated that the G7 financial group considers that in Europe and the United States 120 000 million dollars are in circulation bound up with the sale of drugs .
Of that amount 85 000 million dollars are laundered in financial institutions . I think that is the basic problem confronting all the institutions , including the European Parliament , which try to deal with such a terrible problem as drug dependence .
We agree with Mr Burtone 's report and with the inclusion of the amendments at first reading .
They are most important amendments because they place the fundamental accent on prevention , education and training and , when prevention is not effective , on the rehabilitation and treatment of addicts .
Those amendments also take into account the social situation of those excluded from society and the social situation of poverty which - not in all cases but in many - leads young people to drug dependence .
It therefore seems to us that the report , unlike other amendments with which we do not agree , ought to be approved in the European Parliament perhaps by the same majority by which it was approved in the Committee on the Environment and Public Health , an overwhelming majority : 28 votes in favour , 1 against and 3 abstentions .
The report regards addicts and drug dependence as public health problems and not as individuals to be hounded and suggests rather that it is the large-scale traffickers themselves , those behind these 120 000 million dollars , who should be pursued and not the little consumer whose plight might be aggravated by imprisonment .
In my country 60 % of prisoners are behind bars because of drug dependence , and 40 % of that 60 % have the AIDS virus .
Prevention must therefore be fundamental and two other amendments therefore seem important to us : in the first place to provide the Lisbon Observatory with sufficient human and financial resources to keep it right up to date all the information we have throughout Europe on which actions have been most effective ; in the second place to hold in 1996 the conference proposed by the rapporteur under the aegis of the United Nations , the European Parliament and the Commission , in which the experiences of all the European countries may be evaluated , not only those of the past 20 years , so that we may know what experiences have been the most effective and may then take more practical decisions in this field .
Mr President , rapporteur , ladies and gentlemen , I am one of these people whom it seems you respect but whose opinion you do not share and who is in favour of positive drugs control , or what you describe as ' legalized liberalization ' .
I know that we do not at present have a majority in Parliament who share this view .
I would also add that I am not fully in agreement with Mr De Coene : even when you raise the question of public health , the fact remains that positive control of soft drugs would facilitate the implementation of health policy .
The same would apply to alcohol , if only we resolved to get to grips with the problem .
But I do not want to open up the debate on this issue , given the balance of opinion in the House .
One thing worries me : Europe has seen a debate of incredible stupidity over recent months .
I am aghast that the President of a republic which I like very much could have said so many things - I will not say ' absurdities ' as I do not wish to offend him - on the subject of drugs which are both futile and incorrect .
This frightens me because while I am indeed in favour of a European approach to the drugs problem and to public health , if this is going to be the kind of approach advocated by Mr Chirac , then I say : ' Drop it !
What are we heading for ? '
It would be a disaster when you consider that the country which Mr Chirac is attacking , the country which he hates ( as far as its drugs policy is concerned of course , as apart from that the Dutch are friends ) , this country , then , has a much better public health record than France for whose policy Mr Chirac is responsible .
So here we have a gentleman who dares give advice to people who are doing much better than certain others and who tells them : ' If you come to come to our country , you will not actually do as well , but we have a better system ' .
This really is a bit much to take , ...
This is why our Parliament must adopt the Burtone report .
I do not agree with everything in it , but it is better than many other things .
Parliament must also make it clearly known to the politicians and the Council that we are opposed to the policies recommended by the French Government , not because it is the French Government , but because they are policies which are highly damaging to public health in Europe .
Mr Chirac is a veritable danger to the public when it comes to public health and drugs .
He must be told politely , because he is a friend who sometimes makes mistakes : he made a mistake with the nuclear testing and he is doing so again with drugs .
But he will learn as he gets older , he will come to understand , as everybody does .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the report submitted to us by Mr Burtone once again addresses certain concerns which Parliament expressed at first reading but which were ignored in the common position .
I therefore approve of the general inspiration behind the report and virtually all the amendments , with the exception of Amendment No 8 which refuses to distinguish between hard and soft drugs at the prevention stage .
For the rest , I have the impression , on reading Amendments Nos 1 and 4 , which are concerned respectively with calling into question repression and the health aspect of drug dependence , that we are afraid both of words and the reality of the situation .
The reality which is there for all to see , and which is the result of an essentially repressive policy dictated by international prohibitionist agreements and the assumed ideologies of certain countries - such as France or the United States - is the following : a continuous growth in drug trafficking and consumption , the financing of organized crime of stupendous proportions , the destabilizing of banking systems , the corruption of whole nations , the growth of delinquency due to the need for money , and the spread of AIDS . All of this under the cloak of prohibition and hypocrisy .
This is the edifying net result of the policy of repression .
But yet I do not propose to counter the dogma of unprincipled repression with a dogma of liberalization lacking in any public health objectives .
Our pragmatic position can be summed up in four simple ideas which are effectively adapted to the reality of the situation : the decriminalizing of all drug use , controlled legislation for products which do not lead to addiction , public international control of the supply and trade in hard drugs based on an agreement between the European Union , the United States and the other major consuming and producing countries , and , finally , the generalization of policies of risk reduction and substitution treatment .
This is a simple , clear and understandable policy .
As long as we fail to courageously advance along this path , crime will continue to prosper from individual tragedies .
Mr President , we have now almost finalized the drugs prevention programme .
The common position contains a considerable number of qualitative improvements introduced as a result of amendments proposed by Parliament .
It will be easier to allocate funding now that specific projects are planned , which will help both the Commission and the Member States .


A number of amendments were not accepted by the Commission and the Council , and the amendments that have come back in the recommendation for a second reading have a rather defeatist air , implying that there is not much we can do except limit the worst of the damage .
But this is playing into the hands of the drugs dealers , who are indirectly responsible for the destruction of their fellow men .
We reject on principle the acceptance of harm-reduction as a basic approach and addiction as a social phenomenon , since these undermine the very justification for providing assistance .
I therefore also oppose the amendments which aim to have harm-reduction adopted as a strategy .
Persuading addicts to kick their drugs habit is a very delicate issue and cannot be governed by any general European strategy .
It is also a curative rather than a preventive measure , and this is not what this action programme is about .
To sum up , I support the common position , but I shall be voting against the Burtone recommendation .
You have been very courageous Mr Burtone .
You have , through your group , encountered many obstacles .
I have been well aware that you had to steer a course between the two extremes .
It is essential to speak of risk prevention .
But it is not enough .
Because here , which is the place to do so and where we can benefit from the experience of others , we must finally acknowledge that we are not making any progress and are in fact regressing .
The Lisbon Observatory provides us with the tragic figures .
Of course there have been arrests and of course drugs have been seized , but drugs are continuing to enter Europe in ever larger quantities every year .
The least we can say without making a moral judgment is that the repressive policy is not working .
But that does not mean I favour simply opening up the gates , quite the contrary .
However , I do not believe you are going to get very far by giving equally short shrift to those who want to liberalize and those who simply want to repress .
I greatly admire your courage and this report , but it is not enough .
Let us be quite clear : there is racism in drugs .
When I hear of the tragic effects of soft drugs , I think of alcohol and tobacco .
For these are our drugs .
Tobacco leads to a dependence estimated at 25 or 35 % .
And what do you do about that ?
But then it 's the State which sells it .
I am speaking from the public health point of view , if you like , but also from a moral and political point of view .
It is tobacco and alcohol which cause most damage in terms of public health .
Let us remember this and not demonize other people 's drugs .
We too have our drugs .
What is needed is an economic approach .
We must have the courage to say that we must control , and not simply decriminalize drug use .
Just as if you have drunk too much you are not allowed to drive , so if you smoke too much you will not be allowed to drive .
But when you consider that , in my country in particular , there are five million cannabis users , I wonder how we are going to manage to lock them all up .
Here in Parliament we have the obligation to discuss this matter a great deal more .
We clash with the experience of others rather than listening to it .
The caricatural example is of course my country 's attitude to the Netherlands which , fundamentally - namely for having adopted practices protecting users of hard drugs from HIV infection - is a good example to at least listen to and to take on board .
We should therefore discuss more among ourselves and benefit from national experiences , both negative and positive .
I believe that this will be progress and that this conference which you mention and which we all want to see , in 1996 , will be a step in the right direction .
Finally , we must not demonize any experience or initiative , whether negative or positive .
Initially , let us listen to what has been done to prevent risks and try to go further in what seems to be a problem linked to our societies and not solely to any weakening of moral fibre .
I believe that if we do not offer alternatives to our young people , not enough dreams , not enough adventure , and not enough certainty , then drugs and drug dealers still have a bright future ahead of them .
Mr President , drugs are a scourge which destroy our families and kill our young people .
For very many years already the European Parliament has concentrated on three courses of action in combatting this tragedy .
Firstly , preventing drug addiction , secondly , combatting drug trafficking and the related crime and , thirdly , helping drug addicts to get well again .
Today we are interested in the first of these courses of action .
In my eyes this is the most important .
Because if drugs lose their attraction for young people , if young people believe that all drugs and stimulants are a threat to the freedom of the individual , the drugs traffic will automatically decline .
We therefore need a concerted European approach to prevention and must exchange both positive and negative experiences , include addiction prevention in the various Community programmes for young people , and fund promising projects .
But above all we must help parents who are so often ill-equipped to confront the dangers threatening their children , and also the teachers and trainers , especially those active in risk environments .
Finally , let us remember one important principle : programmes undertaken with young people are often far more effective than those undertaken for young people .
I believe that creating a sense of responsibility among those primarily concerned and ensuring their active participation must be a golden rule in preventing drug addiction .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I congratulate Mr Burtone for the efforts he has made , particularly of late , to tackle the problem with greater clarity but also greater realism .
Understanding at last that punishment is not the solution to the drugs problem seems to me to be in itself an important step forward , as is the fact that the preventive approach is being adopted .
I have , however , to say that , in the end , the approach we are left with is still that of ' taking an aspirin to cure cancer ' : that , basically , is what emerges , despite - let me repeat - the tremendous effort of good will from my friend , Mr Burtone , and all of those who have worked on this report .

The reality , as Mr Hory and Mr Kouchner have said , is that punishment has proved a hopeless solution and that the adversary facing us is a world economic giant and one that cannot be defeated using either tanks or helicopters : the more it is criminalized , the more drug use increases at international and world level .
That then is the reality .
We need then radically to change our approach and we must do this all together , to start with by discussing among ourselves the results so far of prohibition and criminalization .
That is why the most important amendment is Amendment No 32 which calls for a conference to be held to discuss scientifically the disastrous results of prohibition and for the international conventions of the United Nations to be revised .
Mr President , Mr Burtone has done some wonderful work and he is obviously very concerned about drugs but at the same time I would like to say that I do not share all his views .
In our group I speak for something that we call the minority but I in fact believe that in this case the minority is bigger than the majority .
Like most Swedish politicians , my party in Sweden , the Centre Party , can certainly not support the thesis that a drugs-free society is an unattainable utopia .
I was deeply upset at seeing a joint European programme of measures against drug abuse almost distorted beyond recognition by fellow Members who have given up the battle in the face of drug producers and those in favour of a liberal drugs policy .
It is completely mistaken to regard a restrictive policy on all drugs as the antithesis of a policy to reduce suffering and the harmful effects of drug abuse .
I invite any Member of the European Parliament who is in two minds about the liberalisation of drugs to make a study visit to Sweden to see how we combine a highly restrictive view of drugs with humane care for the victims of these deadly drugs .
However , the European Parliament 's proposal will have no effect on Swedish laws and regulations , dealing as it does with recommendations for a programme of measures .
Unfortunately , however , this type of decision helps to undermine the legitimacy of the European Parliament and the confidence of the people of Europe in it .
This is an unfortunate consequence of today 's debate .
This debate has also strengthened still further my conviction that the area of criminal law should remain a purely national concern for the Member States .
Mr President , Mr Burtone 's report contains a number of different parts .
There are parts that I support , such as the importance that is attached to preventive work and the need for proper care and rehabilitation to help drug addicts give up their abuse .
There are also parts of the report , however , that are not at all acceptable .
It contains a number of more liberal formulations where the policy of what is called ' harm reduction ' is concerned .
This is a philosophy which is aimed at reducing the damage done by abuse , not at combating and putting an end to it .
The report also contains demands for a supranational drugs policy and for a review of existing international conventions .
This is not acceptable .
The UN 's drugs conventions should rather be strictly applied by the EU countries as one element in the battle against drugs .
The policy of certain EU countries in the field of drugs today in practice serves to sabotage international cooperation in the fight against drugs .
In the report the issue of drugs is treated as a health issue and dependency as an illness .
Drugs are , however , primarily a social and political issue .
The reasons for drug abuse are social conditions , exclusion , unemployment and the lack of future prospects for young people .
The battle against unemployment , social injustice and segregation is thus an important part of the battle against drug abuse - the most important part .
A proper policy for a system of care and rehabilitation which works is also needed .
In this context it is also impossible for society to accept either trafficking in or the possession of drugs - they should be illegal .
There should also be popular opposition to drugs and steadfast and consistent action on the part of the police and customs authorities .
This policy forms a single whole , all parts of which are needed .
Mr President , as a socialist I regard the equal worth of all people as a central issue .
I cannot accept that people should be lost to drug abuse .
This is why I would like to see a consistent overall policy with a single goal : a drug-free society .
Mr President , it is customary to congratulate a rapporteur .
But in this case I should like to extend my particular congratulations as it is rare that such intelligent and courageous texts are submitted to the House , a fact to which the number of Members present at this sitting testifies .
This report goes against prevailing opinions and the blindness which make a situation which is in itself extremely worrying worse by the day .
It identifies the failure of repressive policies which have recourse to increasingly substantial resources , to a lesser degree in Europe and to an extreme degree in the United States . Yet we continue to model our policies on those of the United States when , at the same time , we can see a parallel increase in the number of drug users , the number of risks they take , and the number of accidents of which they are victim .
So today we are concerned with the question of prevention .
This prevention must clearly be applied to hard drugs in particular , concentrating on intravenous drugs .
It must also be implemented at various levels : the family , schools , universities , associations , municipalities and workshops .
We must act on all these fronts as , whatever some people may choose to believe , drug dependence is a sickness which we must fight , and we are indeed dealing with sick people , in exactly the same way as an alcoholic with cirrhosis of the liver is sick and a smoker with lung cancer is sick .
We must therefore confront an illness and its complications - which are admittedly a major element - whether viral contamination , which essentially means hepatitis or AIDS , social contamination in the form of family dramas , marginalization and exclusion-dereliction , or judicial contamination through the resultant delinquency .
All of these elements must be appraised .
Why does everyone entrench themselves in their own camp , without wanting to look at the results obtained by a number of projects - and I am thinking here of substitution in particular - the results of which have been insufficiently studied ?
We must endeavour to act on collective awareness , on public opinion , on our Member States , on our governments - and I am well placed to know about this , given my nationality - and , finally , on international opinion as a whole .
In this respect , holding a conference which would call into question the position of the international community would be very welcome .
Mr President , this is one of the absolutely most important issues in Europe and the international community as a whole .
It is a matter of how we can best and most effectively tackle the scourge of drugs .
This is a task which places us under an obligation and demands that we , as parliamentarians , accept our responsibilities and do not simply let things rest .
The view expressed by Mr Burtone 's report is a view which worries me .
It confirms that a re-evaluation is under way of the traditional policy on drugs which used to guide Europe and which was the lodestar internationally in work on and the battle against drugs .
It smacks of resignation and lack of enthusiasm .
Its message is that the battle against drugs cannot be won - but this is not true .
We know that a restrictive drugs policy combined with a well-developed rehabilitation system produces results .
We know that the fewer the young people who try drugs in the first place , the smaller the number who will become addicted .
This is why preventive work is aimed at young people .
It is by far the most important thing we can do .
It is the most important way of reducing the number of addicts in the future .
A policy which is geared only to reducing the damaging effects of drug abuse which is already taking place sends out completely the wrong signals and devotes resources to a completely wrong objective . The policy of harm reduction is a policy of negative accommodation .
It is a defeatist policy .
If we are to be successful in combating drug abuse we cannot make distinctions between use and misuse .
Nor can we make distinctions between soft and hard drugs .
There is always a risk - irrespective of what we choose to call it - an imminent risk that individuals will become addicted .
I cannot therefore support the Burtone report and I hope that this house will be able to produce a more positive and more active policy on drugs .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by thanking Mr Burtone for his report .
In the light of the figures for 1995 on the drugs problem in Germany , I would urge that the main drugs policy priorities should be measures to educate people about the dangers of those substances which , sadly , are still all too often dismissed as party drugs , and preventive measures to tackle the causes of the problem .
It is alarming to see the sharp rise in demand for synthetic drugs , particularly Ecstasy , and the careless attitude that people take to these pep-pills , with no thought of the dangers involved .
Hopefully , effective addiction prevention measures will succeed in reducing the demand , as they have done in the case of heroin .
I should also like to voice my opposition to any liberalization of drugs , in order to counter the expectation of rising demand .
Europe is still seen as a lucrative market where there are profits to be made .
At the same time , any tendency towards liberalization and legalization has the effect of playing down the dangers of illegal drugs and is the greatest obstacle to prevention .
Reference is always made in these debates to the consequences of alcohol and nicotine abuse .
Not only should these problems be mentioned , but they should be seen as a clear warning , so that we do not end up with the same problems by making soft drugs freely available .
As a practising pharmacist , I oppose any attempt to make hashish or marijuana available from chemists , since that would mean putting drugs on a par with medicines .
Instead , I would like to see new models and progress in the area of aid and therapy for drug users , including methadone substitution , though only in the context of therapeutic and psycho-social accompanying measures .
We need to offer improved and more specific counselling and treatment for those who are in danger from , or dependent on , drugs , and their families .
Let us support the concept of living without drugs or addictive substances , and let us not trivialize these problems by engaging in a debate that blurs the issues .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am very pleased that the action programme on drug dependence is the subject of discussion in the House today .
I am all the more pleased as we will soon be discussing the proposed Council regulation on North-South cooperation in the fight against drugs and drug dependence , which therefore completes the prevention aspect of the subject .
As the Intergovernmental Conference opens - a conference which has set itself the particular objective of drawing closer to Europe 's citizens - the subject under discussion is one of concrete and , unfortunately , daily concern to our citizens .
As the Member for a region particularly affected by this scourge , located 100 kilometres from the Netherlands , I know the destructive effects which drugs can have on our society as their use is unfortunately increasing among our young people and sometimes even among our children .
90 % of the addicts being treated in my region are under 30 years of age .
We must turn off the tap and stop the continuous supply .
Naturally , we must also improve and reinforce treatment programmes .
I welcome the proposals of the common position of the Council which include a series of schemes which are clearly more important and more specific than those of the Commission 's initial proposal .
Efforts must continue in this direction .
In particular , we must increase the resources allocated to treatment cures .
We must also promote improved cooperation between Member States and between the competent Community bodies in this field .
And would it not also be wise to bring together all the Community bodies and agencies active in this area within a single organization ?
It is only by such a pooling of energies that we will be able to effectively combat and eliminate this scourge .
Mr President , I have been working on the issue of drugs since the very first committee of inquiry in which I served with Sir Jack StewartClark .
I found myself pulled in a variety of ways over the years .
Very often it is ageing liberals from the ' 60s , like myself , who advocate liberalization , legalization of drugs .
They make a very good case very often .
But generally speaking , the people who take this line are not themselves addicted , are not themselves very often in direct contact with the vast problems related to addiction , and they are complex problems .
Of course the element of unemployment and poverty is very significant here .
In fact , the whole question of why some people choose to deal with life through the haze of drugs , why some people become addicted and others do not , is also part of the issue we have to face .
We need to pay particular attention to our prisons .
Contrary to what has been said by the previous speaker , I am happy to tell you that a specialized unit has been opened in the prisons in Dublin .
I am sure many colleagues from other countries have experienced the same problem that very often young people in prison , who may not in fact be addicted when they go in , come out addicted .
Therefore it is important that one has a unit in prisons where the prisoners themselves can make a choice against drugs .
You will find that a significant number of them will probably make that choice .
While 80 % of the people in our own prisons are there because of drug-connected crime , some of them are not .
This is a contagious disease , as contagious as tuberculosis was in the ' 40s and ' 50s .
We have to treat it like that .
We also have to recognize that our detox and treatment programmes must include not just detox but also an element of teaching life-skills .
You cannot rehabilitate people if many of them have never been habilitated in the first place .
Mr President , I know that Commissioner Flynn shares with us the regret that we do not have total competence in all matters concerned with drugs .
The fact that law and order sits within the third pillar is regrettable .
However , we have education - education to young people , to teachers , to parents ; health ; we have rehabilitation and we have harm reduction , and there is a great deal that we can do in this regard .
Therefore , this common position is a good first step .
Mr Burtone has made a sympathetic report and , on the whole , we ought to support this .
My view is that national countries must decide on their own drugs policy .
Indeed , if we look at my own country , in Scotland and England there are two separate drugs policies .
Scotland is more concerned with harm reduction than England .
And here I see an absolutely vital role for the Drugs Monitoring Centre .
It is up to this new committee which has been set up with members from national governments , which Commissioner Flynn no doubt will be chairing , to produce proper comparisons of what is taking place in each country , to look at what methods are being used to help drug addicts , to educate drug addicts , to get the drugs problem solved and then to come to the Community , to this Parliament , with a recommendation of what needs to be done .
That is its value .
Therefore , in supporting this debate and what Mr Burtone has put forward , I ask the Commission to come back to this Parliament and to make specific recommendations on the basis of the committee 's work and on the basis of what the Drugs Monitoring Centre is recommending .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the health of the people of the Union is something we concern ourselves with as regards foodstuffs and consumer goods .
Why should we then not concern ourselves with the health of our fellow citizens where drug abuse and its effects on the brain , lungs and reproductive organs is concerned ?
The policy on drugs must be approached from different angles .
There are no simple solutions .
The goal must be a society free of drugs .
We must find common and national methods which are effective .
The emphasis here must be on prevention and combating drug trafficking , while treatment detection and prosecution are national responsibilities .
If we wish to have the support of the people we cannot use EU resources to finance controversial projects , such as the prescription of heroin .
Syringe programmes involving methadon are also controversial , however .
5 % of those who participated in methadon programmes over a period of ten years managed to overcome their addiction - this is not particularly effective .
We should , however , jointly evaluate our special national programmes .
This will also enable us to find a common policy , which will emerge from the results , results which will of course lead to lower demand .
The alternative to this policy is increasing drug abuse and gains for the drug traffickers .
What is important now is to show a willingness to compromise .
This we must do if we are to be able to achieve common measures .
I should also like to thank Mr Burtone for his commitment to this issue and say that I believe the Commission and the Council have chosen a realistic , sensible path , which Parliament should support .
It is not the drug traffickers but our colleagues in the European Institutions that we should support .
Every time drugs are discussed in the European Union , tempers flare - this time between France and the Netherlands .
I am alarmed at how all the protagonists in the debate portray their own opinion as the only legitimate one .
This is an accusation often levelled at Mr Chirac , but in my experience it is at least as true of those , within and outside this House , who make a fetish of liberalization .
As far as the PPE Group is concerned , the contradiction that is often drawn between help and punishment does not exist .
Both are necessary if the problem is to be tackled truly effectively .
The Swedish model seems to me the most successful one at present .
Throughout the debate today , and indeed on other occasions , I have heard no convincing argument against the Swedish model , and I see no reason why it should not be a model for Europe as a whole .
In the light of that , I am also irritated by the debate between my country - Germany - and the Netherlands .
Our Foreign Minister , Mr Kinkel , said recently in The Hague that nobody wished to interfere in the drugs policy of the Netherlands , but the German Government as a whole takes a different view .
I wonder whether Mr Kinkel has forgotten that we are in the third year after Maastricht .
The dialogue about combating drugs is not interference : it is European domestic policy .
The drugs problem must be tackled at European level , firstly by means of prevention - that is what we are discussing today - secondly through better cooperation in policing , via Interpol , and thirdly through a common development policy to create alternatives in the countries where drug crops are cultivated .
To my mind , the third point is of particular importance .
I hope that everyone who is following the debate today will also be listening when this question is discussed on Thursday , not because I am the rapporteur , but because the drugs problem cannot be tackled effectively without alternatives for the countries where drug crops are grown .
Mr President , I first of all thank all those who have contributed in such a sincere and dedicated way .
Obviously it is a debate that touches a lot of people 's concerns in the House .
The text before you today for this second reading is the Council 's common position on the first programme for Community action to prevent drug dependence .
We all agree on the need for such a programme and the need to adopt concrete measures to combat drug abuse at European level .
I would like to express my thanks to Mr Burtone , your rapporteur , for the very considerable efforts he has made in examining the common position , the text today , and the amended proposal which was tabled by the Commission following your first reading .
As you know , the initial proposal has been extended following the incorporation of some 21 amendments which were proposed by Parliament and which were supported by the Commission either fully or partially .
The Council took on board many of the amendments , sometimes , I have to say , in a different form .
I believe that considerable progress has been made in arriving at a text which is acceptable to all the Community institutions .
I accept that there is need for some further work to be done so that we can resolve the differences that exist .
For its part the Commission could not accept the Council 's common position for two principal reasons .
They have both been referred to here .
The Council wants to reduce the overall budget for the five-year programme from ECU 28.5m to ECU 27m .
The Commission finds this unacceptable given that the common position which has been suggested by the Council substantially extends the scope of the original proposal .
It wants to extend the scope and still reduce the money .
We find that unacceptable .
Secondly , the management committee , a structure which is proposed by the Council , is inappropriate for such a very small-sized programme .
The Commission supports the setting up of a purely advisory committee , both as a matter of principle and in order to avoid unnecessary administrative burdens .
I remain of that view , notwithstanding the decisions taken on the committee structure for the three other health programmes recently approved under the codecision procedure .
I would like to turn to the Commission 's position on the 32 amendments proposed by the rapporteur in the second reading .
Twelve are acceptable to the Commission , Mr Burtone , fully or in part .
These are Nos 3 , 6 , 7 , 10 , 12 , 15 , 16 , 17 , 26 , 27 , 28 and 31 .
On the remaining amendments the Commission cannot support the draft recommendations for the following reasons : Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 8 , 11 , 14 and 30 and the new Amendments Nos 33 to 36 .
These lie outside the Community powers based on Article 129 or deal with matters that fall within the scope of other pillars of the Treaty , the exact point Sir Jack Stewart-Clark has been making for some time .
Amendment No 4 : this statement is already covered by recital 1 of the common position and by Amendment No 6 .


Amendment No 5 : Amendment No 7 describes the objectives of the programme in greater detail without reference to the objectives of a policy on drugs .
Amendment No 6 : the first statement is fully acceptable since it confirms the public health approach to the scourge but the second part falls outside the Community powers under Article 129 .
Amendment No 9 is already covered by Amendment No 7 .


Amendment No 13 : the content of this amendment is covered by Amendment No 15 which is acceptable to the Commission .
Amendment No 18 : the tasks of the EMCDDA are dealt with in the regulation establishing it and it cannot be modified through this programme .
Amendments Nos 19 , 20 and 21 : I have already underlined the Commission 's position concerning the nature of the committee foreseen by Article 5 of the proposed decision .
Furthermore , I would like to point out that Amendments Nos 19 and 21 are not in the line with the decisions taken by the three health programmes that were adopted at the beginning of this year .
Amendments Nos 22 and 37 : the activities foreseen in these amendments are not in line with the principle of subsidiarity and would exceed the budgetary possibilities of the programme .
Amendment No 23 : the Commission was supportive of the evaluation and exchange of experience in the fields mentioned in the amendment and this has been incorporated into the common position .
Amendment No 24 : the Commission considered that these activities are already included in the common position under generic provisions .
Amendment No 25 : the first part of this amendment is already covered in the common position whereas the second part , which relates to the organization of social and health services , is a matter for the national authorities .
Amendment No 29 : the prevention of drug dependence and associated risks with the support of the activities of relevant bodies is the main aim of the programme and it is already underlined in the Council text .
Amendment No 32 : the organization of a European conference is not indicated as there was already a European Conference on Drug Policies coordinated and co-organized by Parliament , the Council and the Commission in December last year with a specific workshop on prevention policies and activities .
So , having reviewed these various amendments , I would again like to express my appreciation for the work of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
The Commission 's report on the evaluation of the European drug prevention week of 1994 , which has recently been transmitted to Parliament , confirms the interest of those involved in the day-to-day management of drugs-related problems in cooperation on a European scale .
I hope that the adoption of this programme will in due course support , relaunch and act as a catalyst for common efforts to prevent drug dependence and to help drug users .
Mr President , I wish to speak briefly to express , certainly , my appreciation for the efforts made by the Commissioner to align the Commission position and that of the House .
But significant differences remain , both with the Commission and with those who have tabled amendments on behalf , among others , of the EPP , the effect of which is to distort the work done so far .
I repeat : we have taken a consistent line , a far from easy path ; at any rate , we have tried to respond to a tragic problem - the problem of drug dependence in Europe .
We have said clearly that we are opposed to any kind of liberalization of legalization of drugs but , at the same time , we are clearly opposed to any form of criminalization : young drug addicts have , in fact , not be marginalized but rehabilitated using all possible means and instruments .
Therefore , Mr President , I repeat that we need a programme of primary prevention to try to reduce the demand for drugs in our Community but , at the same time , this could prove - indeed , it certainly will prove - inadequate if we do not set about treating , rehabilitating and the reintegrating drug addicts into society .
Those are the approaches we stressed in the difficult debate held in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection and , subsequently , in the House .
There are those who - albeit in good faith - have failed to understand our position but there are also those who are doing their utmost - deliberately - to undermine the work designed seriously to combat drug dependence in Europe .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
Votes
Madam President , we would like a separate vote on Amendments Nos 5 and 6 .
Madam President , I was under the impression that we had agreed that if we wanted a separate vote on anything , we had to say so in advance .
I naturally agree with Mr Pompidou , but I think we have to be consistent , otherwise we cannot carry on .
Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , you are perfectly right in the case when there is a recommendation from the committee responsible .
That is why I initially stated that there had not been any recommendation from the committee responsible in the case of these amendments .
There is not therefore any problem .
Excuse me for intervening once again , Madam President , but we also want a separate vote on Amendments Nos 22 and 23 .
( The President declared the common position adopted as amended )
I should like a separate vote on Amendment No 16 , Madam President .
Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on this occasion the committee responsible has recommended a block vote on Amendments Nos 12 , 16 , 19 , 21 .
Furthermore , your request for a separate vote does not seem to have reached us before the deadline laid down by Rule 116 .
I am sure you will understand the difficult situation this puts me in .
Madam President , I am looking for someone at the back of the Chamber , but if my memory serves me correctly , the list of how we wished to vote was drawn up last week , and although I cannot see the colleague in question , as far as I am aware , the list was handed in to the secretariat .
We did everything according to the rules , Madam President .
Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , as you were able to appreciate this morning , we are introducing a system which is , let us say , rather more constraining and rigid than we are used to .
I believe we should be pragmatic and allow ourselves a certain flexibility in moving towards the strict application of this system , as we are not voting machines .
This is why I am going to allow a separate vote on Amendment No 16 .
When you are President Mr Anastassopoulos , you will be perfectly free to be as inflexible as you like .
For the sake of fairness , Madam President , if we have a sperate vote on Amendment No 16 , we request the same for Amendments Nos 19 and 21 .

Mr Pompidou , you are seeking to shamelessly profit from the situation !
No , Madam President , it is in the interests of consistency .
I am sure , Mr Pompidou , that you will withdraw this request which was made in order to inject a little humour into the vote .
No , Madam President , my group is with me .
I cannot decide alone to withdraw this request .
( The President declared the common position adopted as amended )
Madam President , I wanted to say a word on this point as I once again presented the table which failed by just one vote to win the Commission 's support .
But I should like to draw attention to the fact that having approved the previous text we will be contradicting ourselves if we do not adopt the amendment which I propose .
Yesterday Commissioner Papoutsis , who was here , demonstrated the coherence between the text we have just adopted and the table I propose .
This is why I invite you to vote in favour of my amendment , especially as the Commission and Parliament must succeed in convincing the Council .
Madam President , I should like to support the amendment .
I do not think there is any contradiction here .
The committee approved the table unanimously because , in the table , priorities are established very clearly , perhaps more clearly than in the broader brush-strokes of the text .
As I said , however , there is no contradiction here , and the committee approved this table unanimously .
Thank you sir .
The House is sufficiently well-informed to vote in full knowledge of the facts .
After the adoption of the ' table ' part of Amendment No 27 :
Madam President , the table I referred to was , of course , that of the committee , not the table submitted by Mr Soulier and the PPE .
It is really quite straightforward , because the committee presented and approved this table , not the one that was submitted by the PPE .
I would therefore ask that the vote be retaken , because what I said clearly created some confusion .
So to recap and to make it quite clear : the committee 's table is not the same as that of the PPE .
Mr Lange , I believe that there is in effect some confusion .
I believe that for my part I have been very clear .
I put to the vote Amendment No 27 by the European People 's Party .
The rapporteur then requested to speak in order to explain why he was in favour of this amendment and why he had tabled it .
You spoke giving the impression that you supported it , but that is your affair .
This amendment was put to the vote once again and I made it quite clear which one we were dealing with .
We will not be taking this vote again .
That would not be right .
I believe that everything was very clear .
I should like to protest .
It is indeed normal for a rapporteur to speak on behalf of the committee .
But in this case we were misled for the simple reason that the rapporteur did not speak on behalf of his committee , but on behalf of his group .
That is not at all normal .
Mr Dankert , I listened carefully to the rapporteur , especially as he spoke in my language so there was no possible interpreting error .
I most definitely did not hear Mr Soulier refer to the PPE Group .
I was really very attentive and I tell you this quite simply .
We will not be taking this vote again , it would not be right to do so .
Everything was very clear .
I should simply like to say this , Madam President .
Mr Soulier felt that as rapporteur he had to present Amendment No 27 which had been tabled by his party , taking into account in particular the conclusions of the debate we had this week - a debate sometimes serves a purpose - and the replies given by Commissioner Papoutsis .

On this basis , it was therefore preferable to support Amendment No 27 by Mr Soulier rather than to maintain Amendment No 26 by our Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy .
I assure members of my group that everything was conducted properly .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Madam President , although the House is empty , there is a great deal of noise going on behind me , but I am none the less pleased that the House has accepted my report , and that we have approved the legislative measures in the SAVE programme .
I would call on the Commission , as a matter of urgency , to follow Parliament 's lead in this case , for once , because we have clearly seen that without legislation there is absolutely no movement : that has been demonstrated with regard to CO2 reduction and energy efficiency .
There has been no movement on the THERMIE programme , a programme on renewable energy , which is being held up by the Council .
Despite its high-sounding political pronouncements around the world , and despite having signed up to the Rio and Berlin treaties , the Council is blocking the one programme - THERMIE II - which is concerned with renewable energy .
It is therefore all the more important that we , as a Parliament , get it implemented and make the Council and the Commission put their money where their mouth is .
Otherwise , we in the EU will gradually become a laughing stock !
I would not go so far as to call us liars , but absolutely nothing is happening !
High-sounding words about the need for energy efficiency and CO2 reduction are being bandied about , but nothing is being done !
It is all hot air .
That is why the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy included the legislative element in SAVE II .
So , to repeat my advice to the Council and the Commission : take your lead from the committee - it is giving you sound advice !
Otherwise , we shall make problems when it comes to the budget .
The proposal for a Council Decision concerns an exceptionally important area for the Union 's Member States in terms of the economy , the environment and supply policy : the promotion of energy efficiency .
It should be obvious that by increasing their energy efficiency , the EU Member States will be able to reduce their consumption of energy , exploit a range of non-renewable energy sources more rationally , decrease their dependence on energy imports and reduce the volume of CO2 emissions , which are the main cause of the greenhouse effect .
It is vital , therefore , to extend the SAVE programme for a new five-year period with a view to a more rational use of our scarce resources .
In the light of this situation it is , of course , encouraging to note that the sum of ECU 150 million allocated for the implementation of the SAVE II programme constitutes a significant increase in the modest appropriation of only ECU 35 million previously allocated to SAVE I. The rapporteur is , however , right in saying that there is a need to introduce binding measures in the EU countries in connection with the implementation of SAVE II , to ensure that the objective of reducing energy consumption , is achieved .
There is no point in not legislating in this area - on grounds of the principle of subsidiarity - in view of the cross-border nature of the problems associated with CO2 .
For the same reason , I believe that the EU - in accordance with the objectives of the SYNERGY programme - should make all useful data and experience gained from the SAVE programmes on the efficient use of energy resources available to the developing countries whose consumption of fossil fuels , in particular , is expected to soar during the years up to 2020 , with a considerable increase in world CO2 emissions as a result .
Recommendation for second reading by Mr von Wogau
We assume that the Customs 2000 programme is concerned with agreeing at Community level criteria for the minimum level of the controls to be carried out .
Since the various Member States today have different legislation governing such subjects as drugs and arms control we do not consider that it will be possible to arrive at a common interpretation of the powers of customs authorities .
In our opinion each Member State should itself be allowed to decide on the level of controls to be carried out at its borders with other EU countries .
At the time of our intervention at first reading on the Community action programme on customs , we welcomed this initiative designed to better coordinate national customs controls at the Union 's external borders , while at the same time being concerned at the direction taken by the European Parliament : its amendments tended to ' communitize ' the national customs and to promote the objective of a ' domestic market ' which is even more unified than the present single market and which would virtually deny countries any margin for manoeuvre in their legislation .
We are therefore very pleased today , at second reading , to see that the Council has since taken the same line as ourselves and rejected Parliament 's most contestable amendments .
In order to make its intentions quite clear , it has even dechristened the programme , which is no longer concerned with ' Community customs ' but simply ' Community action on customs ' , which we consider to be perfect .
As could have been expected , the European Parliament has returned to the attack with amendments which my group voted against .
We believe that the Community , under pressure from federalist groups such as those in this House , is systematically adopting the wrong approach : first , we dismantled controls on goods at the internal borders without even having harmonized controls at the external borders , a mistake for which we are now paying very dearly .
Now , under the pretext of improving external controls , the proposal is to move towards ' communitization ' .
This is to make another mistake , and for three reasons .
A reason of principle as each Member State must retain its customs , which also fulfil purely national tasks , including the application of possible safeguard clauses ( let us remember , in this respect , the lessons of mad cow disease ) .
A reason of effectiveness as we believe , here as in other cases , that it is better to support the former national administrations which are working than to create new European structures ( we prefer partnership to fusion ) .
Finally , as if any further argument were needed , a reason of advisability : given the dominant free trade attitudes , there is nothing to guarantee that by once again renouncing our customs defence instruments for the benefit of the Community , controls will become stricter , as they should do .
I approve of Parliament 's insistence in giving the Community ' Customs 2000 ' programme more force and substance faced with the hesitations of the co-legislator , the Council .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy thus wants to step up the fight against fraud through harmonized and reinforced customs .
In the face of third parties , common tariffs must be matched with common customs .
This means imposing strict rules everywhere where there are customs , and not rules which vary from one Member State to another .
Such a programme can encourage the European Union to advance in this direction , but we must of course show we are serious in implementing the programme , in particular when it comes to the controls .
Each Member State must provide its customs with the technical and human resources necessary to fulfill this task .
I stress in particular the importance of continuing high-level training supplementing the initial training which each customs officer receives in his country of origin .
This continuing training , to be given at a European customs academy , will be a vital asset for European customs officers working at external borders and involved in the fight against fraud .
We have voted today against almost all the amendments to the Community action programme ' Customs 2000 ' , since we believe that they do not respect the individual Member States ' sovereignty .
It should still be up to each Member State to decide how they wish to control their borders , train their personnel , etc .
Practically all the Member States have different laws on the importation of different kinds of goods , e.g. drugs and arms .
That is the way it should be in the future as well , and that is why we see no grounds for harmonizing legislation in this area .
Drug abuse is one of the worst scourges with which Europe has to contend .
It is therefore also extremely important that strategies for combating drugs are chosen with care .
We are of the opinion that the proposals put forward in the Burtone report are geared too much to measures to reduce the harm caused by existing abuse .
We believe this is far too late .
Greater emphasis ought to be placed on preventive work , particularly among young people .
We know that the fewer the young people who try drugs in the first place , the smaller the number who later become addicted .
Obviously preventive activities must be combined with a well-developed system of rehabilitation , the main concern of which should be to free those involved in drug abuse of their addiction and to help their return to society .
We also believe that it is wrong to make a distinction between hard and soft drugs or between use and abuse .
The problem of where the line should be drawn will always arise and any ambiguity about what is acceptable and what is not will only send mixed signals to our children and young people .
A drugs policy aimed at restriction and prevention is the common path we ought to take , in order to be able to combat drugs effectively .
Resignation and an ever increasing level of tolerance will only have the opposite effect .
The drug abuse issue is at heart a question of democracy and human rights : all men and women should have control over their own bodies .
A person dependent on drugs can never be free to exercise such control .
The report proposed by our colleague Mr Burtone once again had to take into account a considerable number of amendments adopted by the European Parliament at first reading , the Council having deliberately neglected our proposals and changed the nature of the Commission 's amended proposal .
It is highly regrettable that the Council does not have a point of view to match the scale of the problem of drug dependence and the essential need for prevention .
Like the rapporteur , I believe that ' all-out repression ' is not the right way to succeed in eliminating this scourge of consuming narcotic substances and that repression must primarily target the dealers and suppliers of these products , and in particular those who use drug networks for financial purposes .
There must be no holds barred when it comes to combatting the drug dealers , those peddlers of death , and those who specialize in laundering drug money , the financiers behind organized death .
Drug addicts must be saved from these people . They must be cared for and allowed to benefit from the widest possible prevention , one which certainly includes a genuine European health programme but which also extends to other Community policies .
The Council must accept the cooperation which must be implemented .
The Council must see drug addicts as people in distress who must be brought back into society and not as delinquents .
Consequently ( and this is a long-term goal ) , we must first give drug addicts the means to avoid the spread of risks linked to drug consumption .
We cannot rescue them from their dependence overnight .
Also , together with prevention pure and simple , which is a means of avoiding the use of drugs , we must protect addicts from the still greater risks they run .
I therefore fully support the Burtone report , which we must adopt with a very large majority .
I hope that the Commission will support our approach .
I invite the Council to show greater realism and commitment in implementing this programme .
Its very credibility is at stake .
What upsets me and greatly concerns many Swedish people and other Europeans is the tenor of the amendments tabled by Mr Burtone and the committee .
Certainly it is important to help drug addicts .
It is at least equally important , however , to prevent young people and others being drawn into drug abuse .
Clear signals are needed from the authorities of European states .
By approving the Burtone report the European Parliament would be sending out a completely different signal , a signal which could lead to many more young people in Europe being drawn into a life of hopelessness , prostitution and crime .
It is not concessions in drugs policy that we in Europe need but forceful measures from governments , parliaments and voluntary organisations to punish those who profit from drugs and reduce drug use with the aim of freeing our continent from addictive drug abuse .
This is why I voted against central elements of the Burtone report .
The fact that I have abstained from voting in favour of the report on the prevention of drugs , does not mean that I am not in favour of preventing the drug problem .
I am , to the greatest possible extent .
However it is precisely prevention of , as opposed to combating , this serious problem which is best undertaken at national state level .
The states themselves are best able to assess which policy and what resources in their particular circumstances - including cultural norms - will produce optimal results .
A common EU strategy would not be the best way of preventing the drugs problem , and the prospects of there being agreement about such a strategy are unlikely in the light of the differences between the various speeches made here today .
Earlier , the Burtone report caused considerable conflict between the majority , who are liberal on drugs , and most of the Swedish Members .
In the proposal which has now been adopted some of the proposals from those who are liberal on drugs have been removed .
It has also been established that it ' is not advisable to draw a sharp distinction between soft and hard drugs ' .
Does this mean that the information provided by Sweden has had an effect ?
This is possible and , if true , it is hopeful sign .
The report still contains a number of elements which the environmental party cannot support :
The environmental party cannot accept the so-called ' harm reduction ' strategy , because this concept has become a code word for a liberal strategy on drugs.-The environmental party cannot accept that the introduction to the programme states that ' a completely drug-free society is a Utopian vision ' .
That the principal goal is dismissed even in the introduction as ' utopian ' represents an unacceptable reduction of ambitions.-The environmental party cannot accept that drugs policy should become a competence of the EU because this would open the way for Community legislation on drugs decided upon by majority voting.-Finally , we consider that border controls must be allowed to remain if an EU country deems them to be an effective way of combating drug smuggling .
Fighting against drugs dependence , in particular by motivating co-operation between the Member States , backing respective actions and promoting and co-ordinating their policies - the basis of the programme of Community action to prevent the scourge of drugs in the framework of public health - deserves our agreement .
Everything that can promote information , prevention and education , prophylaxy and treatment , whether in the younger age bands , where appeals to consumption take place at ever earlier ages , or within families , schools or at work , or through actions aimed at risk populations ( including prison inmates ) , or aimed at public opinion in general , can count on our support and approval .
But we should have no illusions that the success of this programme requires other policies to be implemented in a coordinated way , including those which deal with punishing the money laundering of capital and combating the profound causes of social marginalisation and social instability , as well as unemployment , which together , make people vulnerable and make them more likely to consume drugs .
It is also to be regretted that the budgetary amount made available by the Council for this programme , 27 million ECU , in other words around five billion escudos , over five years ) is lower than proposed and well short of what is desirable .
In our fight against drug abuse we shall be committing a serious mistake if we begin to admit that it is a ' lost war ' and that , for hypocritically economically-based questions , it is not worthwhile investing enough money to deal with the size of this scourge .
On the contrary , it is only if we tackle and reduce drugs dependence with enough political will and sufficient means that we will actually be able to attack this problem from every aspect .
The consumption of various kinds of drugs , including so-called hard drugs such as heroin and cocaine , has assumed dramatic proportions over the last 20 years .
It is not surprising therefore that many EU citizens today regard drug abuse as one of the greatest of all social problems .
Nor can there be any doubt that this cross-border problem must , and will , be solved by means of a combination of national and international measures .
In this light there is every reason to welcome the Commission 's proposal for a programme of action for the prevention of drug abuse .
In its report , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection has put forward a number of proposals for supplementary measures , including a proposal for an improved exchange of information between the Member States , support for the improvement of information campaigns , support for the work of voluntary organizations , and a proposal for a more effective strategy for combating drug abuse at international level , on the basis of a comparative study of the respective countries ' drug laws .
I fully support these proposals to improve the Community 's programme of action .
Recommendation for second reading by Mr Castricum
The proposed interoperability of the transEuropean high-speed rail system is a good project .
But it only has any meaning if it is accompanied by a financial plan allowing Europe to complete the efforts made by the individual Member States .
We must apply the principle of subsidiarity and too often the European Union intervenes illegitimately in matters which are normally within the sphere of competence of the Member States .
But in this particular case it is surprising that the European Union is not pledging major financial support for this ultimate transborder project .
Let me take the example of the East high-speed rail link , running from Paris to Strasbourg , Vienna and Budapest . In addition to the efforts of the Member States , this project also needs Community funding .
The European Union should redirect its efforts at genuine transborder projects .
Taken overall , this would not increase expenditure but rather reduce it .
I should like to see a financial report one day complement the present report .
I believe there is an urgent need for this .
Recommendation for second reading by Mr Cornelissen
The safety systems used in connection with the transport of dangerous goods must be tightened up .
I say this in reference to the train accident at Næstved station where , even three years after the accident , there are problems with seepage of toxic materials .
I consequently welcome the work done in this report , to tighten up the regulations , and I am therefore able to support the report .
Soulier report
The proposal for a regulation on the SYNERGY programme is , in every respect , a positive contribution to resolving a number of environmental , developmental and energy supply problems at an international level , and there can therefore be no doubt that this programme , the first phase of which was launched over fifteen years ago , must be extended into a new fiveyear period .
Total world consumption of energy is increasing , particularly in the developing countries .
For example , the International Energy Agency ( IEA ) estimates that the developing countries , which in 1990 accounted for 75 % of the world 's total population , but for only 25 % of the global consumption of energy , will account for 80 % of the world 's population and 40 % of total energy consumption in the year 2010 .
Unfortunately , this increase in consumption will primarily take the form of greater use of fossil fuels , increasing emissions of CO2 into the atmosphere as a result .
In order to militate against this trend as much as possible , it is of paramount importance that the EU continues and intensifies its transfer of know-how in the energy sector to the developing countries .
As a step towards this end the EU should , for example , make all the useful data and experience gained from the EU SAVE II programme available to the developing countries .
Soltwedel-Schäfer report
Madam President , the report by Mrs Soltwedel-Schäfer is full of comments and proposals which show both good sense and goodwill .
However , certain points are unacceptable .
First of all , we completely rule out even a partial standardization of the social protection systems of the Member States ( in order to harmonize the reimbursement amounts for medicines ) .
Secondly , you must be careful when promoting so-called generic medicines .
This must not be detrimental to the laboratories which create fundamental products which are the result of research which lasts longer than their period of use , research which is very expensive and in comparison with which advertising costs - exclusively among members of the medical profession we should remember - seem to have been greatly exaggerated by the rapporteur .
Thirdly , we are highly suspicious of the praise of self-medication .
This opens the door to all kinds of abuses and dangers .
We must never forget that medicines are an active product which must be treated with care .
We must therefore never lose sight of the all-important role of the pharmacist and physician in terms of information and control and not seek to sacrifice this at the altar of illfounded economic arguments .
The most important consideration in all of this must be public health .
Finally , and this is an equally important point , we regret the imprecise use of the term ' ethical ' which recurs frequently in this report : this is the term of the new language of the ' politically correct ' which is used in order to avoid the necessary submission of medicines to the principles of natural and Christian morals .
Despite these major reservations , we voted in favour of this report .
Community guidelines for an industrial policy for the pharmaceutical industry must take account of the fact that the trade in medicines does not take place under normal market conditions .
It is not an invisible hand which determines demand , supply and price , it is the representatives of interest groups and government authorities which exercise a considerable influence over sales , consumption and profits .
This has a number of consequences .
Think of the enormous profits , the artificial prices , the hugely expensive advertising and publicity , the large-scale mergers and so on , though it must be said that all of these are also influenced by the enormous cost of research and development , employment , competition and the special nature of medicines .
' Pharmacon ' means both medicine and poison , something healing and something deadly . It goes without saying that you cannot obtain goods of this kind freely , nor can you supply them unsupervised .
We can also understand why the state , the health insurance funds , patients ' associations , doctors ' organizations , universities and the pharmaceutical sector are all involved in the creation and distribution of medicines .
The European Union 's interest , and particularly that of the European Parliament , lies in both the industrial and public health aspects .
The main thrust of its policy is as follows : rationalize production , with limits on advertising budgets and the prevention of fragmentation ; and reorientate innovation , focusing on proper modernization , licensing procedures and registration requirements for new medicines , rights of ownership and medicines or treatments for rare or previously untreatable diseases .
This in turn will help to promote preventive and instructive medicine , generic medicines , herbal and homeopathic medicines , the sensible use of medicines , uniform packaging , alternative testing , selfmedication , an environmentally-friendly industrial policy , multiannual planning , a responsible trade policy , a European data bank - the ECPHIN - an ethics committee at the EMEA , and so on .
As a member of the two committees asked for their opinion , I agree with the draft proposal in principle .
It is a sensible and balanced compromise between the different interests of the pharmaceutical industry , social security , research organizations , the health insurance funds , the medical profession and consumers ' organizations .
I do feel , however , that we need a clear definition of innovations .
A real innovation is a new medicine , not an existing medicine that is given a new description or a ' me too ' medicine which is brought out as a derivative years after a genuine innovation .
A real innovation is used to cure previously incurable or untreatable diseases and conditions , or offers better treatment for certain complaints or a better chance of curing them than existing medicines .
All in all , I feel that this proposal is a step in the right direction .
A policy on pharmaceuticals must take account of the competitiveness and profitability of the sector as a whole - industrial policy - and of employment , public health , medical progress and social security - social policy .
I believe that the proposal on which we are to vote meets all the requirements of sound policy , both industrial and social .
That concludes voting time .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.10 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Discharge for 1991 , 1992 , 1993 and 1994
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0058 / 96 by Mrs Kjer Hansen , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on giving discharge to the Commission in respect of the EAGGF clearance of accounts for the 1991 financial year ; -A4-0086 / 96 by Mr Cornelissen , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the Commission report on action taken in response to the observations contained in the resolutions accompanying the decision giving discharge in respect of the general budget of the European Communities for the 1992 financial year ( COM ( 95 ) 0666 ) ; -A4-0097 / 96 by Mr Samland , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the Commission report on action taken in response to the observations contained in the resolution accompanying the decision giving discharge in respect of the general budget of the European Communities for the 1993 financial year ( COM ( 95 ) 0666 ) ; -A4-0098 / 96 by Mr Wynn , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on giving discharge to the Commission in respect of the implementation of the general budget of the European Communities for the 1994 financial year ; -A4-0089 / 96 by Mr Blak , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on giving discharge to the Commission in respect of the management of the ECSC for the 1994 financial year ; -A4-0081 / 96 by Mr Kellett-Bowman on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on postponement of the discharge to the Management Board of the European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training ( Thessaloniki ) in respect of the implementation of its budget for the 1994 financial year ; -A4-0082 / 96 by Mr Kellett-Bowman on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on giving discharge to the Administrative Board of the European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions ( Dublin ) in respect of the implementation of its budget for the 1994 financial year ; -A4-0096 / 96 by Mr Wynn , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on refusing discharge to the Commission in respect of the management of the European Development Funds for the 1994 financial year .
Mr President , I would not have objected to my Danish colleague , Eva Kjer , speaking first .
My subject is the Coal and Steel Union and I must say that I am a little disappointed that the Commission is not present , that the Commissioner does not find it important enough for him to be here for this debate .
Of course , I appreciate that he has an able representative in Fritz Brüchert , who is present , but I would very much like to have seen the Commissioner himself here while we discuss such an important subject .
What we are talking about here is 60 billion Danish kroner .
This year the Coal and Steel Union is the only body to have been awarded an unconditional Statement of Assurance , and that is incredibly good .
There has been exceptionally good co-operation between the European Parliament , the Committee on Budgetary Control , the Court of Auditors and the Commission , but that does not mean to say that there have not been differences of opinion .
On the contrary !
I would , however , like to start by congratulating the Commission on the fact that the Bagnoli case is now finally concluded .
For four years I have protested about a ten-year-old matter concerning the missing interest payments which the Italians tried to cheat us out of .
The Commission has succeeded in recovering this money .
It is a couple of million Danish kroner , but it is something at least , as taxpayers will understand , that money which had been paid out unlawfully , has been repaid .
We should almost put the flags out to celebrate the fact that , on 11 October 1995 , the Commission was finally able to resolve this matter .
But then we begin to have some of the minor points we have problems with .
The solvency ratios .
We adopted a directive in 1992 , and now we are even contravening the actual solvency ratio directive .
That is to say that we have excessive external investments .
The key factor is risk spreading , and it is being confined to fewer and fewer debtors and bigger and bigger commitments .
I can quote a couple of figures .
There are 11 debtors whose loans exceed 25 % of the ECSC 's net assets .
The main commitments exceed 800 % of net assets , which means that the risk is not sufficiently spread .
We may run the risk of some momentous events occurring whereby we suddenly sustain some losses , but perhaps we are running over into next year 's discharge procedure now . But what if , for example , we are involved in a bankruptcy in connection with the tunnel between France and England ?
Then the EU system loses - and wait for it everybody - over 10 billion Danish kroner , and that is when things start to get problematic .
That is to say , therefore , that even if the accounts have been properly kept , there have still been shortcomings .
That is one of the things I am really aware of , and I have asked for a list of the types of guarantees we have .
I have been promised it by the Commission , but have not yet received it .
We do not seem to be very good at speculating in securities either .
In fact , during the past financial year we are due to approve , we lost ECU 70 million , and once again - you heard right - 70 million kroner by not selling securities at the right time .
Now we shall have to wait until the market changes and the rate goes up to recover the money .
Let us look at another problem , for example the Paris affair .
My good friend John Tomlinson will remember that we did something quite outrageous in Paris .
We bought a property that was so expensive that you would have thought we had bought the whole of Paris .
We have covered it up here in the accounts .
28 % of the investments which should have been paid back to the ECSC have not been received , and that amounts to ECU 1.68 million .
That means that the figures are being massaged , and I would therefore ask the Commission to sort things out and stop using all these tricks to hide the figures .
I also wonder , in regard to all the properties we have at our 126 embassies around the world , whether the accounts have been tampered with there as well ?
These are some of the things which I , at any rate , will try to investigate when we get to next year 's discharge .
And then there 's an entirely separate matter : the closure of mines in England where a Conservative government asked for low interest loans and then discovered that perhaps they would not use the loans after all and repaid them .
They have had God knows how many million kroner in interest allowances and , according to the Commission 's legal service , we have no chance of recovering them .
In this case we should , in my opinion , no longer confine ourselves to the legal aspects of the matter , but should pursue a political course and bring the English Government before the Court and tell them that we do not like their speculating and stealing our money .
In short , the Commission should be brave and take a political step to get the money back .
Finally , Mr President , England has received over 50 % of the loans earmarked for four countries .
We cannot have that .
It is interesting when an English government does this .
Prime Minister Major is behaving like a flirtatious woman ; asking all and giving nothing .
He may well like our money , but he does not like the EU .
I call upon Mrs Theato to speak on a point of order .
Mr President , I did not quite understand why the order of the reports was changed .
I was told that the President-in-Office would attend our debate and hear at least the first reports .
Could you please tell me whether you know if the President-in-Office is coming and , if so , can we ensure that those reports for which we would particularly wish the President-in-Office to be present are dealt with before the Council addresses the House - in other words , that the rapporteurs at least can speak beforehand .
I would greatly appreciate your confirmation on this point .
My fear is that we will waste time by making further changes and failing to adhere to the agreed timetable .
The order was changed , Mrs Theato , solely because Mr Blak had important business preventing him from attending later .
All the other reports will be dealt with in the order envisaged .
The Council will be able to speak , but it seems that there is some delay because of the trialogue which is taking place .
I call upon Mr Tomlinson for a point of order .
Mr President , following on from the question that Mrs Theato has raised , the Council itself fixed the time for the trialogue .
So it has deliberately double-booked itself .
To be in another room having the trialogue while the debate on discharge is taking place in this House is unacceptable conduct .
Were I in your place , Mr President , I would deny the Council speaking time in our discharge debate if it is so capricious in its attitude that it decides to double-book itself .
The Council fixed the trialogue .
It determined when it was going to be .
It decided that in this debate , which rests on its recommendation , it can waltz in here whenever it wants and make its speech without having heard the debate .
I hope therefore , Mr President , that you will consider denying the floor to the Council when it arrives , because it has treated this House with disdain and contempt .
We should show it the same .
Mr President , I am astonished that we are holding this debate on the discharge without having the Commission here .
How can we expect people to take Parliament seriously if it operates like this ?
I have been an elected representative for 25 years , but I have never experienced anything like this .
Will you arrange for a representative of the Commission to come here without delay ?
Mr President , I should like to support what the previous speakers have said , and in fact I would urge that we vacate the Chamber and suspend the sitting here and now , until Parliament informs us that it can continue in a proper manner .
It is quite impossible to proceed with the discharge debate under these circumstances .
Mr President , on the same point .
I was just going to make the move for adjournment and I am supported by a large number of Members from all round the House .
Mr Wynn , ladies and gentlemen , I shall suspend the sitting for ten minutes .
I have sent someone to ask whether after these ten minutes we can expect the Council and the Commission .
If the Council and the Commission say they cannot guarantee to be here in ten minutes , I shall put it to the vote whether or not we should continue with the debate .
( The sitting was suspended at 3.10 p.m. and resumed at 3.20 p.m. )

Ladies and gentlemen , I have been in contact with the Commission and the Council .
The Commissioner has been kind enough to come straight away .
As regards the Council , we are told that they are discussing a document at the moment and will be another quarter of an hour .
I therefore put to the vote the question whether the debate should continue .
( Parliament decided to continue with the debate )
Mr President , I warn in advance that God help the Council if it comes in here wanting to lecture us for half an hour on a debate it has not heard .
I hope you make that abundantly clear to the President-in-Office before he walks into this room .
We were treated with disdain in committee when we were sent a civil servant to give what after all is a political recommendation .
We made it quite clear in committee that was unacceptable conduct by the presidency .
We have been treated with contempt again this afternoon and what we will not put up with is some sort of lecture on a debate which the Council has not had the courtesy to listen to .
I hope the representative of the Council can make that quite clear to the presidency before it comes to the Chamber .
It will save some of us the embarrassment of having to say it again directly to the Council when it arrives .
Thank you , Mr Tomlinson .
The Council has a distinguished representative here who will naturally report these points of view .
You know that it is not for me to censor what the Council wishes to say in this Assembly and you will receive the appropriate answers in parliamentary terms .
I therefore call upon the rapporteur , Mrs Kjer Hansen , to present her report .
Mr President , as the Commission is now well represented , I shall begin by thanking it for its co-operation and for the fact that the Commission has readily provided me with information and answered my questions on this subject .
Let me start by stating that , in my opinion , most of the shortcomings in the procedures for closing the accounts are due to the agricultural policy itself , the actual way in which we have formulated the common agricultural policy .
The agricultural policy has become so complex that it must be radically simplified and reformed before the accounts can be closed efficiently .
I hope that message will be an important consideration in any discussion of future agricultural policy .
It is also a problem that agricultural expenditure is paid via the EU budget only .
Naturally , the Member States do not , therefore , have the same interest in exposing irregular payments which may have taken place .
It is quite simply a clash of interests between the Commission and the Member States in that expenditure is not shared .
The procedure for closing the accounts is far from satisfactory for several reasons .
The Commission does not have sufficient resources to carry out the procedure satisfactorily .
The scope of the audit is minimal compared with the transactions made .
There are areas where no checks have been made whatsoever for years .
It is also difficult to carry out proper checks owing to the large numbers of bodies involved in paying out funds in the Member States .
In many cases it seems to be pure guesswork as to what sums are to be collected .
Only 7 % of the corrections made in the 1991 budget are individual corrections .
The rest are ' standard ' corrections , i.e. the Commission estimates or , more correctly , guesses what sums or what percentages are to be recovered .
The Member States accept the corrections in the majority of cases , but we have also seen a number of examples of disagreements which have then been brought before the Court .
I therefore welcome the fact that a conciliation board has been set up to enable the Member States and the Commission to enter into conciliation in the event of a dispute .
The critical problem with the procedure for closing the accounts is that what should have been a technical procedure has , in reality , become a political negotiation .
The assessment which the Commission makes is made the subject of negotiation between the Commission and the Member State in question .
We have seen a number of examples of this .
One of the worst is cotton production in Greece where the Commission initially called for a correction of 25 % , but after negotiations with the country concerned , this was changed to 10 % , subject to a number of requirements being fulfilled .
Of course , both good and bad things might be said about such negotiations , but the fact is that there is no question of objectivity .
Another well-known example is the milk quota affair .
We have previously discussed this in great detail , but allow me to emphasize all the same that negotiation and political pressure predominated over the fact that there was a case of an unlawfully paid sum .
The whole matter ended up as political horsetrading , and the best that can be said about the milk quota affair is that the public got to hear all about it as it unfolded .
The fact that there is often negotiation between the Commission and a Member State means that the law is not necesseraly upheld .
The risk that the Member States are not given the same treatment exists , whether it occurs consciously or is merely a reflection of accidental discrimination .
Of course there are other Member States which find this so-called flexibility quite acceptable , because they believe it could be in their interests .
The problem is , however , that the idea behind the closure of the accounts is to recover expenditure not actually entitled to support .
The system suffers from numerous failings and the most serious is that it does not ensure , and does not seek to ensure , objectivity in closing the accounts , so that the amounts recovered reflect actual losses .
I recommend that discharge be given for this area , not because it deserves to be , but because it is the natural thing to do if we are to be consistent and follow up an earlier decision .
May I conclude by saying that I consider it better to close the accounts in spite of all the shortcomings , than not to close them at all , and I hope that in other areas , too , e.g. the Structural Funds , we will be able to complete the procedure for closing the accounts .
Mr President , the discharge for the 1992 budget has caused something of a stir .
As we know , thanks to Parliament 's persistence the Commission has finally recovered ECU 1.6 billion in respect of the non-application of milk quotas in Spain and Italy , in other words Parliament has saved the taxpayer no less than ECU 1.6 bn - a fact worth remembering , particularly for the Eurosceptics .
Could I ask the Commissioner how much of the ECU 1.6 million has now been paid ?
A few points were left over at the end of the discharge debate last year , such as the inquiry into tobacco fraud in Greece and Italy .
Am I right in thinking that very little work has been done on the investigation in Greece ?
When will Parliament be informed about the probable scale of the fraud and the measures that have been taken ?
Then there was the milk quota buy-back scheme which was being operated without any legal basis .
The Commission tries to make light of this by pointing out that a legal basis was adopted in 1995 with retrospective effect , so that the ECU 170 m in question were legalized retrospectively .
Does the Commission share my view that this is hardly what one could call sound financial management ?
Finally , there was the failure to recover ECU 170 m from Spain for the nonapplication of milk quotas in 1989 .
In the detailed information which I am most grateful to the Commission for supplying , it argues that it did nothing to recover this money because none of the Member States had lodged an appeal with the Court of Justice .
This is an extremely serious matter .
It means that the Commission makes the application of the Treaty and the principle of equal treatment conditional on a protest from one or more of the Member States .
I cannot help thinking that the Commission is in danger of becoming the Council of Ministers ' lackey , instead of the guardian of the Treaty and protector of the European taxpayer .
I realize that most of these decisions were taken by the previous Commission , but I insist on having a clear explanation from the present one .
The handling of the issue of funding for slaughtering calves in the Netherlands is further undermining the credibility of the Commission 's financial policy .
I know that the Commission is to make a statement tomorrow , but perhaps the Commissioner responsible for the budget and budget control could say something now about this ' spend , spend , spend ' approach .
Let me explain what I mean .
First the Agriculture Commissioner says he is surprised at the Netherlands ' decision to destroy 60 000 calves , then a few days later we read in the newspaper that the Commission is contributing HFL 20 m towards this measure , which it has itself already condemned as unnecessary and unwarranted .
I think this is an extremely serious matter which undermines the credibility of the entire Commission .
Can the Commissioner explain how this is supposed to be consistent with the strict financial management which Mr Santer announced , and on which I congratulated him ?
After all , the proof of the pudding is in the eating , as they say , so I would like a detailed reply from the Commission on this fundamental question .
Mr President , these eight reports for joint debate represent something rather new in the Community this year because the Maastricht Treaty instructs the Court to produce a Statement of Assurance each year on the Community 's finances .
It does not tell the Court how to do it nor does it tell Parliament what to do with it .
I was preparing to follow Mr Wynn with my remarks and now I find that I am playing St John before him !
The Court devoted considerable resources to the DAS ( Statement of Assurance ) and that fact is obvious when you see the shortcomings or look for the holes in the Annual Report for 1994 .
I look to the new President of the Court to bring about a restructuring of the working methods of the Court .
I asked for that last year and I ask for it again because we need to see the Court so organized that it can actually produce an annual report and the Statement of Assurance .
This leaves it , I know , hard pressed but if it acted more like an international firm of auditors and rather less like a pale copy of the European Commission , it might be more successful .
The second problem follows the receipt of the DAS by the European Parliament .
This has led to considerable discussion in the Committee on Budgetary Control .
I strongly support the answers provided by Mr Wynn , which he will give later and which can be found in his explanatory statement .
He sets the DAS and the constitutional position of DAS in its proper context because all the European Council did was just request that the Court produce the Statement .
It did not say how the Court should do it and it did not say what we should do with it .
But I believe that the explanatory statement attached to Mr Wynn 's report is so good that we ought to draw up an own-initiative report which will enable us to put those paragraphs - 30 to 51 - before the House so that it can vote on them as the policy for the Community .
Now my friend Mr Blak has had to depart .
It is a matter of breaking the windows and running away .
Last year I said about him ' I regard him as the man in charge of the European Coal and Steel Community .
He does a splendid job . ' However , with his remarks about the closure of coalmines , he has allowed his party politics to get the better of his normally sound judgment .
He is at it again this year !
It is true to say that he makes it clear the United Kingdom has not acted illegally .
There has been no question of deliberate wastage of European Coal and Steel Community funds .
While one of the mines was closed in 1990 , the Markham main colliery has been mothballed , in that it is under repair and maintenance so that it can be used in the future .
We shall vote against his paragraph 11 .
If I may turn to Dublin , that is a fairly easy task because the Committee on Budgetary Control has no hesitation in recommending that discharge be given for the 1994 year .
I am delighted that it has been reported that the saga about property in Dublin is at an end .
This has gone on far too long and that worry is now behind us .
But the problem of financial control at Dublin is not yet settled .
We recommended last year that the Commission appoint a part-timer to carry out this work and this has not yet been done .
The pattern of work , the Financial Regulation and the Court 's advice seem to conspire to produce too much cash in hand at any one time .
If the Court , the Commission and the Foundation cannot get it right , they should propose an amendment to the Financial Regulation because the advice conflicts from year to year .
I hope that the House will endorse the Committee on Budgetary Control 's recommendation that discharge for the European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions in Dublin be granted .
It is not such an easy story when we turn to the European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training , CEDEFOP as we call it ; there are much more serious problems there .
I hasten to add that the problems are not mainly of the Centre 's making - they are not its fault at all .
It must have been a prime instance of European cock-up theory which prompted the European Council to transfer CEDEFOP from Berlin to Thessaloniki .
I really believe that it was their intention to transfer the East European Training Foundation - who were temporary tenants of CEDEFOP in Berlin - to Thessaloniki .
But as the king had spoken , the move had to take place .
The Commission did not help because it indulged in some appalling labour relations so that more than half of the staff were not prepared to move .
I do not think Parliament helped either because we had asked for independent consultants to come in and review the work of CEDEFOP .
They chose to come in just at the time when morale was under the floorboards because the staff were not happy with the arrangements that were being made .
The Court produced a fairly critical report on this point , but the consultants went so far as to suggest that the centre was not a great deal of use to the Community .
I do not think the Committee on Budgetary Control is the right body to make a qualitative assessment as to the centre 's usefulness and future use .
That is the work for the Spending Committee .
My view is that as long as there is a growing demand for the centre 's reports they must be doing some useful research which people want to get hold of .
That is a good commercial justification .
In addition , I think we would look rather foolish if we suggested that such a centre was unnecessary at a time of high unemployment in Europe and a time when training and retraining ideas are vital to our future .
That work deserves an even higher priority .
Rather than condemn CEDEFOP out of hand by refusing discharge , we propose that discharge should be deferred .
In the immediate future the committee should arrange a visit to Thessaloniki , thus the director and officials could reassure us as to the future of CEDEFOP , its viability and that it can play a useful role in research into training and retraining .
The Budgetary Control Committee recommends to the House that we defer discharge to CEDEFOP for the time being .
I finish with an appeal to the Commission and everybody else concerned to look at what is happening to the management boards for both Dublin and Thessaloniki .
There are now more people on the management boards than there are people working in the centre .
The founding fathers ' original idea was to get the social partners to talk together - that is a good thing - government , employers and trade unions .
But if you have one representative from each of the 15 Member States and the EFTA countries and representatives from the Commission , you have got boards of 60 people .
They meet twice and their bureau meets three or four times .
There must be a better way of doing it which would look more sensible to Europe 's citizens .
I appeal to the Commission to instigate an enquiry as to how this can be improved .
Mr President , first of all , on the general budget : within the resolution let us not lose sight of the fact that we actually welcome the spirit of constructive cooperation that has existed between the Commission and the Court of Auditors for the year 1994 .
If that applies to the past , then we also welcome the SEM 2000 proposals and hope that in the future things will be far better .
The problem when we give discharge is the fact that 80 % of the Union 's budget is spent by the Member States , and we all know this .
Unfortunately , we do not give discharge to the Member States , we only give discharge to the Commission .
The Commission must not get too enthusiastic about hearing nothing but praise , for it knows that this resolution contains criticism of the lukewarm manner in which the Commission has acted as far as we are concerned , instead of having a go at the Member States to get the money back or ensure that it is spent correctly .
A lot of the specific subject areas within the report will be covered by people who follow me .
I just want to concentrate on one issue and one issue only , which has been referred to by Mr Kellett-Bowman , and that is the DAS .
The DAS will enhance the sound financial management of the Community 's budget - we all accept that - but there are problems , as the Court of Auditors indicated .
Within the 70-odd paragraphs of the resolution , to me the most important one is paragraph 8 , which asks the Commission from now on to include an account headed ' specified amounts subject to recovery proceedings ' .
We asked it to specify individual cases and sub-totals based on substantial errors reported by the Court ; then we asked it to inform Parliament of the action taken in both cases .
I say it is the most important paragraph , because , whilst I shall recommend that we give discharge , I shall recommend we do so only on the clear assurance from the Commission that it will do what we are asking .
So we await the Commission 's response on that .
This was the first Statement of Assurance .
The results of the Court of Auditors ' report on the Commission were somewhat mixed .
Within the Explanatory Statement I use a footballing term to say if we were to look at this response we could say that the Commission had one win , one lose and one score draw .
The win was that the accounts accurately reflected the revenue , expenditure and financial situation of the Union ; the defeat was that there were too many errors in payment transactions to give a positive assurance , and the score draw was the fact that there were no significant errors in own-resources but that it was not possible to give an assurance that all chargeable imports have yielded corresponding revenue .
Even with that one win , one lose , one score draw , last November when the Court presented its report the media - certainly the British media - latched on to the figure of 4 % .
It was blazoned all over the media that the Community was misspending or losing - of course , the word ' fraud ' cropped up time and time again - 4 % of our budget .
We have to take that on board and we have to decide whether we can give discharge to the Commission in the light of what was said in the DAS statement .
Let us just look at it .
The one thing that we have to remember is that discharge is the legal certification of the accounts .
When we look at this 4 % we have to ask the question : well , is this an acceptable level or a non-acceptable level ?
The simple answer is that it is a non-acceptable level !
Parliament in no way can condone this 4 % figure .
So we cannot accept that one ecu in every 25 is wrongly paid .
But then you have to look at the system itself and you have to ask questions such as : is the figure reliable ?
That depends on which angle you look at it from !
You will find that discussed in the Explanatory Statement , where we ask whether the figure is reliable .
But if it is reliable , then whose fault is it ?
That is an even bigger dilemma .
In the main , we could blame the Member States , because they are the ones who spend this 80 % of the budget .
But , of course , as I said , we do not give discharge to the Member States .
The thing we should asking is : can those errors be corrected ?
I think we find an answer to that within that Explanatory Statement ; and that is why paragraph 8 is so important to this Parliament , because that is the way that we can give discharge to the Commission , even with the Statement of Assurance being as it is .
Let us be perfectly clear that Parliament cannot legally establish a debt .
We cannot do the job of the Commission .
Therefore , we cannot make the recovery of the money a condition of discharge .
That is of fundamental importance .
Parliament 's discharge power is focussed on the Community 's accounts .
This is the area where , of course , we can act .
If the accounts were amended , as we request in paragraph 8 , to include the sums the Commission hopes to recover , then three things would happen .
Firstly , Parliament would not have to certify the accounts and , therefore , we would not be covering up any errors ; secondly , the Commission would be obliged to pursue recovery of the amounts paid in error and , thirdly , the Commission 's legal responsibility to implement the budget would not be hindered .
Therefore , the conclusions reached in that general report are that we should grant discharge subject to these demands on the Commission .
I now turn to the European Development Fund .
Here the recommendation is greatly different .
Those of us who have been here for many years and have seen the EDF discharge year in and year out know the problems of funding through the European Development Fund and we have accepted that over the years - not that we have tried to cover anything up , but at least we have tried to take cognizance of all those areas where , in development terms , things are not as simple as they would seem to be to an everyday accountant .
There comes a time when we have to say enough is enough .
Quite frankly , there are three things that have come to a head and which have now brought us to the stage where we say enough is enough .
We have said for a long time that the EDF does not give the correct democratic accountability and that it is compromised by its legal and financial framework .
And yet it is the Member States , once again , who are responsible for that legal and financial statement : they are the ones who have created the situation , they are the ones who can change the situation .
Within this report and within the resolution Parliament recognizes the Commission 's attempt to improve the EDF through its better financial management , even working within what we consider to be an impossible framework .
There is no criticism of the Commission on the EDF in general .
The criticism , of course , comes when we come to the Cultural Foundation - I shall come to that in a moment - because that is the one area where we use the word ' deplores ' ; in fact we use it twice in relation to the Cultural Foundation .
But the DAS gave us the opportunity to look at the accounts , and the Court of Auditors said that the accounts imperfectly reflect the financial situation and the operations of the EDFs .
They lack the consistency and discipline to be able to reflect the true situation faithfully .
That is clearly not a positive statement of assurance .
DG VIII of the Commission would argue that it is .
That was once again our dilemma where we acted as the referee and in doing so the one thing we are clear about is that it is not a positive statement .
As I said about the general budget , it is there as a tool to help Parliament .
But the biggest anomaly this year - and it was the same last year but we did not have the DAS then - is that the Court of Justice in its ruling has now stated that the European Development Funds are not Community expenditure .
It is Member State expenditure which is managed by the Commission .
In other words , the Commission acts as a sub-contractor to manage these Funds and to all intents and purposes Parliament has no say in this expenditure .
Yet we are obliged to give discharge .
We respect the Court of Justice ruling but it creates a confused and incoherent mess .
It also creates problems for the day-to-day management of the EDFs .
If we want to give a discharge year in and year out , we would want to know where we stand legally to do so .
The Commission has made great strides to change things and we accept that and welcome it .
But a radical re-think is needed and I am sure everyone in this Parliament , barring the odd one or two - and I mean odd one or two - would actually agree that the EDFs should be budgetized .
That is the only way the system can change .
We also recognize with the current system that the Commission staff in Brussels is not sufficient , not in quality but in numbers .
It does not have enough staff to do what it should be doing at present .
The nature of the Commission 's role as regards development funding gives rise to contradictions that Parliament as a democratic institution finds extremely hard to accept .
Member States take the credit for providing the funds .
They write the rule book - such as it is - but they then leave the Commission and Parliament to take the blame .
So there are two aspects which I have named so far .
Firstly. the DAS and , secondly , the Court of Justice ruling .
The third aspect was what happened at the Cultural Foundation .
There should be no excuses whatsoever from the Commission .
When I met the Commission it would have been nice for them to have said : ' It 's a fair cop , Guv 'nor . We hold our hands up , we were wrong ' .
But a defence was put up in certain quarters and I find that quite inexplicable .
When something is as bad as what happened with the Cultural Foundation , we should not try to cover it up .
The Commission took a political decision which it did not have to do even if the Council of Ministers was leaning upon it to do so .
In no way , shape or form should Parliament be connected with that decision .
If we had not had the DAS or the Court of Justice ruling , I for one would have been recommending that we do not give discharge because of what happened with the Cultural Foundation .
It gives me no joy whatsoever to make a recommendation not to give discharge to the European Development Funds but the time has come for Parliament to stop providing this veneer of respectability , this fig leaf which we have always given in the past .
From now on we have to look at it through different eyes and for the year 1994 the recommendation is refusal of discharge .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as a Parliament we have a different task from that of the Court of Auditors .
Our task is to make a political assessment of what the budget reveals about policy .
In the area of social policy , it reveals a gulf between the requirements , in terms of European social policy , and the European social policy that exists .
That comes across very clearly .
It is then further reflected in individual structural problems .
There is , for example , the recognized structural problem - still unresolved , despite reforms - of the difficulty in disbursing money from the European Social Fund on time ; this problem has not yet been solved , despite the efforts made by the Commission to address it .
A further problem - and the last one that I intend to mention in detail - concerns the social dialogue , where there is still a great imbalance because worker-employer relations have been europeanized to varying degrees , which means that the extent to which people are willing to show their hands in this context also varies .
If we grant a discharge , we must recognize , on the one hand , that although European social policy is needed , it is not being practised .
However , we must also ask ourselves - and I would explicitly endorse what Mr Wynn said on this point - who is responsible in each instance .
It must be made very clear here that it is time to find another way of placing some of the responsibility on the Member States , since all too often the policy pursued by the Member States consists of foot-dragging , in the hope that at the end of the financial year , they might perhaps get some money for projects which they could not otherwise have implemented ; or else they are actually given money from the Social Fund and spend it on building roads , because that is their preferred use for it .
If we cannot manage to curb this behaviour on the part of the Member States , there is something strange about criticizing the Commission and refusing to grant it discharge .
We must , therefore , grant discharge to the Commission , because we have succeeded in establishing to our satisfaction that it is not the Commission that is at fault here .
Mr President , it is our job to monitor the efficiency of development aid and to exercise control , in our own political interest and the interest of the taxpayer .
It is perhaps worth noting that all this aid would not be needed if we had a fair system of trade , and were prepared to cancel debts .
The report by the Court of Auditors and our own report find fault on many specific points , for example humanitarian aid , only 66.9 % of which is utilized , or , as detailed by the Court of Auditors , the lack of independence of contracted agencies , ill-defined audit contracts , insufficient preparation , and slack and superficial monitoring .
In many cases , there are no written reports on these matters .
The Commission should not rely too heavily on the implementing authorities or firms to provide effective monitoring .
In view of the strict limit on speaking time , I do not wish to go into these points at greater length ; instead , I should like to deal with the final point made by Mr Wynn , that because of the problem with the Cultural Foundation , we should not grant a discharge in respect of the financial administration of the European Development Fund .
This problem with the Cultural Foundation is a scandal , but it is already two years old .
We in Parliament have brought the scandal to light , and set the wheels in motion to have it discussed .
We had a debate in the House , we set up a hearing in the Committee on Development and Cooperation , and we submitted a report at the ACP Joint Assembly , in order to bring the whole scandal out into the open .
I think we can fairly say that it is being dealt with .
If we do not grant this discharge , we may spark off a fresh debate about Lomé IV and financing .
We have just been involved in major controversy with the Council about these issues .
I find a great deal to criticize in Lomé IV too , but we are talking here about the only forum for North-South dialogue .
This political dialogue has to be important to us .
Therefore , we should not see it destroyed because of this one instance .
It is important that this issue should be discussed at the Intergovernmental Conference .
We must make the inclusion of the Development Fund in the budget a political issue at the conference .
That is our demand .
We should use this budget discharge as an occasion to exert pressure on the national governments .
Mr Wolf has just said that we must place a share of the responsibility on the national governments .
That is what we must do .
It is my belief that if we proceed by making an example of this scandal , the effect we produce will be disproportionate to our analysis .
I would therefore urge , particularly with a view to the Intergovernmental Conference , that we should postpone this vote in order to impress on the Council the following point : if we are to operate a European development policy , then this House must be one of the monitoring and authorizing authorities .
That means that the fund must be budgetized .
It might then be possible to resolve scandals and problems such as these by other means .
I believe that if we do not take this step , the Commission will be cast in an unfavourable light , and we shall undermine what we ourselves , as a Parliament , achieved by means of our initiatives two years ago : namely , bringing this matter out into the open .
To be brief , therefore , I am urging that we should defer the decision on this discharge , raise the issue with our national governments - in Bonn and Paris and London - and then wait and see what happens at the Intergovernmental Conference .
Mr President , I would like , first of all , to congratulate all the rapporteurs on these many reports and say that in each case I will be following the rapporteur 's recommendation .
It reflects the work they have done to get consensus for their reports .
I want to use my limited time to talk politically about the process that we are going through .
The Commission 's attitude is welcome .
Quite clearly the culture in the Commission has changed and is improving .
I hope it will continue to improve until we have the sort of culture that has been visualized both by the President of the Commission and in the sound and efficient management documents that have been put before us .
When I turn to the Council I have to say that its attitude in the process is deplorable .
80 % of the expenditure is spent in the Member States .
The fiddles that affect the European taxpayer largely take place in the Member States and under their jurisdiction .
The clearance of accounts is in the Member States .
The fines are then against the Member States .
If we look at what has happened since the reports were debated in committee , particularly those relating to 1992 and 1993 , Italy has been fined ECU 217m on milk quotas , ECU 89.4m on non-existent cereals - and I have to tell you ECU 89.4m on non-existent cereals represents a lot of cereals - ECU 25.6m on beef storage , ECU 16m on exceeding tobacco quotas .
I could just as easily cite the other Member States ; I am only choosing Italy because I know it will be close to the President-in-Office of the Council .
Other Member States such as Spain , Greece , Ireland and the United Kingdom , have all been fined in the clearance of accounts procedures .
Yet this Council , which is long on rhetoric when it comes to value for money and the fight against fraud , is short on action .
The action of the Council has been to send a civil servant to the committee who could not answer a single political question and to absent itself from our debate today .
Granted it is absent to be at a trialogue , but they were the people who double-booked the meeting !
It is a contempt of Parliament .
We might just as well have had a debate with an empty chair .
That has been the level of the contribution that the Council has made to our procedures .
Mr President , first of all I should like to associate myself with what Mr Tomlinson has just said .
Whilst we were debating Mr Wynn 's report on the approval of the implementation of the budget for 1994 , the opinion was expressed in the Committee on Budgetary Control that the Court of Auditors was in danger of becoming the victim of its own success .
We think that is clear now because the Court of Auditors will leave this hemicycle today not only with recognition of its hard work but also with the burden of at least six special reports and perhaps two or three new control procedures .
However , we can already see growing signs that the Court lacks the material resources to achieve the objectives which Parliament itself has laid down .
And the requirement under the Maastricht Treaty to prepare a statement of assurance as to the reliability of the accounts will contribute still more to putting pressure on certain material resources which are already very tight .
This Parliament has voted and will continue to vote for austerity in expenditure , particularly as regards the appointment of new staff , but we must bear in mind that without a Court of Auditors with sufficient resources we shall find it very difficult to comply with one of the principal mandates of our electors , namely to ensure that Community funds are used correctly and that European taxpayers ' interests are protected when we are faced with the certain fact , stressed by the Wynn report , that 80 % of the Community budget is spent within the Member States .
There is a current of opinion , as honourable Members are well aware , which considers that in view of the 80 % it should perhaps be the Member States and their own national control institutions which should have full responsibility in supervising Community expenditure ; that is to say , the pure and strict application of the principle of subsidiarity to budgetary control and its renationalization .
However , I think that the majority of this Assembly would not approve such an application of the principle of subsidiarity .
In no case do Community funds represent more than 2 % of national budgets and so to treat them in the same way as total national expenditure for control purposes would only reduce the actual quality of the control .
But it is clear that more effective machinery for cooperation between the Court of Auditors and national audit departments must be set up .
If that is hard to manage for the moment it is because there are considerable differences in accounting between the Member States , particularly in periods for drawing up and presenting accounts and also because there are differences in the functions of national audit offices and the political and administrative structures .
All that comes from different constitutional systems which make it very difficult - though not impossible - to establish indispensable machinery for collaboration to ensure that Community resources are satisfactorily controlled .
The commitment and political will of the Members of this Assembly to strengthen the material capacity of the Court of Auditors to perform its duties must be very clear .
Clear expression should also be given to the importance which this Assembly attaches to keeping the Court of Auditors responsible for controlling 100 % of Community resources , with the Court retaining full autonomy and independence from Parliament in addition to observing and fulfilling the conditions laid down in the Treaties .
I should like to end by congratulating all the rapporteurs whose capacity and readiness for discussion are shown by the small number of amendments tabled .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the debate on the discharge for 1994 is proving of to be of greater importance than in the past .
That is because , on the basis of the new provisions of the Maastricht Treaty , Parliament 's powers are no longer limited to merely approving the Commission accounts , a kind of rubber-stamping ; they are in fact based on the statement of assurance from the Court of Auditors and are therefore far more significant and substantive .
On the substance , as a result of what can only be described as a veritable tidal wave of fraud and irregularities , which have reached levels so worrying as to require detailed review of the procedure for implementing and monitoring all Community spending , discharge this year takes on completely fresh importance .
Consequently , the Wynn report has a very important political significance , and its conclusions - which take in the substance of the suggestions made during the debate within the Committee on Budgetary Control - have a direct impact not only on the procedures for implementing the spending provided for in the budget but also , and most importantly , the functioning and - currently completely unsatisfactory - methods of administering Community policies .
If we want to avoid Parliament calling next year for discharge to be refused and , hence , a serious conflict of competence between Institutions , we shall have very rapidly to set under way a reform with a far-reaching impact on the spending mechanisms .
In particular , we must ensure that there is greater transparency and publicity , particularly as regards the administration of direct funding , in certain vital sectors such as tourism and , more generally , internal policies .
We shall have , if necessary , to look into the possibility of setting up a committee of inquiry into the protection of the Community 's financial interests .
Mr President , I would like to start off by commending Mr Wynn for his discharge report on the general budget .
I believe that the rapporteur has succeeded in putting his finger right on the sensitive points which need to be highlighted .
I agree that a change has taken place recently .
Co-operation with the Commission is now conducted in a more positive spirit than hitherto .
I believe , however , that it is depressing to note that there are so many repetitions in the discharge reports , year after year .
I cannot overstate the need for stricter observance of the obligation to follow Parliament 's recommendations , and I believe that there is an obvious need to tighten up the regulations in the context of the intergovernmental conference for example , so that both the Commission and the Member States are required to comply with the changes which are necessary to run the accounts satisfactorily .
It is clearly unsatisfactory that the Commission does not currently use the means at its disposal to get the Member States to observe the rules and comply with their obligations to carry out checks , knowing full well that it is often the Member States which are neglectful in this respect .
We can see this , for example , with the Structural Funds where there is totally inadequate control over projects , and no consequences if projects are not completed or are completed in some way other than that originally laid down .
We must impose a requirement that if the regulations are not observed , aid will be reduced , so that there are also consequences in this area for failure to comply with the applicable rules .
On the subject of the PHARE programme , may I urge the Commission to take up the challenge to work out some strategic guidelines for the PHARE programme 's role in connection with enlargement to incorporate the Eastern and Central European countries .
It is imperative that the purpose of the aid which we provide through the PHARE programme is to pave the way for enlargement with the Eastern and Central European countries .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have a comprehensive package of discharge decisions before us , allowing us an overview of the most serious problems that we have to contend with in the proper implementation of the budget .
The citizens of the EU are entitled to require that every last ECU should be managed in a transparent , effective and economical way , and today , like last year , we must once again conclude , on the basis of the Court of Auditors ' analyses , that there are major flaws in the system .
However , the very fact of discussing these deficiencies openly and frankly can go some way towards generating confidence .
Nothing should be swept under the carpet .
In this respect , all the reports paint a very clear picture and have the support of my group .
As I see it , there are two main areas of difficulty .
We must cut the ground from under the opportunists .
What do I meant by that ?
If Member States find a way to make some money on the side from milk quotas , and if their little scheme receives the retrospective blessing of the Commission , in the sense that there is no insistence on the repayment of ECU 2 billion , this encourages the hope that putting your hand in the Union 's till will ultimately pay off .
My colleague Mr Samland , and of course the Council , will have more to say on this point .
If the rules on the administration of the Structural Funds are not observed , and if this does not incur , for example , the suspension of further payments , then such an approach is actually being encouraged .
It is a fact that 80 % of the EU budget is spent by the Member States , and it is precisely there that significant deficiencies are emerging .
However , we shall get nowhere simply by issuing appeals .
As long as the EU budget functions with the present high level of subsidies from the Agricultural and Structural Funds , there must be a range of sanctions mechanisms to prevent irregularities going unpunished .
The Commission should therefore take very seriously all the proposals made by the Committee on Budgetary Control for securing and recovering sums wrongly disbursed .
As regards external policy , the important thing is to overcome difficulties in the treaties , in order to achieve a more transparent spending policy and genuine cooperation between the two arms of the budgetary authority .
That applies equally to the European Development Fund and to the common foreign and security policy .
Parliament has repeatedly called for the EDF to be integrated into the budget .
The reasons for taking such a step are obvious , and led the Court of Auditors to comment that it was hard to draw any comparison between what was intended and what was implemented .
I would therefore say to all those who argue that a refusal to grant discharge would be an insult to development policy in general and our commitments under the Lomé Convention in particular : it is quite the opposite !
The financial subculture that we are currently sustaining is creating major administrative weaknesses .
We are meant to grant discharge , even though we have no influence or effective political control over how the resources are spent .
That has to change , not least in order to improve the quality of our development policy !
Refusing discharge will , therefore , send the right signal to the Intergovernmental Conference , to tell them that it is time they came up with an institutional solution to this dilemma .
I also expect the conference on the revision of the Treaty to produce clarification of the common foreign and security policy and associated budgetary matters .
It is unacceptable that the Council should decide on joint actions - such as the one in Mostar - and that these should be financed from the EU budget , without the Council at the same time adhering to the procedures for managing the appropriations .
There is a major procedural loophole , and unfortunately it now also affects discharge , because at the end of the day , Parliament cannot discharge the Council .
I am grateful to Mr Wynn for including the conclusions of my working paper in the motion for a resolution , and I am very hopeful that the special report on foreign and security policy announced by the Court of Auditors will give us a good basis for making more detailed proposals to the conference on the revision of the Treaty .
Mr President , my group supports all these reports but I have a query for Mr Wynn before I can advise the vote on the development fund question , which I will come to in a moment .
With regard to Mrs Kjer Hansen , it was very clear that where there are corrections to be made , this should not be a political , negotiable matter .
It should be an objective matter based on the actual loss .
I follow Mr Cornelissen 's report on this point .
He explained that the money was not recovered because no Member State had applied to the Court .
This really will not do .
We cannot go back to our European citizens who are very critical about the question of fraud and what they read in the press , and tell them that this is the system .
We have to get a new and better system that will work because they will find it inexplicable otherwise .
While I agree with Mr Tomlinson that we have seen an enormous improvement in the whole attempt by the Commission to get its house in order in all these matters , nevertheless it did not fulfil all the requests for information in certain headings .
There is room for improvement .
To come to Mr Wynn 's general discharge , he says that he is recommending a discharge on assurances by the Commission .
It is a bit difficult to know how we will vote because the Commission has not been here to hear him and to give these assurances .
So what are they worth ?
We will not know , unless it reads the transcript tonight .
The Council is here now but it did not hear either .
It is a very unsatisfactory situation .
I will have to explain that to my group at tonight 's meeting .
I am very critical of the Member States .
They are dealing here with the European taxpayers ' money .
They do not seem to take it seriously enough .
We should not be giving the fig leaf of respectability that was mentioned by getting involved in a procedure where we really cannot act properly because we do not have proper control .
Regarding my question on the Development Funds , is Mr Wynn aware of the feelings of the ACP 's 70 states expressed at the recent Lomé conference , that if we do not grant discharge , it might affect them in some way ?
If I could have that assurance I could advise my group .
If it does not make any financial difference , if it does not destroy their confidence , then I could go along with the refusal to discharge .
But I would quite like to hear about that .
Mr President , representative of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin with a comment on procedure .
I was not present just now when my colleagues expressed their views on this subject , and this is not because I was attending the trialogue as I was not included in the European Parliament 's delegation .
I should like to point out that we are discussing eight reports in under three hours .
One of these concerns action to be taken following the 1992 discharge , namely Mr Cornelissen 's report .
On this subject , you will remember the discussions on the discharge in question , which was postponed for more than a year .
The second of these reports concerns action to be taken following the 1993 discharge .
The third , by Mr Wynn , concerns giving discharge to the Commission for the 1994 financial year , when the Statement of Insurance ( DAS ) by the Court of Auditors entered into force for the first time and provided us with a negative DAS on payment operations .
Is this reasonable ?
Should not more time have been allowed for each of these reports ?
Is not Parliament discrediting itself by seeking to discuss everything , at the risk of not even doing that for which it exists , namely to exercise control over the use of European Union funding ?
When you add to this the fact that we have changed the order in which the reports are to be considered in order to fit in with the arrangements of one of our rapporteurs , Mr Black , who is not even present to hear what follows , then you can understand to what extent our procedures may appear surprising .
I now come to the two reports by Mr Wynn , one on the 1994 discharge which he proposes to grant on the general budget , and the other on the 1994 discharge which he proposes to refuse on the question of management of the European Development Fund .
We are therefore granting discharge on a budget of almost ECU 60 billion , brushing aside the Court of Auditors ' refusal to give a positive DAS due to payment irregularities amounting to ECU 2 , 386 million , which is ECU 2.4 billion or 4 % of the budget .
We reject the discharge in respect to the EDF budgets of an amount in the region of ECU 2.5 billion , and for two reasons : firstly , there is no positive Statement of Insurance , which also applies to the general budget , and secondly , there are irregularities regarding the Cultural Foundation 's budget , irregularities which I do not dispute .
But do you know what this Foundation 's budget is ?
I say this for the benefit of those who listen to us here : ECU 810 , 000 or 0.04 % of the EDF .
I tabled an amendment which simply specified these amounts .
Without being contested , this amendment was rejected .
Why ?
In truth it was because the decision on discharge had been made in advance .
The arguments put forward are no more than pretexts .
Discharge to the Commission was refused because the EDF is not integrated into the Community budget .
So I should like to ask a few questions .
Why was discharge granted at the time of previous EDF budgets when similar criticisms had been raised and the legal framework was the same ?
Have we taken into account the disastrous consequences , in political terms , of this refusal to grant discharge on the conference of ACP countries , in terms of the way they perceive the commitment of the European countries ?
Before requesting additional competences for Parliament , would it not be better to ensure that there are more deputies able to implement them ?
Mr President-inOffice , Commissioner , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am very sorry that I am only now able to take part in this debate .
As you know , I do not make a habit of being late , because part of debating is , of course , being able to respond to what one 's colleagues have said .
You know , however , that we have also been negotiating today in a trialogue on an important budgetary package , and that is why the Council President and members of the delegation from the Committee on Budgets had to be absent from the debate .
I am exceptionally sorry about this , and it certainly does not mean that we underestimated the importance of this debate , but it does explain why we could not be here on time .
As regards the report that I have to present today , I can tell you that it has been a remarkable experience for me to follow a budget from its drafting in 1992 - on the basis of the Commission 's figures for 1991 - and its adoption for 1993 , through to its second stage in the discharge procedure last year and now in the Commission 's responses to the discharge procedure .
It has to be said , Mrs Müller , that there are certain points where one has the feeling that it should have been possible , somewhere between 1991 and 1996 , to achieve some movement .
A look at the tobacco regulation or the regulations in the wine sector , however , forces one to the conclusion that even five years is not long enough to see progress .
With the support of the committee , I tried in my report to respond on only a few main points , and I should like to stress that this does not mean that all the points not addressed have been accepted .
The few points on which I have commented relate firstly to tobacco , secondly to wine , thirdly to transfers of appropriations and quality control , and fourthly to the recovery of interest on unused monies from the Structural Funds .
Let me say something more on these four points , and firstly on tobacco .
We have a report before us from the Court of Auditors on this issue .
We asked the Commission to submit a report on it , a report which was to be based on the Court of Auditors ' guidelines and submitted by 1 April .
Judging from the informal preparatory work which has already been done in connection with this process , it looks as if the recommendation from the Court of Auditors - the introduction of direct income aid for tobacco producers - is not going to be implemented ; it looks as though the Commission will not actually submit this proposal , never mind the Council accept it .
This demonstrates , however , that an element of inconsistency , mismanagement or actual fraud - call it what you will - is being carried over from year to year , because the legal basis for it is not changed .
The reason for this , Mrs Müller , is that in the discharge procedure , we argue with our partner , the Commission , whereas we should be arguing with the real culprit at the next level , namely the Council , which is capable of establishing legal bases that would rule out mismanagement or fraud .
The same applies to the wine sector , which is a virtual disaster .
We insisted that a register should be compiled - properly compiled in every Member State .
Now a new register is to be set up because the first procedure posed too many problems .
However , we are still paying for the current procedure and , of course , the new procedure is not available yet .
Whose fault is it that the reform proposals have not been properly implemented ?
As in the previous case I referred to , the culprit is the Council .
Furthermore , the Council has some 256 decisions pending , whereas here in Parliament we have only 52 decisions in the pipeline .
That shows where the bottleneck and the imbalance between the institutions is to be found .
The third point concerns interest for the Structural Funds .
We have requested and called on the Commission to see that there is a precise definition of eligible and non-eligible expenditure in the context of the Structural Funds , and to ensure that the question of the recovery of interest is finally resolved , because we see this as Community money which should come back to the Community , rather than disappearing into anyone 's coffers in the Member States , or even in the regions of the Member States , as happens in my own country , Germany .
Last but not least , transfers of appropriations by DG XIX .
I know that you are responsible for the budgetary aspect , Commissioner , but we shall expect you , in future , to supply us not just with an accounting justification for transfers of appropriations , but also with a qualitative assessment , because that has to be the basis for using and implementing resources efficiently .
The Committee on Budgetary Control has unanimously approved my draft report on this issue .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I must first apologize for arriving late , this was partly due to the fact that the political interest in the Community 's future budgets , in other countries also , tends to be greater than in past budgets : I was in fact engaged in discussing the outline for the 1997 budget .
I am here to present the Council recommendation , adopted on 11 March and transmitted to the House , that the Commission be granted discharge for the budget for the 1994 financial year .
I am sure that you share the view of the presidency and the Council that the two institutions need to work in harmony , including when it comes to measures concerning the Community budget .
I know from previous experience that Parliament and the Council consider it crucially important that the Community should ensure that all direct measures are maintained and improved to ensure that resources from the Community budget are spent in full compliance with the principles of financial management which I shall summarize here as consisting of three factors . Firstly : the decisions should reflect the needs of communities ; secondly : the resources should be used economically and efficiently ; and , thirdly , there should be complete transparency in resource management and accounting .
Those criteria assume crucial importance at the current time when the Member States are having to contend with well-known social and financial problems .
In its recommendation , the Council emphasizes that budgetary discipline and respect for the principles of sound management , to which I referred , have to be applied to all measures funded from Community resources .
It is vital that there should be a period review of the reasons that led to the adoption of the measures under way in order to guarantee economy and efficiency in resource utilization .
That should always be done independently of the assessments made to prepare budgetary decisions .
The reports of the Court of Auditors and the monitoring activities on which they are based provide the basic instruments that permit us to monitor the application of those principles .
We have to congratulate the Court of Auditors for the efficient way in which it performs this task assigned to it by the Treaties .
I wish also to take this opportunity to thank the Committee on Budgetary Control for the work it does every year in relation to the discharge procedure : that work is done in the interest not only of the European Parliament but the Community as a whole .
As far as the views of the Council are concerned , let me make a few brief points on the main issues and ask you to run through again in every detail the text of the recommendation and the comments that go with it .
In the field of own resources , the Council shares the concerns of the Court of Auditors about the operation of the Community transit scheme in the Member States .
In that connection , it is most certainly interested in the European Parliament 's suggestion that a temporary committee of inquiry be set up to look into these customs arrangements .
On the issue of spending , the Council fully agrees with the Court on the need to improve the management and monitoring of the common organization of the market in the fruit and vegetable sector and also confirms the importance of reducing structural surpluses and making better use of products withdrawn from the market .
Moving on to the structural funds , the Council notes the persisting and major problem of an excessive concentration of commitments and payments towards the end of the financial year .
That state of affairs must be remedied as soon as possible and , to achieve that , the Member States will have to improve the way in which they programme expenditure and the Commission to speed up the administrative procedures .
The Council considers it necessary to improve cooperation between the competent national authorities and the Commission services involved in spending activities .
We need also to make a greater effort to clarify the criteria governing the admissibility of expenditure and the verification of declarations of expenditure .
Looking more particularly at the European Regional Development Fund , the Council is calling for uniform and strict application of the Community rules on the award of public contracts and environmental legislation in relation to measures financed with a contribution from the Community budget .
In the context of the European Social Fund , the Council is calling for the problem of over-utilization of the Fund to be resolved and for there to be a review of the management structures for Community initiatives to make them more efficient .
As regards the comments made by the Court of Auditors on the implementation of the PHARE and TACIS programmes , the Council is aware that the Commission is having to work in difficult conditions , but is calling for improved coordination between those participating to ensure that the studies carried out are followed up with specific actions and for preventive assessment to be carried out automatically before any decision is taken on programme renewal .
Finally , on the issue of implementation of the administrative expenditure of the Institutions , bearing in mind the comments made by the Court of Auditors on a number of shortcomings in staff management , external delegations and property , the Council notes that the Commission is implementing the Court 's recommendations .
In conclusion , bearing in mind all of the comments made by the Court of Auditors , and after having looked at them in very great detail , the Council has agreed to recommend to the House that it grant the Commission discharge for the implementation of the 1994 budget .
Two final points , one of which concerns the issue of the statement made for the first time by the Court of Auditors pursuant to Article 188c , which gave rise to the Council statement transmitted on the same date as the recommendation .
The Council has pointed out that the accounts accurately reflect the revenue and expenditure of the Union , even though the information they contain needs to be improved .
The Court has not identified significant errors concerning the regularity of revenue transactions but has identified errors in payment transactions , as a result of which it unable fully to certify the legality or regularity of all transactions .
That has been at the root of the Council 's concern , and it has welcomed the announcement of the programme to improve the Commission 's financial management .
That programme must be applied rapidly and in full to reduce errors in payment transactions .
That is what the presidency had to say , on behalf of the Council , on the problems relating to the 1994 budget .
Mr President , I may have misheard what was said .
The Council referred to the European Regional Development Fund , but it did not take a position on the European Development Fund .
Mr Wynn warned that the discharge would be suspended .
On behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , I advocated deferring the decision , so as to give the Council - which I blame for the kind of scandal which has occurred with the Cultural Foundation , though in fact the fault also lies in the structure - the chance to adopt a position , for example by budgetizing the Development Fund .
The House would appreciate a response to what we have advocated , so that then we know where we stand .
We also have to form an opinion on these matters within our group .
The Council cannot simply sweep its problems under the carpet now , because the scandal has made them quite apparent .
I should like a response from the Council on this question .
Does the Council wish to speak again or wait until a later occasion ?
I prefer to wait , Mr President .
Mr President , as spokesperson for the Socialist Group on development , I deplore the fact that the management of the European Development Fund is not democratically accountable .
I deplore the fact that we go through this annual pretence , this annual charade , when Parliament has no say whatsoever over the funding of the EDF .
I deplore the disgrace of the management of the Cultural Foundation .
It was a scandal which was investigated by the Bureau of the Joint Assembly of the Lomé Convention of which I was a member .
We called witnesses and carpeted individuals , including a key Member of the European Parliament .
I make that specific point to be fair to the Commission .
Cultural cooperation is central to development and has suffered a big setback because of this scandal .
I trust that the refusal to grant discharge will speed up the move towards the democratic accountability of the EDF .
I wish to put on record that this Parliament formally deplores the disgusting scandal of the Cultural Foundation .
I express the view that the Commission should be vigilant and meticulous in supporting these views , about which I believe both the Commission and Parliament are in full agreement .
Will the Council now please as a matter of urgency exercise its responsibility to ensure that the funds of the EDF are properly accountable .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , eight discharge reports have been presented , not quite in the order indicated on the agenda , but we appreciate the reasons for that .
It is impossible to speak on them all in four minutes .
I wish to look at only a few key points , but I should like to extend my sincere thanks to all the rapporteurs .
I shall begin with a word about the authority to grant discharge itself , and about our Committee on Budgetary Control .
For 20 years now , we have had the authority to grant discharge , and we have constantly been developing it .
We rely mainly on the annual report and the special reports of the Court of Auditors , for which we are grateful to the Court , but also on the position of the Council when it is available in time - as it was in this case .
However , despite our repeated requests , clarification of the position was presented to the Committee on Budgetary Control not by a member of the Council , but by a senior official , though I imply no criticism of him .
He performed his task well in so far as he could .
Now you , Mr President-in-Office , have addressed the House , and I think you have also listened carefully to what has been said here .
Our comments have been directed mainly at the Member States , but it is not the Member States to whom we must grant discharge .
I should like to turn now to the issues involved .
This time , the discharge of the Commission involves two instruments which have been used for the first time - instruments , as I said , directed specifically at the Member States .
The first innovation is our vote on the clearance of accounts for the EAGGF , submitted by the Commission for 1991 .
Clearance of accounts was previously classed as a technical procedure for which the Commission was responsible .
Parliament had little to do with it .
It is thanks to Mr Cornelissen , as rapporteur on the 1992 discharge , that the problems from previous years have been raised .
A particular problem which has been brought out into the open is the loss to the Community of some ECU 1.6 billion on milk quotas in three Member States .
Detailed discussions between the Committee on Budgetary Control and the Commission have produced reform as regards the clearance of accounts decision , which now completes the discharge already granted for the year in question .
This procedure is being applied for the first time for the year 1991 , with the very good report by Mrs Kjer Hansen .
The rapporteur deserves our thanks for highlighting the difference between the technical and political aspects .
The necessary financial corrections applied by the Commission to the Member States are absolutely non-negotiable where losses to EU funds are involved .
If this is not the case , then the discharge for the clearance of accounts will have to be suspended until the monies are recovered .
An initial tangible result of Parliament 's insistence on protecting taxpayers ' money is that the first tranche of the unpaid milk quotas has been received .
The second innovation , the Statement of Assurance , or DAS , by the Court of Auditors , has far-reaching implications as regards discharge .
Although there is no legal requirement on Parliament , and although an improvement in staffing levels would enable the sampling method initially developed by the Court to be further refined for specific Member States and sectors , we must take pains to include the certificate in our decision .
The rapporteur , Mr Wynn , has done this in the motion for a resolution from the Committee on Budgetary Control , and his readable explanatory statement provides us all with an invaluable aid to understanding this complex issue .
I would like to thank him particularly for that .
I am very concerned at the figure of 4 % , arrived at by the Court , for errors concerning payments , but in the light of the measures initiated by the Commission with the SEM 2000 programme - and thank you , Mr Liikanen and Mrs Gradin - and particularly on condition that the Commission recovers the outstanding sums and identifies the accounts to which they relate , and that we check them , I am prepared , with these considerations and conditions , to support the constructive approach proposed by the rapporteur in the first year of trying out the DAS procedure .
My group therefore backs the recommendation to grant discharge to the Commission in respect of the general budget for 1994 , in spite of the shortcomings that have been identified , and subject to the appropriate conditions .
Madam President , it is appropriate that in discussing budgetary matters we make some reference to the key principles governing responsible budgetary control , such as prudence and the allocation of funding to appropriate and deserving projects .
However , it is clear that not all European projects adhere to these principles and I wish to refer to one in particular .
I am speaking about the administration of our own finances within our own structures .
Recent visitors to Brussels were taken aback by the continuing construction of the European Parliament 's new headquarters there , which has been going on since 1990 , and the ornate nature of the building in question .
This latter-day glass Tower of Babel is utterly unnecessary and a waste of resources which Parliament could have more constructively utilized for other aspects of its work .
This building will cost an estimated ECU 900m - an outrageous sum of money given the other uses to which this funding could have been put and that the projected present budget deficit for this year looks like being about ECU 72m , equal to what we saved in the CAP reform for the year .
All these ecu saved are now being heedlessly squandered .
MEPs , who have a democratic mandate from the electorate , were not consulted on the building of this folly or allowed any opportunity to veto its construction .
Instead , the building of this glass palace has continued unimpeded .
It is particularly ironic that we are discussing budgetary and fiscal matters today in this Parliament .
If ever there was an example of budgetary irresponsibility , it is the grandiose edifice currently taking shape in Brussels .
Despite much talk about bringing Europe closer to its citizens and the need to construct a People 's Europe , projects such as this building only serve to reinforce the image of an elitist Europe out of touch with ordinary people and their concerns .
Perception is very important in this European Parliament and this is no help to it .
Madam President , I have a number of comments on the Wynn report on the discharge for the 1994 financial year .
First of all , what he says about agriculture .
I think that in future it will be almost impossible to forecast agricultural expenditure with any accuracy .
I have never known anyone who could forecast the weather , or what new diseases are going to emerge - we have only to think of the recent appearance of mad cow disease .
And I have never known anyone to predict the exact dollar-ECU rate .
So I think it is always better to err on the side of caution , so that we are always able to honour the guarantees we give our farmers .
One aspect over which we do have control is to make the rules as clear as possible , but as many people have already pointed out , they still leave a lot to be desired .
If a political decision is to be taken on how the rules are to be revised , I think it should be a matter for the Commission , the Council and Parliament together .
My second comment concerns the PHARE programme .
PHARE is , without doubt , intended to prepare the countries concerned for eventual membership of the European Union , and this is why we must ensure that there is not even a hint of financial mismanagement in our dealings with them .
If we want to improve cooperation with them , we not only need better efforts from the diplomatic service and our delegations , but we should also organize exchanges of officials between , say , DG VI and the agriculture ministries in the countries concerned .
Could we not bring officials from the agriculture ministries in the countries of the former Eastern bloc over to Brussels , and send DG VI people to those countries to explain its policy ?
I hope this proposal will be examined in the document which we are scheduled to receive by 30 September 1996 , and that the Commission will explain how it intends to improve the development of its veterinary and plant health measures and cooperation in this field .
Madam President , I should first of all like to say that I entirely agree with the Wynn report and would only pick up on one point , which Mr Tomlinson has already mentioned : that it is rather hypocritical of the Council to say in its recommendation on discharge that the Court of Auditors is right and the Commission must work more efficiently .
At the same time , however , there is something in what the Council says , because if you read the Court of Auditors ' report carefully , it does indeed appear that the Commission is seriously failing in its duties as the guardian of the Treaties .
It is doing practically nothing to implement directives on public contracts or the environment .
The reason for this is clear : if it did so , the Structural Funds would end up being even more seriously underspent than at present .
But this is no excuse for not enforcing legislation , since this simply means that a great deal of money is wasted or that environmental legislation no longer prevents damage , but at best merely limits it or occasionally puts right damage actually caused by the Funds .
Let me give you one example of what I mean about public contracts .
It is apparently a regular occurrence in Greece that Greek contractors win a contract because they offer bids of less than half the cost of the project , but they can eventually claim more than 150 % of the cost from the Commission .
I find it hard to believe that the 50 % profit all goes to the contractors .
The situation with the environment is no better .
Environmental impact assessments are usually drawn up after a political decision has been taken on a given project , and this means that attempts are hardly ever made to find alternatives , such as with the Tagus bridge in Lisbon , and damage limitation is the only option .
The main reason for this , as I have said before , is that most of the Commissioners regard it as far more important to spend the budget than to respect legislation .
I entirely agree with what Mr Liikanen said in a letter concerning Community customs , that the Commission has no choice but to carry on enforcing existing legislation .
That is just as it should be .
But in my experience , it is not what the Commission actually does .
There are other factors involved here : inadequate control procedures and monitoring committees , and its failure to apply Article 24 correctly .
In short , when it comes to the Structural Funds the Commission , the supposed guardian of the Treaties , is a complete failure and needs to look very closely at how it can do better .
I think it should be agreed with the Council - and this ties in with the Council 's own recommendations - that the Member States themselves should be given more responsibility for applying the directives , and that on that basis the Commission should only decide whether or not projects should be allowed to go ahead .
Madam President , my colleague from my constituency , Mr Killilea , was at his colourful best when he described the new European Parliament as the Tower of Babel .
I am sure it is designed to attract the maximum attention , but I do not want that sort of allegation circulating in my constituency unanswered .
We did not build a parliament for the Members of Parliament who are here today .
We built it for the people of Europe .
It was built at a cost of about ECU 3 per capita for one year of the people of this European Union .
I hope , like the House of Commons or the Reichstag in Germany , or the Cortes in Spain , that building will be there for our children , our grandchildren and our great-grandchildren , that it will never be bombed or desecrated and that it will be the place in which the people of Europe will find their voice over the generations to come .
I am proud of that building .
It reflects some of the technology and the grandeur of the age and the competence of the people of Europe of this day .
The attack by Mr Killilea was not worthy of a Member of Parliament .
If he had attended regularly to the business of this House he would have known that we were consulted .
If he was not prepared to be here at all times then he could trust his colleagues who were here and made the decisions .
I want to thank Mr Wynn for his report .
I support his refusal of discharge .
I am not looking at it in the area of the European Development Fund .
I do not regard it as a reflection on the competence of the European Commission but of the circumstances in which we find ourselves ; the impossible situation of being required to account for something that cannot be accounted for , and for which we do not have responsibility .
I do not agree with the tone of his criticism in relation to agricultural spending .
The expertise and the knowledge that I find in the Commission surprises me at times .
It is a most infinitely complicated business to try to forecast what the cost of agriculture will be for any year .
Parliament is continuously a little bit harsh insofar as this sort of criticism is concerned .
The last point I want to make is in relation to the fine that was imposed on the Irish Government .
Unfortunately the Irish taxpayers have to accept this while they got no benefit out of malpractices which led to it .
I want to underline the fact that it was not at European level but within the Irish Parliament that the first disclosures and demand for clarification on all these abuses occurred .
This fine was exceptionally harsh in that it was equivalent to ECU 1 , 000 million for the British or the Italians .
Irish agriculture got no benefit out of it whatever .
Madam President , I will refer to the report by our esteemed colleague Mr Edward Kellett-Bowman on postponement of the discharge to the Management Board of the European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training in Thessaloniki .
Frankly , I did not understand why Mr Kellett-Bowman is asking for postponement .
Is he doing so because there was a financial scandal in the management up till 1994 ?
If so , he should say so in his report , he should describe it to us , and I believe we would then all go along with him .
However , his report mentions no such thing .
On the contrary , it expresses doubts about the continuation of that Centre 's operation - CEDEFOP 's operation - related to its productivity and efficacy .
And it attributes those doubts to the fact that when the decision was taken at the 1994 Summit to remove the Centre from Berlin and transfer it to Thessaloniki , half the Centre 's staff declined to move to Thessaloniki along with the Centre .
Those who had powerful political protectors were transferred to other services of the European Union .
Those who were close to pensionable age requested early retirement , which they were granted , and finally , those who did not fit either of these categories resigned .
So of approximately 100 people , less than half are now in Thessaloniki .
And I , ladies and gentlemen , would like to ask : is that how Europe 's enlargement will take place ?
When the Eastern countries accede in due course , will certain spoiled members of staff refuse to transfer to capitals outside the ParisBerlin-Brussels triangle ?
Is that the basis for the European Parliament 's policies on decentralization and regional development ?
I am very sorry , but unless I get serious answers to the questions I have raised , my recommendation to my group will be to vote against Mr KellettBowman 's report .
Madam President , I wish to speak with reference to Mr Blak 's report on the ECSC on the discharge for 1994 .
I would like to draw Members ' attention to paragraph 11 in Mr Blak 's report that is on the UK pit closures .
I want to draw Mr Liikanen 's attention to the whole question of what he and the Council of Ministers are going to do about the recovery of subsidies paid to pits in the United Kingdom which were subsequently sold off or privatized .
Can we look very briefly at the wording of Mr Blak 's report ?
It says , very interestingly , it accepts that the ECSC will not be able to recover by legal means the interest rate subsidies paid to financial production enhancing investment .
But if it cannot be returned by legal means , is Mr Blak , or is the Commission , going to send the boys round to 10 Downing Street to ask for the money back ?
What is at stake here ?
The Court of Auditors ' report says quite clearly that under Article 54 , 15 pits received subsidies .
Two of them were closed .
One - Lea Hall in my constituency - has received an unrecoverable subsidy of almost half-a-million ECU and Frickley colliery a subsidy of ECU 294 million , which has not been recovered from the British Government .
Monies have also been paid to pits which were subsequently privatized - two , again , in my constituency : Trentham and Silverdale .
I know that when Trentham was privatized , much of the equipment paid for by the ECSC was actually bricked-up .
So , to Mr Liikanen I put two questions : what are you going to do to recover the cash subsidies , and how are you going to stop subsidies being paid to industries in the UK which have been privatized or are going to be privatized in the future ?
How are you going to get that money back for us and stop it happening again ?
Madam President , I should like to address myself first and foremost to the Commission , because although it is up to us to grant discharge to the Commission , I regard it as Parliament 's natural ally when it comes to the economical management of the budget .
As Mrs Theato has already said , the DAS , the statistical Statement of Assurance , provides us and the Commission , for the first time , with an instrument which , although it is not perfect , makes the discharge procedure more meaningful and thus gives the Commission more scope and more responsibility for the implementation of the budget .
The question of the staffing of UCLAF is similarly important .
We have seen , for example in the case of fraud in the packaging sector , that this unit has become a vital part of proper financial administration , and obviously it also has an important function in the fight against fraud .
This means that it must also be given the level of staffing that it requires .
The point has already been made that 80 % of expenditure is managed by the Member States ; it is therefore all the more important that the Commission should probe more deeply , because we have heard hair-raising things about the results of checks on the withdrawal of fruit and vegetables from the market .
This has demonstrated the importance of checks and the need to extend their scope significantly , so that the Member States , too , can be made aware of their own responsibility .
The final issue that I wish to highlight concerns the satellite bodies , the decentralized institutions which are based in individual Member States , but work for the Union as a whole .
Our Greek colleague has referred to the Centre for the Development of Vocational Training .
As a result of its move to Thessaloniki , this centre is experiencing difficulties .
Mr Kellett-Bowman and the committee were right to recommend that we should defer discharge until this body acquires a clear function and provides a quality of service commensurate with the need .
We shall see whether this is to be the case .
If so , the centre will have a purpose .
If not , we must draw the necessary conclusions .
Madam President , the debate on discharge for the European budget clearly throws up one important reason for the disenchantment with Europe that we see in our countries .
One of the causes of disenchantment is the somewhat lax approach to money - European taxpayers ' money .
I have been following the debate today with interest , because it has focused quite clearly on the question of finding a culprit : was it the Member States , or was it the Commission ?
I see this as a rather fruitless line of inquiry .
The European Parliament is being shuttled here from pillar to post .
I cannot entirely absolve the Commission from blame .
Particularly now , when we are once again discussing the legal bases - and I believe that the legal bases are also an important basis for safeguarding the budget in Europe - I have the impression that the Commission is quite content just to play along .
Secondly , having seen the clueless attitude of some members of the Commission appearing before our committee of inquiry into fraud in the transit procedure , I have to say that more changes will be needed if confidence in this Commission is to be improved as regards financial matters .
With these points in mind , I would congratulate our rapporteur , Mr Wynn , on his clear report on the implementation of the European Development Funds in the 1994 financial year , and in particular on the proposal to refuse to grant discharge to the Commission in this respect .
Through its refusal , Parliament will let it be known that we are no longer prepared to cover for goings-on which deserve to be highlighted , rather than concealed .
It is clear that irregularities , such as that involving the Cultural Foundation , occur in areas where the responsibilities are ill defined .
To put it plainly , it is our wish and our demand that the European Development Fund should become part of the European budget , so as to remove the grounds for mismanagement in this area .
I hope that the new Member States , too , will have some pertinent suggestions .
However , I think that we are also entitled to expect active support from the Commission .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , although the debate is drawing to a close , I should like to express my concern as to whether the political significance of this discharge procedure is properly understood , either by the Members of the House or at the level of the Council and the Member States - and indeed , therefore , by the public .
I think this is extremely questionable .
Indeed , it has to be asked whether the Commission takes the whole business seriously enough , and I would simply remind you of how the debate opened .
Nevertheless , I have to make it quite clear that our impression of cooperation with the Commission , as indeed with the Court of Auditors , has been very good , and leaving aside all the arguments , that is the real basis on which to grant this discharge - quite apart from the fact that postponing discharges will cease to be effective if it is done repeatedly .
I was not made sufficiently aware today of the way in which the Council and the Member States are involved in this whole process .
Almost every speaker referred to the fact that 80 % of the budget is spent in the Member States , but lasting improvement of the way the budget is implemented can only be achieved in conjunction with the Member States , and I believe we must therefore ensure that cooperation with them is improved .
I also think that in many cases , the Commission 's attitude to Member States which step out of line , by failing to observe the conditions , is half-hearted .
In any event , I have no hesitation at all in supporting the proposal to defer or even refuse discharge in the case of CEDEFOP , but this situation cannot go on indefinitely .
I already see reason enough to ask whether we should not be thinking in terms of closure .
Contrary to the view of one of the previous speakers , Mr Kellett-Bowman made it very clear that there is no assurance at all that this centre is performing its functions efficiently .
In conclusion , I should simply like to make a point which I think has been neglected this year - that just as we have been looking at expenditure , we must also consider revenue .
We referred to the fact that this task is being undertaken in the committee of inquiry .
However , the committee reflects only some of the major concerns in this area which we need to discuss .
Madam President , at the outset , I must state that I have particular reservations about Mr Kellett-Bowman 's report on CEDEFOP .
The report refers to minor financial management problems , which lead it to conclude that CEDEFOP 's discharge concerning the financial year 1994 must be postponed .
The proposal to postpone discharge is based on a report by external consultants , which is unclear about the extent to which it refers to the financial year 1994 .
I suspect that other aims and aspirations lie behind this attitude , such as restricting CEDEFOP 's activities and closing it down , as the report indirectly implies .
It is a fact that CEDEFOP is passing through a time of transition because of its move from Berlin to Thessaloniki following the decision taken at the European Council in Brussels , concerning which anyone is entitled to have reservations .
Yet , it was a policy decision that we all ought to respect and support .
So if any delays or irregularities have been observed , efforts should be made to overcome them by supporting CEDEFOP and organizing it more rationally , instead of casting doubt upon the utility of a European institutional body .
The utility of CEDEFOP is enormous at a time when unemployment is one of the European economy 's gravest problems .
Madam President , I think the European Commission has an obligation to make better use of CEDEFOP 's contribution , as the rapporteur himself also said .
Besides , a long-term programme prepared by CEDEFOP has already been prepared , and this must be given serious attention .
Finally , I would like to invite the rapporteur , when he visits Thessaloniki , to assess the situation objectively .
For the present , I call on the rapporteur to delete paragraph 2 of the motion for a resolution , which casts doubt upon CEDEFOP 's utility .
Madam President , I wish to express my sincere thanks to Mr Blak not only for an excellent report but also for drawing our attention yet again to the iniquitous practice of the Conservative Government in misusing and abusing European funds .
It must be said that this is only the tip of the iceberg .
ECU 2.2 million does not seem a lot of money given that the Commission is currently investigating virtually half a billion ecu of ERDF resources that have gone into the privatized utilities of gas , water and telecoms in the UK .
I believe that it is the role of this Commission and of this Council to monitor and control the use of those funds and to take action .
I am afraid it is simply not good enough to say that , for legal reasons , the Commission cannot act to recover taxpayers ' money .
How can it be that we allow President Santer to stand up and call for a confidence pact in employment while at the same time we allow our loans , grants and subsidies to go into privatized utilities and multinational companies for them to line shareholders ' pockets and to put people on the dole ?
It simply will not wash with the public and they will see the hypocrisy of our policies .
Therefore , I ask the Commission and the Council to take action .
Two years ago I tabled parliamentary questions on this matter .
As yet we have had no results on that .
I believe that if the Council and the Commission will not act , it is the job of this House by demanding the establishment of a committee of inquiry into the misuse of funds to prevent the systematic abuse of funds for private gain and profit .
Madam President , I wish to refer to Mr Samland 's report , on which I congratulate him .
I welcome in particular his reference to the TACIS programme and the greater need for commitment to the monitoring of TACIS projects .
There is also a need , as the rapporteur stated , for a better dissemination of the results of the TACIS programme .
TACIS has poured some £ 600 million into the Russian Federation , for example , in the last five years .
Yet does Parliament have a clear idea of where the money has been spent or how effective TACIS has been ?
The answer must be a resounding no !
Increased accountability and transparency must be given top priority , including increased monitoring of programme spending for the newly-independent states of the former Soviet Union .
But this must not be at the expense of swift and efficient implementation .
I hope the Commission will ensure that this spirit of transparency is extended to its investigation of any wrongdoing by Michael Emerson and that Parliament is given a full account of any possible misuse of European funding or the granting of consultancies .
I should like to apologise for the delay at the beginning but we were spending time together with members of the Committee on Budgets and presidency trying to solve the problems of next year 's budgetary procedure .
The debate today and the vote tomorrow bring to a close the review of the financial activities of the Community in 1994 .
The process of external control is a key part of the efforts to improve the effectiveness and the value for money of the Community budgets .
Each step - from the reports of the Court of Auditors to the thorough deliberations of the European Parliament - reinforces the efforts for financial management reform in the Commission and across the Community .
The Committee on Budgetary Control , based on a report by Mr Wynn , recommends giving discharge to the Commission with regard to the general Community budget for 1994 .
Discharge is also proposed concerning the European Coal and Steel Community and the European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions in Dublin , based on the reports of Mr Blak and Mr Kellett-Bowman , respectively .
The Commission welcomes these proposals .
In this context I want to reply to Mr Blak on the question of Bagnoli , Italy .
The subsidy was fully paid back by the end of the last year .
The discharge for the CEDEFOP is postponed .
The Commission will work with the rapporteur , Mr Kellett-Bowman , to clarify the outstanding issues .
Finally , with regard to the European Development Fund , based on a report by Mr Wynn , it is proposed to reject the discharge .
I will return to this question in a moment .
The particularity of the 1994 discharge procedure is that it has to evaluate the results of a new instrument introduced by the Maastricht Treaty , the ' Statement of Assurance ( DAS ) ' .
The results of the first DAS demonstrate that the examination of individual operations , from the Commission down to the final recipient , provides valuable new information on the functioning of the financial management of the Commission and the Member States .
At the same time , the necessity to come to general conclusions on the basis of a small sample poses difficult methodological questions .
There is also the difficulty of explaining the meaning of the results to a broader public .
As has already been said today , the headlines of : ' billion ecu fraud and waste ' - unfounded as they were - show the difficulty of a broader public to comprehend this instrument .
It is therefore particularly valuable that the comprehensive and balanced assessment of the first DAS by Mr Wynn will establish a reference for future exercises .
I want to congratulate the Commission and Mr Wynn for their excellent work .
I especially want to refer to the explanatory note because it is conceptually a very difficult issue and it is very clearly explained in the note .
This might even prove to be a useful reference for the Commission in the future .
The Commission will continue to work with the Court of Auditors and outside experts to improve the methodology of DAS .
The main consequences to be drawn from the first DAS are twofold .
Firstly , all efforts will continue to eliminate sources of errors identified in DAS .
The errors attributed to the Commission - mainly formal - have been addressed as part of the first two stages of the Sound and Efficient Management programme ( SEM 2000 ) .
The errors attributed to the Member States - often substantial - will be addressed in the third stage of the exercise .
This stage has been launched .
The first meeting of the group of personal representatives of the Ministers of Finance of 7 March 1996 was fruitful .
A work programme was agreed .
It covers topics from the preparation of the budget to financial control .
The first items discussed in some depth included the question of eligibility of structural funds expenditure and the possibility of reinforced sanctions .
These questions are identified by the 1994 discharge report as the key question for the structural funds .
As Mr Samland said in his report , this is a key issue .
We hope that in the working group we are going to find a solution .
The discussions in the group of personal representatives confirmed expectations that progress on the questions will be difficult .
A number of Member States took a view opposite to the approach of the Court of Auditors and the European Parliament .
There is , in fact , a built-in contradiction between , on the one hand , ambitious quality objectives and , on the other hand , the political commitment to ' spend it all ' by 1999 .
The European Council of Madrid has given a strong impetus to increasing quality of spending and examining the possibility of new sanctions .
But the basic contradiction remains .
Secondly , the recovery of those individual payments where the Court of Auditors finds serious errors , needs to become more systematic and more transparent , as asked in the 1994 discharge report , and as was repeated by Mr Wynn a while ago .
The Commission will therefore - from now on - provide a report on the follow-up of each serious payment error .
This report will be made available jointly with the annual financial accounts .
Furthermore , the claims forecasts ( or prévisions de créances ) will from now on be established by sector .
The amounts will be estimated by the Commission services concerned regardless of the source of information which establishes an irregularity .
The recovery will then be pursued according to the sectional procedures in place .
In different sectors we have different procedures .
As far as internal policies are concerned , the 1994 discharge report expresses serious doubts on the transparency of procedures with regard to direct financing and subsidies .
There is little evidence to support this view in the report of the Court of Auditors .
In fact , it should be noted that both LIFE and research expenditure have their specific , detailed rules assuring transparency with regard to project selection and programme evaluation .
Publication in the Official Journal is mandatory .
Tourism activities have been thoroughly evaluated .
The results will be transmitted to Parliament in a few weeks ' time .
I highly recommend reading this report as an informative approach to the evaluation methodology in which I strongly believe for the future .
The Commission will work with Parliament on any useful improvement .
Instead of another horizontal report covering all of category 3 , it would however be more effective to focus on individual programmes through ex ante and ex post evaluations for each programme concerned .
Let me turn then to the European Development Fund .
The Committee on Budgetary Control proposes not to discharge the Commission .
This proposal is not primarily based on bad management by the Commission .
In fact Mr Wynn 's report recognizes the Commission 's attempts to improve EDF financial management although it criticizes the financial management of the ACP Cultural Foundation .
Instead the main reason is the non-budgetization of the EDF .
The Commission regrets this proposal .
For its part it will continue its best efforts to improve the administration of the EDF .
The management mistakes made with regard to the Cultural Foundation are recognized but consequences have been drawn from this experience and the Foundation has been shut down .
It should also be borne in mind that the amounts involved were quite small .
Furthermore , the Commission has always shared the criticism of Parliament concerning the legal and financial framework of the EDF .
The Commission will continue to press for budgetization of the EDF .
But to refuse discharge until the EDF is budgetized , while being understandable and consistent , may mean that until such a time Parliament 's voice will not exist with regard to the EDF implementation .
Finally , as you are certainly aware , there are those in the Commission dealing with development policy who fear that the refusal of discharge may make development policy more difficult in future .
Let me conclude with two replies to Mrs Kjer Hansen and Mr Cornelissen , whom I also want to thank for their excellent reports .
Mrs Kjer Hansen talked about the resources in the clearance of accounts .
We have known the needs there , but I want to say that the Commission has already taken a decision for the 1997 budget that we will not ask new resources outside the enlargement budget .
So we will do all we can within the redeployment and the enlargement budgets .
Mr Cornelissen had a number of questions here .
First of all , concerning the recovery of the funds for exceeding the milk quotas , we are recovering the funds in four years which means in four equal tranches .
In 1995 we have already received ECU 450m ; ECU 450m has been decided for this year and budgetized and two other tranches will be recovered in 1997 and 1998 .
As far as tobacco fraud is concerned , investigations and legal proceedings continue .
The Commission will keep Parliament informed of any new developments .
As to the buy-back scheme of milk quotas , the legal base has in the meantime been adopted and the Commission considers this matter closed .
On the Spanish milk quota in 1989 the Commission does not have a legal base to change the decision .
This is also the position of the Court of Justice .
Finally , on the Dutch calves I will transmit that question to Commissioner Fischler .
My expertise is not sufficient for that .
There was also a question on the ECSC loans to British Coal .
We discussed this matter also a year ago .
I am sorry to say this but , according to the opinion of the legal service , there is no legal base for the Commission to recover these subsidies on the grounds that British Coal was subsequently closed .
Finally , I want to extend thanks to Mrs Theato , the chairman of the Committee on Budgetary Control for these exceptionally thorough and productive discharge procedures for 1994 .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , would you like to speak ?
Madam President , a very brief comment concerning the European Development Fund .
I would point out that the Fund is financed via direct contributions from the Member States and not with appropriations from the Community budget .
That being so , discharge of the Fund budget was not mentioned in today 's speech by the presidency .
Madam President , we must correct that statement if it is going to be in the record .
What came through in English was that Parliament plays no part in discharge of the EDF .
That is the whole point .
We play a part in that and in nothing else .
I must say to the President-in-Office that I saw him struggle before - this is not a personal condemnation - in the trialogue meeting and with the type of answer he has given now he is not being given the best advice on something Parliament takes extremely seriously .
Madam President , there is a very serious conflict here between the Commission and Council that we need to clarify .
The Commission has alleged that unless we grant the discharge concerning the European Development Funds , it may make their work more difficult .
This was followed by a statement from the Council informing us that we do not have any responsibility whatsoever to discharge the EDF .
Could they get their act together and tell us what the situation is ?
Madam President , I am grateful to the Council for the information it has just given us , but I would appreciate it if the accuracy of that information could be checked again .
As far as I am aware , it is not accurate .
There is definitely a recommendation from the Council as regards the Development Fund .
I would therefore ask for this point to be checked again .
Madam President , on this point I fully support what Mrs Theato has just said .
I should simply like to make the point , at the end of this debate , that there has been frequent mention of the respective presence of the institutions during the procedure .
I believe it would be useful to remind the rapporteurs who , pursuant to Rule 145 , submit their reports on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , that when they accept reports they must be present throughout the debates .
Commissioner Liikanen was present to reply to the rapporteurs but four of the eight rapporteurs were absent .
We will take note of this .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon on Wednesday .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is Question Time to the Commission ( B4-0431 / 96 ) .
The removal of controls on goods and baggage at internal frontiers does not flow from the Schengen Agreement .
For example , as far as controls on baggage are concerned , Article 124 of the Schengen Agreement , signed in June 1990 , merely provides that : ' the number and frequency of checks on goods during movements of travellers at internal borders shall be reduced to the lowest level possible .
Further reductions in and the final abolition of such checks will depend on the gradual increase of travellers ' exemptions and on future developments in the rules applicable to travellers crossing borders ' .
It is , in particular , the Community instruments , adopted to complete the internal market , that guarantee the removal of controls on goods and baggage at internal frontiers .
As far as controls on baggage are concerned , Article 1 of Regulation No 3925 / 91 provides that the removal of controls on baggage at internal frontiers is to apply , except for those checks linked to prohibitions or restrictions laid down by the Member States , provided they are compatible with the three Treaties establishing the European Communities .
I posed this question because the opponents of cooperation under Schengen always maintain that accession to Schengen will make it more difficult to catch criminal gangs .
I maintain , however , and I would very much like to hear the Commissioner 's views on this , that traditional border controls are antiquated because they are very easy for criminal gangs to get through and it is therefore out of date to deploy police along borders ; instead , we should have international co-operation to combat crime .
I would very much like to have your confirmation that accession to Schengen co-operation in no way prevents the Italian , French and Danish police from stopping , examining and searching cars etc . , and undertaking all the investigations necessary to catch drug traffickers and money-launderers , and put a stop to trade in human beings etc .
I would earnestly request you to confirm this .
As the honourable Member is aware , the Commission is taking part in the meetings of the Schengen Executive Committee as an observer .
At this time , in this first year of application of the Schengen accords , it has been observed that their application has , in point of fact , increased the opportunities for control in relation to all issues that threaten the security of citizens .
The application of the Schengen agreement has therefore stimulated cooperation in the field of activities of prevention and control applied by the competent authorities of the various Member States .
I therefore believe that the response - of particular interest to those countries which are considering acceding to Schengen in the future - may be encouraging .
Mr President , I should like to take up the issue raised by Mr Haarder 's question .
At present the situation is that these controls are conducted on the basis of spot checks without the national customs authorities in Denmark and Sweden having to have any suspicions of criminal behaviour .
Does the Commissioner consider that such spot checks , not based on any suspicion of criminal behaviour , are compatible with the Schengen Agreement ?
It is sufficient that are not carried out automatically because the frontier is being crossed .
Controls are in any case possible far from frontier zones and , on occasion , even at the frontier , but they have to be based on the assumption that the frontier has been crossed .
Mr President , this surprises me a little as we have been told that it will no longer be allowed for Sweden to carry out spot checks of the kind carried out before we acceded to the European Union .
This question is therefore extremely important .
Is it so that we are entitled to carry out spot checks at present and will there be any change for the worse , that is to say , will it become still more difficult to carry out such checks under the Schengen Agreement ?
Some change is surely bound to happen in connection with the Schengen Agreement ?
It is right to point out that the Member States retain the power to carry out checks at any point in their national territory , provided that those checks are justified , in particular in accordance with Article 36 of the EC Treaty , are proportionate and are not discriminatory .
Article 7a of the Treaty on European Union lays down a clear objective that allows for no margin of discretion , but the abolition of checks at the internal frontiers of the Union does not deprive the competent authorities of the power to take measures throughout their territory and , consequently , at frontiers also .
However , given that the crossing of internal frontiers can no longer form the basis for carrying out checks , the exercise of that power must form part of a system of controls covering the territory as a whole .
Any power to carry out checks that is able to exercised solely where or because an internal frontier has been crossed would therefore be incompatible with Article 7a .
As the author is not present , Question No 19 lapses .
I apologize to Commissioner Flynn and to Mr McMahon who rushed to the Chamber for this question .
Question No 20 by Brian Crowley ( H-0240 / 96 )
Subject : Duty-free shopping
Duty-free shopping at airports , on airlines and on car ferries is a voluntary activity on the part of travellers , the profits from which contribute significantly towards the viability of many airports , air and ferry routes .
In addition , the products sold in duty-free outlets throughout the world are dominated by brand names from European Union companies whose competitiveness is assisted by duty-free sales during international travel within the European Union .
In these circumstances , and bearing in mind that a common VAT system for the European Union has not been achieved as yet , has the Commission undertaken any examination into the feasibility of extending duty-free sales on international EU routes beyond the deadline of 1 July 1999 and , if not , will it now do so ?
Duty-free sales to intra-Community travellers , at airports and ports and on aeroplanes and ships , have been authorized by the Council , as you will be aware , until 30 June 1999 in order to find a solution both to the social repercussions on the sectors concerned and the regional problems , especially in frontier regions , which could develop as a result of the abolition of import duties and the remission of tax on exports in trade between the Member States . That is the thirteenth recital of Directive 91 / 680 .
The Commission wishes to make it quite clear that in considering the issue of duty-free sales it has to be borne in mind that refraining from collecting taxes in specific sectors is in fact tantamount to granting aid .
It will therefore be difficult for the Commission to consider extending the facilities for duty-free shops , as these are arrangements incompatible with the principles of the internal market .
I would point out , by the way , that no Member State allows that type of facility inside its own fiscal territory , given that arrangements of that nature can lead distortion of competition between , on the one hand , sales outlets exempted from tax and those liable for it and , on the other , the various means of transport .
I thank the Commissioner for his response .
However , he is somewhat misguided in what he has said .
Indeed he is throwing a very unusual veil of secrecy over what is going on .
He said that the duty-free mechanism is contrary to the internal market .
Yet one of the major points of any internal market should be the harmonization of VAT and excise duty ratings .
That is not happening .
There is no sign of it happening in the near future .
What is being proposed here by the abolition of the duty-free regulations is a huge loss in employment across the 15 Member States as well as a huge drop in the attraction to travellers of services that they are free to choose for themselves ; and if they go outside the EU they can get these services .
I would call on the Commission here and now to postpone implementation of this decision until such time as we have the other essential sectors of the internal market in place , namely the harmonization of excise and VAT regimes .
I will try to be brief although the matter is not particularly simple .
Duty and tax-free sales to intra-Community travellers at airports , on aircraft or on ferries have been authorized by the Council until 30 June 1999 .
On the point now raised by you , namely the link to other aspects of the internal market , let me say without prejudice to the future definitive VAT regime , the freedom to purchase tax-paid goods anywhere in the Community has been one of the fundamental acquis of the internal market since 1 January 1993 .
It should therefore no longer suffer distortions of competition from tax-free sales after the 30 June 1999 deadline , which is the end of the period of adaptation .
So the relevant event which logically produces the necessity for an end to the dutyfree system is not the future definitive VAT regime but is something which has already been substantially in place since 1 January 1993 .
I should like to thank the Commissioner for the observations he has made .
My own view is that it is a complex matter , as he has said .
It is probably too complex to deal with in this manner .
The Commissioner has suggested that duty-free shopping , were it to continue beyond the deadline set by the Council , would offend the principles of the internal market ; but it does not necessarily offend against the Treaty .
The Treaty provides in Article 99 for harmonization necessary to ensure the establishment and functioning of the market .
I do not know that the case has yet been well established that the scale of alleged distortion is in some way a significant problem or impediment to the functioning of the internal market .
I should like to ask the Commissioner one question .
On 20 November 1990 in a debate on the VAT system in relation to the Fuchs report your predecessor promised the House a full Commission study on the implications of abolishing duty-free sales prior to the date in question .
Is the present Commission prepared to carry out that commitment which has never been discharged and which would allow us to deal with this matter which , as you have clearly suggested , is complex and cannot be dealt with in this manner ?
Mr President , Mr Cox has touched upon what I actually want to ask about , but allow me also to call to mind the problem which arises on major routes , for example between Stockholm and Helsinki , where one third of gross profits actually derives from the sale of duty free goods .
That is the way it is in many places in Europe .
A different transport pattern is produced when duty free sales are done away with in this manner .
Finally , I have a question which does not need to be answered , because I realise that it is complex .
We might well ask what duty free sales actually mean : do they distort competition when all the Member States take part ?
Strictly speaking , they do not .
The last thing which I should perhaps mention is , that as this report is delayed in the Commission , it indicates that the actual complexity of the matter just cannot be described in a report .
There are transport , social and regional conditions to be considered .
I hope , however , that we will be able to find a solution together .
The point about transparency is a relevant one .
It is true that the present duty-free system contributes to the financial resources of airports , ferries and so on .
That is what I have said from the beginning in saying that the present duty-free system contains an element of aid .
If airports , air transport , ferries etc. need to be aided , I am sure you would all agree that different and more transparent economic methods need to be considered , rather than a continuation of this non-transparent method of fiscal expenditure .
Question No 21 by Wayne David ( H-0229 / 96 )
Subject : VAT claims
What are the procedures involved in claiming back VAT on goods and services purchased across the European continent by long-distance lorry drivers ?
As regards the VAT forms , is it true that lorry drivers have to complete forms in different formats and the language of the Member State where the goods and services were purchased to be able to claim back VAT , or is it the case that forms in the native language of the driver can be used ?
The Eighth VAT Directive on the refund of VAT to taxable persons established in a Member State other than the Member State making the refund , provides for a standard form for the submission of applications for refunds and an explanatory note which the Member States have make available to those making such applications .
The applicant has the right to use the pre-stamped form in any of the official languages of the European Union , whereas the form itself must be completed in the language of the country making the refund .
Although the Commission is aware of the practical problems that these procedures may create for operators , it is not , unfortunately , possible to remedy them in the context of the current VAT arrangements .
Problems of that nature will , however , come to an end when we move on to the definitive VAT regime , based on the principle of taxation in the country of origin .
In fact , the place of taxation will at the same time determine the place at which the tax is deducted .
The tax will be deducted overall , by being charged to the amount of tax owed , regardless of the place at which the tax to be deducted has been paid .
And so , the whole of the detailed procedure provided for under the Eighth Directive is destined to become obsolete .
I thank the Commissioner for his full and comprehensive reply and I take on board the point that he makes at the end that this is essentially an interim problem and once the new arrangements are in force the problem will disappear .
But , given that there is this interim problem and given that enormous difficulties are being caused at the moment , are there no measures at all that the Commission can introduce so that the procedure is made much more straightforward and efficient , albeit in the interim ?
The Commission has indeed considered whether , under the present regime , there is any way of eliminating the inconvenience which I acknowledged is there .
I am afraid we have not been able so far to identify any such possibility .
International removal companies are experiencing very similar problems with VAT to those of lorry drivers .
Can you confirm which country should levy VAT on removals - the country being moved out of or the country being moved into - and can some clear guidance be given to the companies concerned ?
This is a relevant but slightly different problem , because it does not have to do with forms and languages in which to fill them in , but has to do with another , even more fundamental weakness of the present transitional VAT system , which will be solved only once the definitive system based on the principle of origin is in place .
Question No 22 by Per Gahrton ( H-0256 / 96 )
Subject : Europol
It is clear following Parliament 's consideration of the Nassauer report that a majority of Members would like to see Europol develop into both operational cooperation among police forces and a common EU police force .
Commissioner Gradin previously stressed that Europol was to take the form of cooperation between police authorities , not between police forces .
She rejected the notion of an ' EU FBI ' .
Cooperation already takes place among police authorities in Interpol .
Will the Commissioner specify what she personally believes Europol can and should do that Interpol or its European division is not already dealing with or could deal with ?
Under the Treaty on European Union police cooperation is an issue of common interest .
This is perfectly obvious from both Title VI of the Treaty and the declaration on police cooperation .
Some of this cooperation will be achieved through the development of a Union-wide system for information exchange within a European police office , known as Europol .
The aim of Europol is to improve the opportunities for the competent authorities in the Member States to fight serious forms of international organised crime within the European Union .
In accordance with the Convention there will be close cooperation with Interpol .
The Council will establish provisions formalising this cooperation and ensure that the various functions complement one another .
Thank you for that answer but I do not believe it was a proper answer to my question as to what Europol will do that Interpol is not already doing .
I have studied carefully a German thesis entitled ' Grenzenlose Polizei ' , which quotes a British Interpol official as saying that Interpol has global responsibility , which is an advantage over Europol , and the former head of the Bundeskriminalamt , who says that Europol is an organisation which will dissipate energies and operate in parallel and in competition with Interpol .
Swedish police chiefs have also expressed public criticism , including the former National Head of Police , who is also a former President of Interpol , who asked more or less the same question .
I would therefore repeat the question : what is Europol expected to do in practical terms which Interpol does not already do or could do ?
If no answer is forthcoming to this question it is clearly an organisation set up to compete with Interpol , in which case one might well ask whether it is necessary at all .
I do not see Europol as an institution which will dissipate energies - on the contrary .
Europol is needed so that information can be analysed within the European Union to enable us better to investigate the crime which occurs .
I do not agree with Mr Gahrton that the former Swedish National Head of Police is particularly concerned that there may be some overlap between Interpol and Europol .
In fact , I recently visited Lyon with Björn Eriksson , where we talked about how Europol and Interpol should cooperate and how this relationship might be formalised .
This cannot be done before the Europol Convention is ratified by the fifteen Member States , however .
I should like to ask the Commissioner , if indeed we were to move along the lines Parliament approved in the Nassauer report - which I think is premature - whether the Commission has given any thought to advising the Council on how such an enhanced and semi-autonomous Europol would be politically accountable - which is essential - and how any complaints against the operations of Europol could be dealt with , as we would expect complaints to be dealt with by individual police forces in our own countries ?
Incidentally , I wish to say to Mr Gahrton that if he visits Europol , they will explain to him the difference between their role and that of Interpol , and he will find that it is quite different and very distinctive .
The question raised by the honourable Member is a very important one , namely how complaints can be made about Europol operations .
Bearing in mind how important it is that the Court should be involved and act as a complement to the Commission , this is particularly significant .
This is why I , and many others , hope that the UK will at last be able to accept the Court 's playing a role in the Europol Convention .
Question No 23 by Eva Kjer Hansen ( H-0274 / 96 )
Subject : Fraud against Community resources
On various occasions , the most recent at the hearing of the Committee of Inquiry , the Commission has stated that the most effective way of getting to grips with fraud would be to introduce a common system of sanctions .
What instruments does the Commission believe would give the Community the practical means required to impose such sanctions and does the Commission have the political power to introduce them ?
The Commission uses all appropriate means in its fight against fraud which damages the Community 's economic interests .
The most recent programme of work to combat fraud indicates clearly where the priorities lie .
There are four main points .
The first concerns an increased presence in the field .
The second is to strengthen cooperation between the Commission and the Member States , inter alia by establishing cooperation agreements and holding seminars and courses on the application of statutory provisions , including criminal law provisions .
The third main point concerns improving Community legislation .
The fourth point deals with the need for greater harmonisation of the Member States ' national legislation .
The Commission has looked at the issue of sanctions as part of both point 3 and point 4 .
In this context it is important to distinguish between administrative sanctions and penalties under the criminal law .
I should first like to discuss administrative sanctions . In December 1995 Council Regulation 2988 / 95 was adopted .
It was based on Article 235 of the Treaty of Rome and Article 203 of the Euratom Treaty .
The Regulation contains general rules governing the administrative sanctions which should be applied in the event of irregularities .
All areas of Community expenditure are covered , as are own resources .
As you know , sanctions have already been introduced in certain areas , such as agriculture .
The Member States have submitted reports on national measures to combat the waste and mismanagement of Community resources .
On the basis of the reports the Commission has conducted a comparative analysis , which is in turn to serve as the basis for a study on the possibility of extending administrative sanctions to other areas , such as the Structural Funds .
This is also what the Council of Ministers asked for .
I will now turn to criminal sanctions .
The convention on the protection of the Community 's financial interests was signed in July 1995 .
It thus awaits ratification by the parliaments of all fifteen Member States and I truly hope that this will be achieved as soon as possible .
The convention lays down that fraud is a criminal offence .
It covers both Community resources obtained on false grounds and the withholding of own resources .
A number of additional protocols to the convention are planned , one of which concerns the issue of corruption .
The question of sanctions is also dealt with .
Another protocol will deal with the responsibilities of legal persons under the criminal law , such as increased cooperation on legal issues .
Within the framework of the current Intergovernmental Conference the Commission has also proposed that the battle against fraud should be incorporated in the first pillar .
I would like to express my thanks for the reply and for the summing up of the contents of the work programme and the provisions already adopted .
However , I would like to ask the Commissioner to confirm that it is an untenable position for us not to have common sanctions in all areas .
The Commissioner has touched on some of the areas where some initiatives have been taken , but it still remains extremely limited .
And what use is there in adopting some common rules to apply in the EU , if there are no common control systems to ensure that the rules are observed , or common sanctions for contraventions ?
If there are no such provisions , then there will always be a difference , and that means that there will be those who can get off lightly by circumventing the common rules .
I would therefore ask the Commissioner to confirm that what we are trying to achieve is a common system of sanctions in all areas .
May I also ask a question regarding the system of sanctions in relation to the Member States ?
The situation is that where the Member States ' do not implement rules laid down in law , the Commission is able to impose sanctions on them in the form of fines .
We have not yet seen a single example of this option being used .
Will the Commissioner also make use of sanctions against Member States in future ?
Of course we shall do our best to exercise control in all areas .
However , the honourable Member knows as well as I do that it is in fact an enormous step forward that we have obtained the convention to protect our common resources .
We can only go on with additional protocols and so on , in order to arrive at common forms of cooperation , once the convention has been ratified by all the parliaments .
We are discussing the question of sanctions in SEM 2000 , which means that we have now entered into cooperation and dialogue with the Member States in order , inter alia , to find appropriate forms for sanctions such as those in respect of the Structural Funds .
A brief follow-up question : 70-80 % of EU resources are used within the individual Member States .
I very recently saw in my own country , Sweden , that it had been suggested there that a special national body should be set up to deal with fraud involving EU funds .
I consider this to be a good initiative because it would also make it easier to press on in the individual Member States without perhaps having to resort to common , possibly even supranational , sanctions .
My question is as follows . Will Commissioner Gradin do her best to ensure that similar national bodies are established in other Member States in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity ?
It is correct that 80 % of EU resources are disbursed to Member States .
I have also seen that Sweden is thinking of appointing a delegation to check that resources are being used in the correct manner .
We are conducting a dialogue with all fifteen Member States concerning which system would suit each individual country and that system is then laid down in an agreement .
As things stand we have six agreements and are continuing efforts to find solutions .
In this connection it is those countries with a federal system which present the stumbling block .
Commissioner , do you not think that the greatest problem as regards corruption in the European Union lies in the fact that the individual Member States frequently go to some lengths to deny the Commission the resources it needs to exercise effective control over the various operations ?
Unfortunately it is probably not the case that corruption is the biggest problem , but rather the trend that I have discerned in recent years that it is above all organised crime which is growing and is behind fraud cases .
This is an extremely serious problem .
As the author is not present , Question No 24 lapses .
Question No 25 by Maj Theorin ( H-0254 / 96 )
Subject : Extension of the common foreign and security policy to common defence
In its Opinion on the holding of an Intergovernmental Conference ( COM ( 96 ) 90 final ) the Commission believed ' that a proper common foreign and security policy has to extend to common defence .
The Commission therefore calls on the Conference to allow the Union to review the role of the Western European Union with a view to incorporating it into the Union according to a settled timetable ' .
What does the Commission consider to be the implications under international law of thus extending the common foreign and security policy for those Member States of the Union which are neutral and militarily non-aligned ?
Will they have to leave the EU ?
If in individual cases Member States are to be allowed to play no part in military missions , will they still be obliged to make a financial contribution to them ?
Mr President , in reply to Mrs Theorin 's question , I should like to point out that the Commission 's opinion was drawn up for the Intergovernmental Conference and that it constitutes a formal part of the procedure laid down in the Maastricht Treaty .
I therefore find it rather difficult for the Commission itself to give further information on this opinion outside the IGC .
I would point out to the honourable Member that all the Member States have already agreed that the common foreign and security policy ' shall include all questions related to the security of the Union , including the eventual framing of a common defence policy , which might in time lead to a common defence ' , in Article J.4 of the Treaty on European Union .
The Commission opinion in question must certainly not be interpreted as implying that any Member States will have to leave the Union .
All the individual aspects of the Member States ' obligations will , of course , be dealt with in detail at the IGC .
Since the Commission now in any event insists in its document for the Intergovernmental Conference that the common foreign and security policy should include a common defence , it surely must have considered the consequences , particularly the consequences for EU Member States which are neutral and militarily non-aligned .
My question concerns how the Commission envisages the integration of the WEU in the EU when it is a fact that several Member States do not want to be full members of the WEU , nor to participate in a common defence .
It is also a fact that the WEU comprises member states , 27 of them , the status of which varies as regards their role in the WEU .
This naturally gives rise to considerable ambiguity and uncertainty as regards the obligations the countries have vis-à-vis one another .
Is the integration of the WEU in the EU possible given the large number of countries with different security arrangements which are members of the WEU and would the forthcoming enlargement of the EU to include countries in Eastern and Central Europe not be complicated by such integration ?
Would new EU Member States perhaps not also have to be covered by the WEU mutual security guarantees , and what consequences would that have for the EU 's relations with Russia ?
These are all relevant and important questions in the debate on security cooperation in the European Union and its implications for defence .
The opinion which the Commission produced for the Intergovernmental Conference simply puts forward a number of specific recommendations and alternatives in this field , and I find it rather difficult to anticipate the results of the negotiations which began at the summit in Turin at the end of March .
But let me give the honourable Member one example of how we can overcome the difficulties that she has identified .
You know that the IGC is also to have detailed discussions on the decisionmaking process in matters of foreign and security policy .
A very important question , for example , is whether or not we should abandon the right of veto which currently applies .
One thing which has already become clear from the preparatory talks is that there is not one Member State , nor indeed the Commission , for that matter , which is in favour of deciding by a majority on whether the Union should take part in military action , if it has the capacity to do so on its own or through the Western European Union , and everyone agrees that it should always be up to each Member State to decide individually and independently whether it wishes to take part in particular military activities .
However , it also appeared from various opinions expressed during the preliminary discussions that the Member States might agree that while a majority of Member States cannot force a minority to take part in military action , at the same time a minority cannot prevent a majority from doing so .
Let me give you a hypothetical example , which is certain to be discussed in the negotiations at the IGC .
I am absolutely convinced that even the countries which currently pursue a policy of neutrality - which they do not all interpret in exactly the same way , in any case - will also be prepared to carry out ' Petersburg duties ' at some point , such as by using troops for peacekeeping or humanitarian missions .
This is just a hypothetical example , in the sense that nothing has been decided yet .
I cannot say any more at the moment without pre-empting the outcome of negotiations at the IGC .
Mr President , I should like to begin by abusing the privilege of the microphone to congratulate the Commissioner on the success of the donors ' conference on Saturday .
I know he put a lot of personal work into it .
I have two questions .
Firstly , it has been suggested that the way around this particular problem would be to suspend Article 5 of the WEU Treaty and therefore perhaps make it easier to integrate neutral states into a future defence union .
What is the Commissioner 's view on whether that is a feasible possibility - to suspend Article 5 ?
Secondly , the Commissioner quoted Article J.4 , the wording of which is engraved on my heart .
It talks about the eventual framing of a common defence policy which may , in time , lead to a common defence .
Therefore it is a long-term objective .
Does he not agree with me that a premature movement towards integrating defence into the competence of the European Union would make it harder , not easier , to enlarge to Central and Eastern Europe , as it will be perceived at the moment as a threat to Russia ?
I should like to take this opportunity to express my thanks to Mr Titley .
I saw him at the Conference for Yugoslavia , and we are all grateful for the fact that the international community has in any event accepted its responsibility to help fund the reconstruction and rehabilitation of Bosnia .

Turning to the first of Mr Titley 's questions , the Commission has not expressed an opinion about Article 5 or how it relates to the obligation to provide mutual assistance under the North Atlantic Treaty .
So I really cannot say whether this would be an answer to the problem .
I also wonder whether it would be easy to reach agreement on releasing countries from their obligation to provide mutual assistance in this way .
It very much depends on the answer to Mr Titley 's second question as to how far we wish to go in carrying out the provisions of the Maastricht Treaty by trying to frame a common defence policy which may , as he rightly quotes , lead to a common defence .
Mr Titley links this issue with the discussions on the expansion of NATO , which we know are causing some concern in the Russian Federation at present , but I am not sure that we can really draw this parallel .
My impression is that Russia has given no sign up to now of having any misgivings about the enlargement of the European Union to include applicant countries from Central and Eastern Europe , although it is always possible that their lack of alarm has something to do with the fact that the European Union 's security policy is still very much in its infancy .
The Maastricht Treaty in 1992 finally got to grips with the security issue and said that all problems relating to the security of the Union should be a matter of Union policy , but it actually says very little about the instruments to be used in pursuing this policy .
We are currently in the middle of discussions on what we are going to do as regards the Union 's defence policy , a subject which I hope will be given serious consideration at the Intergovernmental Conference .
Is this policy going to come under the Western European Union ? Is the Western European Union going to be incorporated into the European Union ?
This is what the Commission has recommended in its opinion , and the question now is what the relationship will be between the European Union 's defence capacity and NATO 's defence capacity .
I hope that this is a subject we shall be able to return to on other occasions at Question Time .
I should like to thank the Commissioner for his reply .
I should also like to talk about the Commission 's views on the Intergovernmental Conference .
Let us imagine that it will be as the Commission wishes , that foreign policy will be decided by qualified majority voting and that the WEU will be integrated in the European Union .
Let us then imagine a situation in which the Union is drawn into an armed conflict and the non-aligned countries choose not to send troops as you described .
Assume that these nonaligned countries will also choose to declare themselves neutral in the conflict in which the Union is involved , with the obligations under international law which such neutrality implies - this might concern trade policy and other areas .
Do you consider that neutrality in the strictest sense is possible for a nonaligned country which is a member of the European Union ?
First of all , the Commission 's opinion specifically excludes decisions on military involvement from the scope of the qualified majority , and it recommends special rules to cover such cases .
I myself much prefer to try to reach agreement on security issues using the formula that I mentioned earlier : the majority cannot force the hand of the minority if there are clear military implications involved , but the minority cannot prevent the majority from taking whatever action they wish .
One final comment on the issue of majority voting versus the veto .
To those in the Member States - and there are still quite a few - who would prefer to retain the right of veto in matters of foreign and security policy , I would point out that one of the reasons why the Commission is calling for majority voting instead is that we cannot see how the European Union can have any kind of foreign policy if there is still a right of veto when it has 25 members , as it soon will . We are also aware that dropping the right of veto does not necessarily imply that there will always have to be a vote whenever foreign policy is on the agenda .
It is more likely to narrow differences , and the knowledge that no single Member State or group of Member States can block decisions will probably encourage people to reach a consensus . We have already seen this in other fields where there is majority decision-making : instead of taking a vote , people try to use the art of persuasion , and those with opposing views always tend to be more flexible , because they know that if it comes to a vote it will still be the majority that wins .
Question No 26 by Birgitta Ahlqvist ( H-0259 / 96 ) , which has been taken over by Mrs Theorin
Subject : EU and Belarus
The development of democracy in Belarus must be closely monitored .
The Constitution confers considerable powers on the President at the same time as the parliament has a great many vacant seats because of the election laws .
Allegations of election rigging have been made .
The European Parliament has protested ( 12.10.1995 ) against the authorities ' conduct during a strike in Minsk in August 1995 .
The EU has now concluded an interim agreement with a view to a partnership agreement with Belarus .
It has been announced that Belarus and Russia will form a union on 2 April .
What form this union will take has not yet been explained but the opposition in Belarus have protested strongly against the proposal .
Has the Commission investigated whether genuine freedom of the press and association exist in Belarus ?
Is the Commission listening to the criticism by the opposition in Belarus of the country 's curtailment of democratic freedoms and rights ?
The Commission thought very carefully before finally submitting the interim agreement to the Council for signature , after the earlier postponement because of the situation in Belarus .
We believe that Belarus took a major step forward in 1995 when , despite its rather rigid electoral laws , it finally managed to elect a new parliament .
Although not all the seats were filled , the number of elected members ensured that there was at least the quorum needed to enable the parliament to operate normally , which has to be seen as a move in the direction of democratic reform , though I am being very careful in what I say here .
The people of Belarus have shown that they want a democratically elected parliament , and President Lukaschenko finally accepted the result and offered the parliament his personal cooperation and that of his government .
Regarding the voting procedures , international observers present during the elections , including representatives of your own and of other Member States of the European Union , concluded that the electoral laws and procedures were generally properly observed , despite the fact that a few minor but unfortunate irregularities had taken place .
The main criticism once again concerned limitations on the freedom of the press during the election campaign .
The Commission agrees with Parliament 's analysis of the situation in Belarus and shares its concern about the human rights situation , such as the freedom of the media , as I just mentioned , and also the right of association , particularly for trade unions .
I expressed our concern on 25 March to the Prime Minister of Belarus during his visit to Brussels , and also during my visit to Minsk at the beginning of November 1995 , when I talked to the President 's right-hand man , Mr Myashnikovitch .
The Commission will certainly continue to monitor the human rights situation in Belarus very carefully , particularly the freedom of association of the trade unions and the freedom of the media , and our findings will be taken into account in the ongoing review of bilateral cooperation between the Union and Belarus .
I would also inform the House that it was difficult for the Commission to decide whether to go through with the signing of the interim agreement at that particular time for the reasons I have just mentioned , and also because we basically agree with Parliament 's analysis of the situation .
But we had to choose either to prolong the delay and push Belarus further into isolation , or else to try to use the interim agreement as a vehicle for ongoing dialogue with Belarus .
As you know , Belarus has been making strong overtures to the Russian Federation , and has concluded a number of agreements with it which appear very much designed to promote further integration between the two .
Belarus was also the country which had the most developed form of integration with the Russian Federation under the old Soviet system , and without wishing to imply that we are trying to compete with the Russian Federation for preferential relations with Belarus , I think it was a good idea to show Belarus that the European Union can offer political and economic advantages which complement its relations with the Russian Federation .
We also know that the ratification of the partnership agreement is now before Parliament .
This is a broader agreement than the interim agreement recently signed by the Council and the Commission , and the House will certainly be reaching its own conclusions on it .
I hope that I can have further discussions with Parliament 's Committee on Foreign Affairs , and perhaps the Committee on External Economic Relations , in order to take another careful look at what is happening in Belarus , and in particular what it hopes to achieve with these agreements .
One is a customs union agreement with the Russian Federation which also includes Kyrgizstan and Kazakhstan , two countries which I visited recently . It is not clear whether this represents a move towards the integration of these three countries with the Russian Federation , or whether it is a looser form of association .
On the subject of the integration of Belarus and the Russian Federation , we should realize that the agreement recently signed between the two is the third or fourth attempt since the collapse of the Soviet Union to develop new , closer and more inextricable ties between them .
Once again , it is extremely difficult to predict at the moment how things are likely to develop on a political level .
Finally , I remember that a day or two before we submitted our recommendation to the Council to go ahead with the signing of the interim agreement , I was given the opportunity to explain the Commission 's reasons for doing so to the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
I would therefore hope that the signature by the Council and the Commission did not take the House by surprise .
Commissioner , I am interested in a number of points in relation to what you have said .
Firstly , what practical effect has the interim agreement had on positive , democratic development ?
Secondly , how do you view the fact that , once again without the approval of parliament , the editor of the parliamentary newspaper has been removed , simply for speaking out regarding the lack of press freedom in Belarus ?
How do you view the fact that Decree No 336 , which maintains the ban on trade unions , has not yet been repealed ?
And finally , how do you view the fact that the legal text signed by Lukaschenko has not yet been published , despite the fact that the future of relations with Russia is the key constitutional issue ?
We actually discussed each of the questions raised by Mrs Schroedter with the Prime Minister of Belarus when he visited Brussels , though I have to say that the answers we received were far from satisfactory .
Mrs Schroedter is very familiar with the situation in the country and knows the answers that are given there too , and that we do not find them satisfactory and will go on applying pressure until changes are made .
But the question was whether these extremely serious inadequacies which affect every aspect of its democracy were sufficient grounds for postponing the signing of the agreement yet again .
In my previous contacts with Mrs Schroedter and the group dealing with Belarus , I pointed out that we had discussed these problems with various members of the Belarus parliament and had asked them whether they thought that the signing of the interim agreement should be further delayed .
Many of them , and this is no exaggeration , told us that they hoped that the signing of the agreement would promote a more permanent dialogue with their country , which they felt was still isolated from the West , and that these problems might then be put back on the agenda .
As I said earlier , this was one of the main reasons why I felt our decision was the right one .
Question No 31 by Friedrich König ( H-0068 / 96 )
Subject : More rapid completion of the Brenner railway line
What measures does the Commission intend to take to speed up the completion of the Brenner railway line , which is one of the 14 projects on the Trans-European Network ( TEN ) priority list , in view of the probable effects of a de facto ban on road transport transit through Switzerland starting in the year 2004 ?
The Commission attaches the utmost priority to the Brenner rail project .
It has organized a number of workshops and other meetings with representatives of the governments and railways involved in the Brenner axis .
In addition , the Commission follows the work of the trilateral Brenner commission .
In November 1994 a memorandum on the further development of the Munich-Verona railway axis was signed by the then Transport Commissioner , Mr Oreja , together with the Transport Ministers of Germany , Italy and Austria .
This memorandum follows a route agreement , including the Brenner base tunnel , reached in June 1994 and it specifies actions to improve the financial and economic viability of the project .
The Community has committed itself to support the completion of the trans-Alpine crossing on the basis of the guidelines for the development of the Trans-European Transport Network and of the available financial instruments .
In this context , the Commission has launched a study on the development of Alpine traffic which will constitute an important basis for further in-depth economic and financial studies on the Brenner project .
It also supports the efforts to create a public / private partnership for the project implementation .
By the end of 1996 the trilateral Brenner Commission together with the relevant Commission service will submit a report which is intended to constitute a basis for a political decision on project implementation .
Since 1985 the Community has granted financial assistance of ECU 85m from the transport infrastructure programme and the TENs transport budget line for the co-financing of feasibility studies and the upgrading of the existing VeronaBrennero Italian line .
Of the 1995 allocations to the project , a significant part concerned technical environmental studies on track doubling on the AustriaInn Valley section , the most advanced and , due to capacity problems , the most urgent part of the project .
The European Investment Bank has meanwhile committed a loan of ECU 362m for improvements of the existing Verona-Brennero line which constitutes a preliminary phase of the whole project .
I am glad to hear you confirm that the Commission attaches special importance to this project .
A further reason for doing so is the fact that the die is cast in Switzerland , and we must be prepared for a de facto end to road transport transit through that country : alternatives are therefore necessary .
Road capacity is limited and the environment is under enormous pressure , so rail transport is the only possible option .
My question , Commissioner , is as follows . The Council has so far refused to declare its support for the 14 priority projects .
Parliament is sticking to those priorities , because by attempting to give everyone a slice of the cake , without setting any priorities , not only will the sums distributed be far too small , but it will be impossible to ensure that the important things are done on time .
What is the Commission 's stance regarding Parliament 's demand that the 14 priorities should be adhered to ?
I am grateful to the honourable gentleman for his further question .
We are well aware in the Commission of the pressures that come both from the geographical features and the potential action of neighbouring countries .
We are also in agreement with the view expressed by the honourable gentleman that very acute and strong interest must be taken and , indeed , put into effect so far as rail and combined transport development in the area is concerned .
It would be wrong to say , however , that the Brenner project does not feature in the fourteen priority projects that were agreed at Essen and are the subject of continual attention both by the Member States and by the Commission for the purposes of funding within the powers of the Trans-European Networks transport budget line .
The Brenner project will continue to receive very substantial support .
My only regret is that the controls and limitations on the resources available to the Community will mean that that support is not as substantial ultimately as we would like it to be , especially given the urgency and priority which the whole European Union should attach to the successful completion of this project .
Commissioner , my question concerns the fact that Mr Santer has submitted a plan and put forward ideas for making additional resources available to implement the trans-European networks .
We now know that the Brenner base tunnel project , in particular , will demand substantial resources : it is calculated that the Munich-Verona project as a whole will cost around ÖS 160 billion , an incredible sum !
And Austria would be required to provide 40 % of that .
My question to you is this : do you think that this very important , high-priority Brenner project will be entitled to some of the additional resources that Mr Santer now wishes to make available for the transEuropean networks ?
I regret to say that if the honourable Member believes that President Santer and the Commission have the power , to use his phrase , to make available additional resources for TEN , then he is labouring under a very sad and serious misconception .
I should like to take his mind back to the Essen Summit .
The heads of government at that summit unanimously expressed the view that the Commission should come forward with proposals which they should put to ECOFIN for a top-up of what was available in the Community budget for the transEuropean networks budget line .
That call - made , as I said , first at Essen - was repeated in Madrid only last December .
Despite repeated , detailed propositions made to ECOFIN , ECOFIN has so far proved to be deaf to those appeals .
Recording the concern of the Commission , which I have expressed on many occasions , President Santer quite rightly made it very clear at the beginning of this year that he thought it was now time for ECOFIN to make a positive response to the submissions made by the Commission and to the call made by the heads of government .
So far nothing practical has developed .
What we have done is to take account very directly of the applications made for transport TEN funding support from the Member States , which are now running at six times the resources available to us .
We have made a calculation in terms of the projects that they have in hand and we can demonstrate that there would be a justifiable top-up of an extra ECU 1.7 billion in addition to the nearly ECU 2 billion that is currently available in the total transport TEN line .
We know that there are budget constraints and consequently we have also made it clear that we would settle for a top-up that is smaller than the ECU 1.7 billion .
There still has not , so far , been a practical and positive response from ECOFIN .
We will therefore reconfirm that .
On the last point that the honourable Member made , it is very clear that if we have the resources or even a decent proportion of the resources that we can prove to be necessary and that could be practically employed for the purpose of enhancing competitiveness , improving growth and generating employment in the European Union , we would be very ready to respond to the realistic demands that are made in relation to Alpine crossings , including the Brenner project .
Question No 32 by Florus Wijsenbeek ( H-0082 / 96 )
Subject : Checks on driving and rest periods : discrimination against foreign lorry drivers in Belgium
Is the Commission aware that there is discrimination against foreign lorries when checks on driving and rest periods are carried out ?
Figures show that 72 % of checks in Belgium are carried out on foreign vehicles , while in neighbouring countries the figure varies between 15 % and 20 % .
What action does the Commission intend taking to induce Belgium to reduce these checks on foreign vehicles to normal proportions ?
The Commission recently adopted a report on the application of social legislation in road transport in 1991 / 92 .
The report shows that in Belgium , 65 % of those drivers subjected to checks on driving and rest hours were nationals of other Member States whereas in the Netherlands , for example , this figure is 20 % .
The Commission has no evidence , however , that Belgium does not carry out its controls in an objective way .
Information on control operations undertaken in cooperation with bordering Member States does not indicate any discrimination either .
The geographical situation of Member States and the importance of national road transport companies can , of course , explain certain variations in the numbers of nationals and non-nationals that are controlled .
A small Member State with high levels of transit traffic but few national carriers will proportionately check more foreign drivers than would a large , peripheral country with a sizeable national fleet of vehicles subject to Community social regulations .
The returns from Luxembourg , for instance , show a situation that is comparable with that of Belgium .
The honourable Member will no doubt be pleased to hear that at the initiative of the Commission efforts are being made to identify best practice relating to controls and to promote action in the Member States to ensure the uniform application of Community rules .
The Commissioner 's view would be correct if - and he lives in Belgium himself - 65 % of all lorries on the Belgian roads were foreign lorries .
This definitely is not the case , as the Commissioner will well know .
Therefore , there is still reason to believe that there is discriminatory treatment of foreigners .
I urge the Commissioner to do something to ensure that Directive 88 / 599 is correctly applied .
This is the first and foremost task of the Commission - to see to it that Community legislation is correctly applied by all Member States .
Luxembourg , of course , is a different case because if you drive for five minutes , you are already abroad .
We heed what the honourable Member says .
I repeat , only in order to emphasize , that there is no evidence of discrimination but that , in conjunction with the Belgian authorities , the Commission is seeking to ensure at all times that there is fair and uniform application of Community rules to prevent any possibility of discrimination against drivers from any country , whatever their company or point of origin .
Question No 33 by Hans Lindqvist ( H-0150 / 96 )
Subject : The bridge across the Øresund
Construction of the bridge across the Øresund , between Malmö and Copenhagen , has just begun .
Even at this initial stage , the environmental and financial calculations have proved to be incorrect .
The project now looks like overshooting its budget by hundreds of millions of Danish kroner .
As regards the environment , it also appears that the limit values set for silt discharges etc. are going to be exceeded .
Is the project being part-financed by the EU ?
If so , how much money is involved ?
Is the EU planning to provide any further financial or other aid towards the construction of the bridge ?
Over the period 1992-1994 Danish access routes of the Øresund fixed link received Community financial support under the transport infrastructure programme , totalling ECU 21 m in the form of direct grants to the Danish authorities .
In 1995 Community financial support was awarded under the new regulation for granting Community assistance for work on trans-European transport networks .
The support consisted of ECU 10 m for the cofinancing of studies on the Øresund fixed link itself , where the beneficiary was the Øresund Consortiet Project Authority and ECU 5 m for studies on the Danish access routes where the beneficiary was the State of Denmark .
The co-finance studies for the Øresund fixed link in 1995 included design studies , environmental studies , environmental-impact assessment activities and monitoring , as well as traffic forecast studies .
The co-finance studies for the Danish access routes in 1995 included technical design studies , as well as environmental studies and monitoring .
Further financial support is envisaged for the period 1996-1999 since the Øresund fixed link is a key element in the development of the trans-European transport network .
Indeed , it is a transEuropean network transport priority project .
The 1996 TEN transport request for support for the Øresund fixed link is in the form of interest-rate subsidies .
The Commission is not aware of any substantial increase in the project 's budget .
The figures available to the Commission , based on the 1996 application for trans-European transport co-financing , show that the construction budget has been increased from ECU 1 , 837 m to ECU 1 , 962 m due to a number of changes and improvements related in particular to environmental projects .
Mr President , I would thank the Commissioner for his answer .
According to the reports which have reached me , the amount involved in aid or direct contributions is in the order of magnitude of 5-6 billion kronor , if one includes what has already been disbursed and what will be disbursed .
I should like to know whether the Commission or the EU has imposed any environmental requirements in granting the funds for the bridge .
According to reports the dredging has produced more sludge than anticipated .
There is much to suggest that there will an incredible increase in traffic and the question is whether the construction of the bridge is really reconcilable with good environmental policy .
There is also much to suggest that the bridge will be more expensive than was expected .
It is possible that there might also be the financing of access routes such as the city tunnel in Malmö and others .
Will the EU then grant still more resources to this project ?
I should thus like to ask whether the EU Commission has taken note of the judgement made by the credit institution Standard & Poors that the project as such will not be successful without state guarantees .
There is thus a risk that the EU Commission is supporting a project which neither meets environmental requirements nor can be successful on the market .
Is this the right way to use resources ?
My answer to that last point of the question is absolutely , definitely yes !
I would also be interested to get any firm information to support the allegation made by the honourable Member in his question that the budget for the project - the Øresund fixed-link project - is overshooting its budget by hundreds of millions of Danish kroner .
Naturally , we are interested in establishing whether that is the case .
There has been absolutely no evidence of any description that would support this testimony .
So far as the environmental conditions are concerned , the two principal pieces of Community legislation are Directive 85 / 337 on the assessment of the effects of certain public and private projects on the environment , and Directive 79 / 409 on the conservation of wild birds .
In 1991 and 1992 the Commission examined Denmark 's compliance with these directives in relation to the project and was satisfied that no breach had occurred .
Moreover , as far as the Swedish part of the project is concerned , an application was made by the construction consortium under the Swedish Natural Resources Act .
That application was accompanied by an environmental-impact study .
The study , together with a number of sub-reports , was intended to form the basis of the Swedish environmental examination of the project .
It is also understood that a Danish environmental , non-governmental organization - the Danish branch of Greenpeace - was recognized in July 1994 as having legal standing to challenge the project on the basis of a deficient environmental-impact assessment .
However , according to a subsequent court ruling , work can continue on the project pending a final ruling .

With regard to the question by Mr König , would the Commissioner not agree that , given the scarcity of funds available and the proposals that President Santer has made , these would be excellent projects for a Community lending instrument ?
You will not be surprised to hear that I am sympathetic to the idea of consideration of the development of a new Community lending instrument .
President Santer has revisited the idea of the so-called Eurobonds .
Assessments and investigations are taking place now to see whether a further and stronger case can be developed than was originally put for the establishment of a new form of Community lending .
The honourable Member will know very well , however , that there is very strenuous resistance to such an idea among the Member States and it may not be the first time in history that the Commission in its view and Parliament in its enthusiasm have proved to be more realistic and progressive than the Council of Ministers .
Question No 34 by Konstantinos Hatzidakis ( H-0234 / 96 )
Subject : Development of the Egnatia highway by the construction of vertical road axes
In view of the construction of the Egnatia highway which has been included in the transEuropean networks , can the Commission say how it views the idea of maximizing the usefulness of this highway by the construction of vertical road axes linking it with Sofia , Monastir , Skopje and Durres and , if it approves of this idea where funds can be obtained for implementing this project ?
The Commission agrees with the benefits of the Via Egnatia TEN priority project and it agrees that they can be enhanced by the construction of transborder links to the north which would provide adequate road connections from Greece to Albania , to Fyrom and to Bulgaria and would also increase the economic viability of the project .
The Community support framework 1994-1999 for Greece , the Community initiative INTERREG II and the Cohesion Fund already co-finance the construction on Community territory of road axes linking Via Egnatia with Albania , Fyrom and Bulgaria , while the Thessaloniki-Efsoni link is already at motorway / expressway standard .
The PHARE programme already co-finances the continuation of some of these axes beyond the European Union border to Durres and to Sofia .
Moreover , it is expected that after the settlement of relations with Fyrom decisions will be taken for the construction of the continuation of the Florina / Niki axes to Fyrom .
The Commission will of course continue its efforts to utilize all possibilities for further co-financing of these links within existing Community mechanisms and instruments .
In summary , that means that sections on EU territory can benefit from Regional and Cohesion Fund 's cofinancing as well as from EIB loan facilities whereas sections outside the European Union can be co-financed by the PHARE programme as well as being supported by European Investment Bank loans .
I thank the Commissioner for his answer to me . I would simply like to stress yet again , as a member of the Committee on Regional Policy , that there is a difficulty about the financing of such projects which involve countries that do not belong to the European Union .
Granted that we finance our own projects from the Cohesion Fund , or from the Community Support Framework , in the case of countries that are not members of the European Union the finance should be combined with contributions from the PHARE programme .
This constitutes a problem .
I would like to hope that it will not impede the progress of Egnatia 's vertical axes , but at the same time I should like to ask the Commissioner how optimistic he feels about the project 's overall progress and whether he thinks that with the participation of private capital , the Egnatia highway and its vertical roads would progress much more rapidly than at present .
I am certain there is not a single project in the whole European Union about which I would not say it is possible to make faster progress .
In the case of this particular project I have to say that , given the complexities relating to it , given the number of interests that are attached to it and given the fact that this is the first time in history that such a development has taken place , I can only express a certain degree of satisfaction with the intense interest being shown and the efforts being made to ensure that this project is benefiting from as rapid progress as possible .
I prefer not to be optimistic .
I simply like to be realistic and it is realistic to say that over a recognisable period of time the strenuous efforts being made by all parties will result in a satisfactory outcome .
That concludes Question Time . Questions not taken for lack of time will be answered in writing .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.05 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Fisheries agreement with Morocco
The next item is the report ( A4-0085 / 96 ) by Mr Arias Cañete , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council Regulation on the conclusion of the cooperation agreement on sea fisheries between the European Community and the Kingdom of Morocco and laying down provisions for its implementation ( 12358 / 95 - C4-0135 / 95-95 / 0306 ( AVC ) ) .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the fisheries agreement with Morocco is the most important fisheries agreement concluded by the Community , not only because of its economic value , which is of course considerable , but for its far-reaching social and economic implications .
This agreement has been the main subject of debate in the Committee on Fisheries in the past few months .
I do not need to remind you that since 30 April 1995 , the date of the early termination of the previous agreement laying down fisheries relations between the European Union and Morocco , Parliament has expressed its views on several occasions with regard to the considerable problems arising from the renewal negotiations , so we shall not repeat the statements included in earlier resolutions of this Assembly .
But before commenting on the content of the agreement and to consequences to be expected from it , I should like , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , to give my sincere thanks to the Commission for its collaboration and the rapidity with which it has continually passed on information throughout the seven months of negotiations - an effort which is if possible all the more praiseworthy bearing in mind the difficulty and the many times things ground to a halt ; we trust that such collaboration will set a standard for future actions .
Similarly I take this opportunity to show our satisfaction that , after a long process of dialogue and negotiation between Parliament , the Commission and the Council , interinstitutional cooperation seems to have borne fruit , and , for the first time with an international fisheries agreement , Parliament was consulted pursuant to the second subparagraph of Article 228 ( 3 ) of the Treaty on European Union ; that is to say by means of the assent procedure requested so many times by this Assembly .
We hope that that situation will not be an exception and will represent a change in the doctrine hitherto followed by the Council and the Commission as regards the legal bases relating to international fisheries agreements .
However , I must express the surprise of the Committee on Fisheries and its disappointment as to the late stage at which Parliament was consulted on this agreement , which contrasts with the speed and diligence of the Commission and the Council which I have just mentioned .
However , it must be admitted that at least we were consulted before the date fixed for the first payment of financial compensation under this agreement fell due .
Having made these observations I must state , going now into the content of the agreement , that regardless of how each political Group in this Assembly may view the agreement , the fishing opportunities are certainly reduced as compared with the previous agreement , affecting in particular cephalopoda , long line-fishing and certain sectors of small-scale fishing .
It is an agreement in which there is an increase in the fees to be paid by shipowners and an increase in labour charges as regards signing on Moroccan crew members which , in certain circumstances , makes fishing difficult .
The duration warrants some comment .
It would be very appropriate if the agreement , envisaged for four years , were to result in a non-negotiable commitment for both parties and avoiding unilateral reductions of the duration initially envisaged , as in the previous agreement .
And although no renewal clause is expressly envisaged , this House is urging the Commission to take up , at the proper time and well in advance , the necessary contacts and negotiations for a peaceful extension of fishing relations with Morocco , once the period initially envisaged for its validity has expired .
Possibly this is not the best agreement , the one which would have suited us best .
But possibly , Madam Commissioner , it is the best agreement possible .
And so the Committee on Fisheries , after a debate in depth , has agreed to give its assent to the terms negotiated by the Commission .
We trust the House will approve it .
On the other hand , however , this agreement has shown the growing difficulty in concluding international agreements of this scope .
And that , added to the fact that third countries are gradually developing their fleets and their preserving and processing industry shows up the Community fleet 's state of over-capacity .
The Committee on Fisheries thinks that up to the present this problem has not been seriously faced .
A policy of half measures and patching up has been applied on many occasions , but the situation of the fisheries sector , as the Commissioner herself has said many times , demands that this problem be faced and that the alternatives necessary for the regions and persons who will be affected as a consequence of the restructuring of the fishing sector should be urgently tackled .
It is clear , Madam Commissioner , that the next multiannual guidance programmes will be very hard to negotiate , but it will have to be done seriously and strictly and not in a spirit of political opportunism .
It will have to be done by providing the financial , economic and , above all , social measures necessary to make acceptable the costs arising from them and , of course , in a context of broad dialogue and in collaboration with all those involved in the industry and in welfare aspects .
Madam Commissioner , in congratulating you today and in asking the House to approve this fisheries agreement , we cannot overlook the fact that we must make a very serious effort to adapt our fleet to the fishing opportunities .
We wish the Commission much success in its fisheries negotiations so that we may continue to maintain the activity of our fleet , but we also wish the Member States to face up resolutely to their obligations to preserve the medium- and long-term viability of their fishing fleets .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it will shortly be a year since the fisheries dispute erupted between the European Union and Morocco .
I can point to many events which have taken place since then and which we mentioned at the time in this Assembly .
But underlying all that , as was also emphasized at the recent plenary sitting on 27 March in Brussels , the urgent need to revise and strengthen the European Union 's policy with regard to international fishing agreements .
On this occasion I shall not go into the small print of the agreement - the chairman of the Committee on Fisheries has referred to the basic positive aspects and also to the negative ones and to the social costs involved - but I should like to concentrate on the large print of the Policy , with capitals .
But first I should like to acknowledge , Madam Commissioner , that we fully appreciate that the agreement has been achieved and for a four year period , and with regard to that period I associate myself with the request made by the chairman of the Committee on Fisheries that the appropriate guarantees be secured to that end .
I also view favourably the fact that for the first time , although belatedly , it has been submitted for the assent of Parliament as we had requested .
But basically , I stress , in view of the experience of what has happened and for institutional and sectoral reasons , a new approach to international agreements is required .
Politically the European Union 's fisheries and external and commercial policy must be linked .
Institutionally this Parliament must be definitively associated , strictly and as of right , with the negotiation , approval and control of these agreements .
Sectorally it must be recognized that international fisheries agreements are indispensable for the maintenance of the Community fleet , constituting therefore a fundamental pillar of the future of the common fisheries policy , consolidating stable external fishing grounds and contributing to the search for new alternative fishing grounds .
In the case of Morocco , as previously with Canada , there has been a serious lack of foresight and initiative , substantial cuts in fishing and expensive compensation and precedents have been created which will certainly not pass unperceived by other States with which we shall shortly have to negotiate or renegotiate other agreements .
For all those reasons we appreciate the Commission 's initiative in holding a seminar in May with this Parliament 's Members who are on the Committee on Fisheries , to debate the future European policy on fisheries agreements .
We hope that the Quimper meeting will outline the foundations of a new policy and shed light , the light which the sector is asking us for at this time .
Mr President , I wish to say that the Liberal and Democratic Reformist Group strongly supports and welcomes this agreement and hopes that Parliament will allow it to go ahead through the assent procedure .
We welcome the fact that Parliament has full power with the Council over this agreement via that procedure .
However , there are one or two points I should like to make on a broader issue .
Some of these have already been raised by some of my colleagues , namely the way that international fishing agreements operate , the way they are agreed and the effect they have not just on our own fishing fleets but on the fishing fleets of other nations as well .
In this agreement there are a number of aspects which greatly improve on other international agreements which Parliament has looked at .
I hope there will be sufficient control and that money will be ploughed back into investment in terms of research locally and other areas .
The thing which concerns me most is the size of the sum in comparison with the total amount of money which the European Union puts into fisheries and the fact that in terms of cost-effectiveness this agreement costs the equivalent of ECU 250 , 000 per vessel per year and something like ECU 16 , 000 per person directly employed in the fishing industry .
I have to ask about this in terms of the value generally of international fishing agreements , but I recognize fully the importance of this agreement to the fishing industry of Spain and Portugal and I believe that this report should go ahead .
Mr President , with regard to the fisheries agreement between the European Union and the Kingdom of Morocco , we ought not to lose sight of overall relations between the two countries and the way they have been developing .
In every international agreement there must be a symmetry which respects and , to the highest degree possible , satisfies the needs of the contracting parties .
The unbalanced nature of this agreement seems obvious to us and in this respect it must be borne in mind that in the global context - and I am not speaking only of fisheries - Morocco has obtained concessions in certain sectors of production characteristic of the south of the European Union which are having a negative effect , creating the risk of seriously damaging our economic and social structures .
In the negotiations Morocco exerted pressure on the fishing sector condemning the Community fleet to idleness with the object of obtaining concessions in the agricultural sector .
The arguments put forward , ostensibly conservationist , very frequently turned out to be unjustified .
The European Union 's negotiating position was extremely weak ; the question of the sovereignty of the Western Saharan waters was avoided and agricultural concessions of an unspecified duration were granted for the signature of a rather restrictive fisheries agreement of limited duration .
The weakness of the European Union 's position cannot be attributed , in our opinion , to the Committee on Fisheries or to Mrs Bonino , but is due to the attitude of certain States within the Council .
Personally I understand Mrs Bonino 's difficulties during the whole period of negotiations and congratulate her on her performance .
The agreement is not satisfactory for us because it creates a precedent for renegotiation of the agreement .
The European Parliament has been consulted , and that is something , but we were also consulted too late .
I should like to associate myself with what some fellow-Members have said with regard to the complex problems of agreements with third countries .
Let us hope that we all reach a greater appreciation of the difficulties and realize what we have to work for in the seminar at Quimper .
Mr President , as I pointed out earlier in relation to this agreement , the EU needs to learn lessons from the problems that it has posed .
For example , there is the huge dependence of the EU vessels on access to waters of other countries .
As well as that , in some of these countries there is a desire to reduce EU access to their fish stocks because they are over-exploited and need time to recover .
These cutbacks will obviously affect the EU fishermen , especially the Spanish and , to a lesser extent , the French , who are the main beneficiaries of the agreements .
Nevertheless , we must respect the interests of other countries in the conservation of their fish stocks .
We also need to change our approach to these agreements .
We should not use them as dumping grounds for the over-capacity of the EU fleet .
We are basically just exporting our own problem with all its negative consequences for these other countries .
We have to place fishing agreements in the wider context of responsible management of regional fisheries , giving greater emphasis to the conservation of fish stocks and the needs of the local communities .
Having said that , there are some positive aspects to this agreement .
I welcome the provision made in the agreement for funding the development of the Moroccan fisheries sector as well as for improved research on fisheries in the region and for better training of fishermen .
I also welcome the acceptance of the principle that the size of the EU fleet allowed access to Moroccan waters should be related to the number of fish actually available to be caught .
As well as that , we really have to realize in the EU that we do not have the right to set up free-for-all fishing in Moroccan waters or in the waters of any other country .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I think we must welcome the fact that this report on the cooperation agreement on sea fisheries between the European Union and the Kingdom of Morocco has come before this Assembly , because that shows two things : first that the Committees on Fisheries and Budgets were right when they gave their political opinion on the subject , since the Council is thus recognizing the budgetary implications of the agreement , which involves a significant step forward in the role of the European Parliament in the Community decision-making process ; and secondly that the motion for a resolution which I tabled at the beginning of the year on behalf of the Group of the European Radical alliance did have a raison d 'être .
However , the Council 's decision to apply the agreement provisionally restricts the part played by Parliament and partly neutralizes this more democratic trend .
I agree therefore with the political proposal of the Committee on Fisheries to make the assent conditional upon an official undertaking on the part of the Commission to inform the European Parliament every year of the state of budgetary and financial implementation of the agreement , and following on from my motion I would add that it would be appropriate for the Commission to present an assessment of its socio-economic impact on the Community regions affected , particularly the peripheral regions .
Nevertheless we shall support this assent in spite of all these reservations and those we brought up at the time concerning the terms of the agreement , since it must be recognized that Morocco has become an important focus in European foreign strategy and in fact this concern has taken the shape of a political dialogue which , in spite of the fisheries tensions and other sectoral conflicts now in the past , we are pursuing by the path of cooperation .
Mr President , the regulation now before us on an agreement with Morocco concerns more than the fishing industry .
European horticulture is also affected by this agreement , albeit indirectly .
Without the trade concessions in the sphere of importation of Moroccan vegetables , fruit and flowers the agreement would never have come about .
European horticulture has thus unfairly become the victim of the solution to the fisheries dispute between the Union and Morocco .
To alleviate the pain the Union undertook at the General Affairs Council of 10 November 1995 to make proposals for a fund to promote ornamental plant products .
So far , six months later , the Commission has not yet followed up that commitment .
That is unacceptable !
I expect specific proposals from the Commission at the earliest possible date .
This is a sector which is in difficulties , partly owing to increasing imports from third countries as a consequence of the tariff concessions granted in recent years .
Products from third countries are therefore being imported almost entirely without duties .
It is high time that the European Union did something about it .
Is the Commissioner ready to give an undertaking ?
If so , then I can vote for the regulation .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , virtually five months after the beginning of the provisional application of the fisheries agreement between the European Union and Morocco , the European Parliament is now giving a favourable opinion on this agreement .
It is right to welcome , in particular , the Commission 's hard work and that of Mrs Bonino , as well as the Commission services and those of the Member States , which have been dealing with this sector throughout the negotiations .
But this is also an excellent opportunity to emphasise three ideas : the benefits which my country , Portugal , will draw from this agreement - since Portugal took advantage from the bilateral negotiations between Portugal and Morocco , the need to look forward already to the post-1999 period and the urgency for introducing a new fisheries policy .
In the fisheries sector proper , negotiations with Morocco in the framework of the European Union have so far been favourable for Portugal . Portugal now has three times more fishery permits in Morocco than it had in 1995 and its fishery rights are now maintained by a formal legal basis and not merely by a framework of individual licences .
That is why we have fought coherently and continuously for this agreement .
However , we should already be looking to the future and to the period after 1995 to 1999 , especially when vast coastal populations and economies in both Portugal and Spain depend strongly on existing fish stocks in Moroccan waters .
Any future agreements will have to call for a smaller fleet to be licensed and will also introduce mixed enterprises , the sustained management of fishery resources .
No responsible person can sit in the shade of a banana tree because fishermen are not and never have been dependent on subsidies - they just want to work .
Thirdly , we must have a new fisheries policy .
A new common fisheries policy must be a sustainable and responsible one in which international agreements cannot simply involve exporting structural readjustments of the Community fleet .
Any policy must be based on making proper value of fishermen as the main defenders of fish stocks , because whether we want it or not a sea and marine produce policy can only exist if we have fisheries and fishermen .
Mr President , I welcome the Arias Cañete report .
I welcome the agreement and I welcome the fact that the Commission was able to reach this agreement with Morocco .
We faced very difficult circumstances and , as a non-Spanish Member of the EPP , I am delighted that our Spanish colleagues have a solution to what was an extremely difficult situation , in which compensation was being paid to fishermen who were not given the opportunity to fish .
It was a very difficult position and I therefore am delighted about the new agreement .
Having said that , it would be wrong of me not to draw attention to the future of these fishing agreements .
The Morocco agreement is the most important one .
We must recognise the fact that this agreement before us tonight is going to cost approximately 20 % more than the last one and that we may not have the same fishing opportunities that we had before .
Let me also say that I welcome the opportunity , Commissioner , that you are giving us to have a look at the future of these fishing agreements . They are important for our Spanish colleagues but they are also important , therefore , for the European fishing fleet as a whole .
We must not allow in the future huge expenditure on a commodity that perhaps can be caught in other ways .
We must recognise the fact that we have ACP agreements and other developing country arrangements .
Within this Parliament we may have difficulty in looking at this overall relationship .
I believe that we have to be careful in the future , and this may have implications for our Spanish colleagues and their fishermen .
I am only putting that down as a marker because I believe that the cost of fish is going to be an important aspect in future agreements .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I think we must welcome the fact that this fisheries agreement between the European Union and Morocco has been reached .
It has certain characteristics which I think will be common in the agreements which may be signed in the future : reduction of fishing quotas for the fleets of Community countries ; essential appraisal of resources ; the confirmation that there are no surpluses and therefore the need for sustainable exploitation of fisheries resources in the relevant areas ; and , moreover , the growing presence of third countries in future fishing activities close to their coasts .
All that , of course , has appeared in this agreement with Morocco and I think we must welcome the actions of the Commission and of the Commissioner in particular in achieving this agreement which , as the rapporteur rightly said , is perhaps not a good agreement but possibly the best that could be achieved .
In this respect I think it is important to stress also that there was a need for negotiations for this agreement to be speeded up in view of the pressure exerted by one member of the negotiating team ; pressure not unconnected with the holding of the Barcelona Euro-Mediterranean Conference at the end of November , and let us remember that it was only a few weeks before that conference that it was possible to achieve the agreement with Morocco .
I think that determined the conclusion of this agreement and it will be important for an analysis to be made in the European Union as to the way in which future agreements must be negotiated for the good of the European fishing fleets .
Mr President , a cooperation agreement on fisheries has been concluded with Morocco .
I am pleased that the emphasis has been put on the valorization and protection of Moroccan fish resources , while also providing fishing opportunities for Community vessels , but I maintain that the agreement is still too vague and ambiguous about the demarcation of , and sovereignty over , the territorial waters claimed by the Saharan Arab Democratic Republic .
It goes without saying that it is not the European Community 's business to set the boundaries of a state , but it is its business to agree with its contracting partners over the area of application of the agreements it makes .
It cannot in fact assume the right to exploit a space not subject to the exclusive sovereignty or jurisdiction of non-member countries .
This is manifestly the case for the territorial waters of Western Sahara , and no fisheries agreement with Morocco can confer on the European Community the fishing rights in waters which , according to international law , come under the authority of the Saharan Republic .
The Moroccan fishing zones provided for in the agreement should be demarcated in accordance with the rules of international law , particularly with those of the United Nations Conventions on the law of the sea .
I recall that in 1982 the third United Nations conference on the law of the sea , known as the Montego Bay conference , said , and I quote : ' In the case of a territory whose people have not gained full independence or some other form of autonomy recognized by the United Nations , the provisions relating to the rights or interests aimed at in the Convention are to be applied for the benefit of the people of that territory , for the purpose of promoting its prosperity and its development ' .
As the fishing agreement now stands , the riches of the Western Sahara territorial waters do not benefit the Saharan people .
I therefore ask the Commission , who negotiated this agreement , to make sure that international law is respected .
Mr President , I congratulate the Commission and the rapporteur on this , but I have two problems .
I shall not oppose the agreement but there are two political points that need to be made .
One concerns Morocco itself .
I will oppose - and I give notice now and hope that I will be able to persuade other people to oppose - any future agreements on any subject with Morocco until it removes its military forces and its settlers from Western Sahara and applies the United Nations resolutions which have been there for a long time .
Secondly , I hope that the policy - I am referring to what the previous speaker said - does not apply to waters south of latitude 27.5º or 28º - I am not sure which - so that the waters of Western Sahara are preserved for a future time when Western Sahara can operate its own fishing policy .
Remember the example of Namibia , where there were mainly EU boats operating before the Namibians could settle their own fishing policy .
We committed terrible things in those waters off the coast of Namibia when there was no control .
Let us remember those things and let us now pass the agreement , but remembering those points .
Mr President , I wish to thank Mr Arias Cañete for his report .
As he normally does , he did a very thorough and informative job on this .
I support the agreement as well , because at this time it was politically , socially and economically important in many regions in Spain .
Obviously I am concerned that Parliament is not getting its full constitutional rights in relation to these agreements .
ECU 500 m is a significant amount of money and we are entitled to codecision-making under the Maastricht Treaty .
Whatever international obligations we have I believe should be subordinated to that constitutional right .
I am impressed by the figures that Robin Teverson gave us in relation to the cost per job and per vessel of this agreement .
They are relevant and we should take these things into account .
We should ask ourselves : if we took this ECU 500 m and invested it in those sensitive regions of Spain , how much extra investment would it attract ?
What could it do for aquaculture and tourism infrastructure ?
You could probably attract about ECU 2 , 000 million in investment and it might , at the end of the day , give greater economic benefits than it has in this way .
Not just at this time but for the future , that is the way we ought to be thinking .
Because , as James Provan and others said , we cannot build a long-term fisheries policy on this sort of agreement when , obviously , there are many factors that will not be there in ten years ' time .
So we should look at the other prospects for helping the peripheral regions in a different way .
Mr President , on behalf of Mr Arlindo Cunha , I should like to say that the fisheries agreement reached between the European Union and the Kingdom of Morocco in November 1995 will have to be analysed from two points of view .
First of all , its economic and social contribution to certain European regions and the survival of thousands of families linked to the fisheries sector : in terms of its significance in this field , the cost of 500 million ECUs over four years seems reasonable .
Secondly , its articulation with the association agreement in the overall framework of a Euro-Mediterranean agreement with that country .
It is the same vision of joint importance which I hope will continue to be considered by politicians not only in Morocco but also in the European Union when we have to renegotiate a fresh agreement in 1999 .
For these reasons on behalf of my party I am backing the Arias Cañete report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , although the European Parliament has given up time to intervene in the discussion about the fisheries agreement with Morocco and has even approved various motions for resolutions during the period of negotiations , in particular against the forced inaction of fleets and in favour of compensation for both shipowners and fishermen , this has not prevented the European Parliament with being presented with a fait accompli in the form of a formal consultation more than three months after the agreement was signed .
We are now going to be issuing an opinion five months after the agreement was approved and more than four months after it entered into force .
This situation , Madam Commissioner , cannot be accepted and should not be a practice in the future , as the European Parliament has repeatedly stated and as you well know .
The terms of the fisheries agreement with Morocco have made it possible for important fishing sectors in my country to resume activity , in particular in the area of Sesimbra and the Algarve , with provisions even so for reductions , albeit limited , in the fishing fleet throughout the period during which the agreement will be in force , without imposing excessive conditions on discharge or acceptance of Moroccan fishermen .
On the whole , these guidelines are in keeping with the proposals which we defended throughout , in terms of this agreement , even though they really fall short of what is necessary .
In terms of this agreement - as far as I know Madam Commissioner - the payment of compensation for halting activity between 1 May and 30 November was not agreed upon at the values approved both by the Commission and the European Parliament , and I thereby call upon the Commissioner to confirm this information before the plenary session , to the Portuguese Government and the trade unions representing local fishermen , and to take action if this is true to make sure that the proper amounts are actually paid up .
The negotiation of this fisheries agreement stemmed from another agreement , a trade agreement with Morocco , which is quite clearly harmful for Portugal .
It is not acceptable for us that one thing is given with one hand while cautiously and only four years after the fisheries agreement , something is taken back with the other , in principle during 12 years - but in fact for good - because of the trade agreement .
Therefore - and we do not take this decision lightly - we shall be unable to approve a vote in favour of the fisheries agreement which implicitly and collaterally could well undermine the very survival of various productive areas in Portugal when , in fact , we should just solve the problems facing a fisheries fleet of small dimensions , operated as a cottage industry and whose characteristics it has been acknowledged are such that they cannot take away Moroccan catches in Moroccan waters .
Mr President , most representatives of the Andalusian fisheries sector say that this agreement is the best of those signed between the European Union and Morocco - simply the best .
I think that is so , because this agreement has some very favourable aspects : its four-year duration with no mid-term revision , which ensures stability going far beyond what was envisaged even by Mr Almeida when negotiations started ; because the overall fishing capacities are increased ; because the technical and administrative conditions are improved ; because many thousands of jobs are guaranteed , directly and indirectly , in areas of high unemployment ; because it offers continuity to the Community fishing fleet ; and because the aspects of the unfavourable impact are gradual .
Let me sincerely congratulate the negotiators who have certain been a homogeneous team , which has acted firmly and calmly , waiting for the right time , and in the end decisively .
They have done well .
It is an agreement which was so difficult but which has turned out so well .
And it is an agreement which allows us to continue , improve and advance our relations with Morocco .
I notice that Mr Arias Cañete is not saying what he was saying before the Spanish elections .
Previously he was saying that agreement was impossible , that only a miracle performed by the Virgin could make it possible and was making rather cruder comments about our dropping our trousers before Rabat , for instance .


Now , Mr President , after the elections I see he has changed his tune , so welcome , Mr Arias Cañete , to our point of view , welcome to good sense , to rationality , above all in view of the options for government which exist in Spain .
Mr President , the first assessment we must make is of the agreement itself .
The compromise achieved is the best possible .
We should all perhaps have liked a different one which would have safeguarded the rights of the 80 vessels which will be left outside the fishing grounds .
However , all negotiations involve concession , balance and approximation of positions .
And this is the best agreement which could have been achieved in view of the stubborn and tough attitude maintained by the Moroccan negotiators .
We must also congratulate the Commission on having sent Parliament a copy of the agreement as soon as it was signed .
That act is nothing more or less than one more sign of the spirit of transparency and collaboration with Parliament which the Commission and particularly Commissioner Bonino is advocating .
There is another aspect which is also worth stressing .
The Council understood in its proposal that this agreement has important budgetary implications for the Union .
It therefore decided to consult Parliament by means of the assent procedure .
That possibility constitutes an important recognition of the European Parliament 's rights and powers .
We must therefore vote for this proposal for a decision .
In this case , although the agreement is rough at the edges , the Union has worked for an agreement which was the least bad of the various options .
As the Commissioner is present I should like to make a brief remark which may only touch on this debate , but is important in these times .
This is the anchovy season : Portugal has ceded to France 6 000 tonnes from Zone 9 which are being fished by France in Zone 8 .
I ask you to act with your usual zeal and energy to prevent this frontal attack on this sometimes - but only sometimes - sacrosanct principle of relative stability .
Many thanks and congratulations on the agreement , Madam Commissioner .
Mr President , Commissioner , it is kind of you to let me speak too on behalf of the Committee on Budgets .
Like Mr Arias Cañete , who spoke for the Committee on Fisheries , I welcome the application of assent procedure on behalf of the Committee on Budgets .
Another step forward in the domain of interinstitutional cooperation is surely the fact that , as some of my honourable colleagues have already said , the Commission at least unofficially transmitted the text of the agreement to us just after it had been initialled .
That simplified our work in the committees .
Nevertheless , I must once again voice serious criticism on behalf of the Committee on Budgets about the decision-making procedure .
In customary style , the Council , which is unfortunately not represented here just now , agreed on the provisional application of an agreement for the fifth time this year without our being consulted or having the opportunity to deliver our opinion beforehand .
This breach of contract by the Council in curtailing the rights vested in Parliament as part of the budgetary authority is even more serious than in the previous cases , since the agreement with Morocco has considerable financial implications .
ECU 500 million is not chickenfeed .
I therefore protest formally against the systematic bypassing of this House and insist once again upon our contractually guaranteed participatory rights .
Nevertheless , in view of the great importance we all attach to this agreement , the Committee on Budgets approved it unanimously .
We made our approval subject to three provisos , however .
Firstly , we call on the Council to cooperate constructively in the trialogue on the classification of expenditure and in the ad hoc procedure governing expenditure ceilings for international fisheries in order to ensure that we arrive at an interinstitutional agreement which is acceptable to all parties .
Secondly , we expect the Council to make a formal undertaking that it will keep us officially informed of all negotiations on agreements and protocols , new or renewed .
We also call on the Council and Commission to reach a modus vivendi with Parliament on the provisional application of agreements .
Finally , Commissioner , we expect a formal undertaking by the Commission to present a report to us every year on the application of agreements and financial protocols , based on a cost-benefit analysis , and to present it before the first reading of the budget .
Let me begin by thanking , on my own behalf and on that of the Commission , the European Parliament for the dispatch with which it has drawn up its opinion .
My personal thanks also for this important element after a year of very difficult and very complex negotiations which necessitated the intervention of the President of the Commission .
I wish to take this opportunity also to thank those high-level political representatives , including those from Morocco , who worked for this agreement finally to be achieved .
It is , in my view , a satisfactory and balanced agreement , things being what they are .
It is , in my view , an agreement in which there are neither winners nor losers and it is an agreement which , albeit not perfect - and we have always to try to get the best - establishes proper bases unlike traditional fisheries agreements .
Above all , it places the emphasis on an issue important to us , that of the conservation and sound management of stocks .
It is an agreement that provides important and innovative data as far as controls are concerned .
I wish to remind the House , for example , that , for the first time in this kind of agreement , we have substantially improved controls at sea and on land by defining the status of Moroccan observers on board Community vessels - I do not think there is any need to stress just what an innovation this is - the presence of observers in ports on a reciprocal basis as well as constant satellite monitoring .
And so , in terms of controls to improve the conservation of fish stocks , this is an agreement that contains important new elements .
It will be up to us , over the next four years , to see how we can develop a genuine partnership with the Moroccans because only if the partnership relationship develops well will it be possible to generate the atmosphere needed to renegotiate another agreement .
I have to say here that any further agreement will need to be based essentially on the procedures and proper application of the current agreement and on the type of relationship based on genuine partnership that we are able to establish over the next four years .
I have to emphasize two points on this occasion : Parliament has recognized that Article 228 has been applied for the first time , albeit somewhat tardily .
Every institution has therefore to take responsibility for the delays and for paying due attention .
I believe that , during the past year , I have tried to keep the House - and particularly the Committee on Fisheries - informed , both officially and unofficially , of all of the fundamental stages in this agreement .
I wanted to talk a little about the financial problem and the cost / benefit issue .
In that connection , I believe that the seminar we shall be holding in Quimper will be of great help in establishing more or less exactly the overall picture of the fisheries agreements , so that we are able better to identify those that are expensive and those that are less expensive .
For instance , it will be apparent from the dossier we are preparing that there are agreements that are in principle less expensive but , unfortunately , they are not being taken advantage of .
There are agreements for which we are paying , but the quantities of fish negotiated are not being fished by anyone : I accept therefore that we need to restore some kind of order to the general dossier on fisheries agreements .
That being so , I consider the initiative of a seminar for joint debate to be important , because I believe it is also important to ascertain which fisheries agreements have been concluded on the traditional basis , which have not been exploited and which , although in existence , are no longer being exploited .
I therefore think that for all of those reasons , the Quimper meeting is an important factor in providing us all with information .
A further important element in this agreement is that it includes a formal undertaking to reduce the dependence of the Community fishing fleet on Moroccan waters .
That undertaking exists , and I have to inform both Spanish and Portuguese fishermen that a series of meetings has already taken place to enable us to submit , by July , a programme to cut the dependence of the Community fishing fleet on Moroccan waters .
That is a specific undertaking that we have entered into because we take the view that to be 100 % dependent on a third country is not economically sustainable in any sector , including , obviously the fisheries sector .
Let me finally draw your attention to another factor : many honourable Members have raised the political issue of the relationship with Morocco - the Sahara issue and others .
You will allow that this is not a matter for the fisheries Commissioner , who is bound by certain international procedures and therefore negotiates with the existing authorities and will negotiate with other authorities when , clearly , they have responsibility for governing their own peoples .
It certainly would not have seemed to me to be very sensible , for instance , to postpone any fisheries agreement until the Sahara issue had been resolved ; honourable Members will agree with me that that does not exactly depend on the common fisheries policy and still less on the fisheries Commissioner .
I wish also to mention another point that almost everyone spoke of : the problem of the provisional application of the fisheries agreements .
I wish to mention just two factors here : firstly , provisional application is a internationallyrecognized standard procedure in any kind of sector ; secondly , I believe it is in all of our interests not to have a prolonged interruption of activity .
Imagine if , in November , we had said to our fishermen that they should stay in port until February or March awaiting an opinion on provisional application !
That would not have contributed greatly to improving the understanding of many important sections of public opinion in regard to the European Institutions .
Turning to the request made to me on compensating Portuguese fisherman for having to stay in port , I can say that that is not a matter for the Commission , but I shall look into which national authority is competent and why there have been these delays .
Having said all of that , and without presuming to have answered all of the questions , I wish just to say that throughout the common fisheries policy , aside from other problems , the ' international agreements ' dossier now needs to be reviewed in depth if we are better to organize our future , from very many points of view , including the institutional point of view , bearing in mind that there is a difference depending on whether we are dealing with ACP or other countries .
I believe , however , that trying to conclude balanced agreements founded on partnership - wherever possible and necessary - is the right approach .
Thank you very much , Madam Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at noon tomorrow .
Health monitoring
The next item is the report ( A4-0092 / 96 ) by Mr Poggiolini , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council decision adopting a programme of Community action on health monitoring in the context of the framework for action in the field of public health ( COM ( 95 ) 0449 - C4-0443 / 95-95 / 0238 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , following the major programme to combat cancer and AIDS and the programmes designed to educate and help prevent serious illnesses , this fourth programme is seen in some quarters - by public opinion , journalists and perhaps even Members of the European Parliament who may consider it to be some kind of esoteric device dreamt up by health professionals - as being of lesser importance .
Well , that is not the case ; this is a vital aid to establishing the state of health of Europeans and enabling us to assess the actual results of the major campaigns to fight cancer , AIDS and the other great scourges .
What is involved here is making it possible to take stock of the work that has been done by comparing the results obtained in the different countries .
That will enable us to provide the Member States with factors for assessment on which to base measures to prevent and treat the more serious diseases .
You have to be informed before you can take a decision !
But before you can obtain the information , you have to be able to compare the data that comes from the different governmental and international organizations , such as , for example , the European office of the World Health Organization and the various organizing bodies in the sector , and you have , above all , to find a common language .
The difficulties we face in devising a programme of this nature are substantial : the collation of data , for example , the characteristics of which vary from one state to another ; and there are instances in which some national data is , moreover , impossible to track down .
The data to be compared needs then to be put together to provide a full picture of the health of Europeans and , therefore , the diseases that have effectively to be combated .
That data has to be harmonized ; Europe needs an operational system of monitoring , and that will be possible only if we actually succeed in making it possible to compare and put together the data available to us , given that many health indicators are defined differently in the various Member States .
We need to clear up once and for all a basic misunderstanding : when we talk about harmonizing we mean resolving the difficulties that stand in the way of data comparison .
These difficulties are sometimes merely linguistic but there are times when they flow from cultural traditions or scientific practices which , although in fact harmonized by the international scientific method , make it difficult on occasion actually to identify the health indicators to be compared , precisely because they have different names and are defined differently from one country to another .
Faced with those difficulties , the solutions that appear in the programme are far from clear , in fact they are frequently hesitant and vague .
There is a reluctance to employ the word ' harmonization ' because , as you know , Article 129 of the Maastricht Treaty prohibits the harmonization of health systems .
But it is clear here that the intention is to harmonize scientific terminology and not health systems : unless we have a common scientific language , we shall be unable to provide health monitoring ; Europe would be moving in the dark in the field of health and would not be able to give the Member States the vital information they need to enable them to act most effectively to protect health within the different , heterogeneous health systems of the different countries .
I am certain that , despite its shortcomings , the programme we are considering will improve along the way and needs therefore to be approved and encouraged because it is a basic and vital instrument available to the Member States to promote the health of Europe 's citizens .
There was substantial agreement within the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection : no fewer than 40 amendments were tabled on various problems , including the proposal for a European monitoring agency , adjusting the budgetary appropriation , the objectives to be coordinated with health professionals and the definition of a non-exhaustive list of the sectors in which health indicators need to be defined .
I feel sure that the House will approve this programme by a large majority . As I said , it may not perhaps be a very spectacular programme because it does not arouse the emotions of citizens ; it may not perhaps be properly understood and valued by the mass media , but it is nonetheless a programme fundamental to the success of all those programmes already approved and that have still to be approved in the field of public health in Europe .
Mr President , the Committee on Budgets has considered the proposal for the adoption of a Community action programme on health monitoring and has , obviously , looked more particularly at the financial aspects .
In that connection , we must , however , point to a number of inconsistencies : in point of fact an amount deemed necessary has been fixed by the Commission , limiting to some extent the margin for manoeuvre available to the budgetary authority .
As Mr Poggiolini , the rapporteur , has said , the programme concerns horizontal and trans-national measures that are actually intended to serve as indictors for the more operational measures provided for in the context of the three earlier programmes .
For that reason , the Committee on Budgets takes the view that the proposed funding of ECU 13.8 million over five years , that is less than ECU 5 million a year , falls far short of what is needed to implement an effective and operational monitoring system .
Furthermore , in its communication on the legal bases and maximum amounts , the Commission proposed not using legal bases to underpin measures involving less than ECU 5 million ; in those terms also , there is a lack of consistency in the financial appropriation being proposed .
Looking at the substance then , this would appear to be a proposal halfway between the creation of the kind of genuine European health-monitoring agency which this House has called for on a number of occasions and the simple coordination of trans-national information , its budget deliberately reduced , that the Council wants to see .
I therefore agree , as does the Committee on Budgets , with the Committee on the Protection of the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection which considers the level of funding to be inadequate in view of the crucial nature of the programme and is proposing an increase .
I must point out that , when it came to the recent allocation of funding for the three health programmes , which the rapporteur mentioned , the effect of Parliament 's position was to add ECU 10 million to the total amount fixed for the three programmes at the conciliation stage .
Mr President , in my opinion Mr Poggiolini deserves the Socialist Group 's congratulations on the sincerity and enthusiasm with which he has prepared his report .
In addition he has been kind enough to accept practically all amendments in committee and I thank him for that .
I also congratulate the Commission .
As Mr Poggiolini has said , this programme is extremely important .
In the first place as regards the subject-matter , because only after the real health situation in Europe is known - which will be by putting all the data on a uniform basis , checking their reliability and transmitting them through a computer network - will it be possible to achieve a Community citizens ' health monitoring system , to include factors affecting their health , to make comparisons of health in the various Member States and to bolster the Member States ' health policies .
I should also like to stress that this must lead to the creation of a permanent structure for health monitoring .
As regards the subject-matter therefore , we have before us an initiative of extraordinary importance , but the same is true as regards procedure : this is the fourth programme on health matters , as has been said , since the Treaty on European Union and so since the Council laid down health priorities .
But it is the first of the four to have a differential element .
And the position is that it is not an addition to the actions of the 15 Member States but there is a joint management since it lays down a structure for cooperation between the Member States .
It is not an amalgamation of policies .
On the contrary it plans the creation of a follow-up system and those of us who think that we must make progress in the ' Communitization ' of health policies think that it is an extraordinary initiative .
It is a matter of a co-decision procedure enriched , moreover , by contributions from the Commission , the Committee on the Environment and the Committee on Budgets .
Finally I should like to thank the Commission for its special sensitivity to Parliament 's view .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me thank Mr Poggioloni for this excellent report .
The harmonization of data is essential to provide each country with a basis of comparison to enable it to review its own health policy and to allow each state to react more quickly and effectively to rectify undesirable trends .
Data protection and security of data are paramount requirements .
For that reason , anonymity must be ensured when data are passed on .
That is very important to us as Liberals .
These efforts are consistent with Article 129 of the Treaty , which enshrines the aim of ensuring a high level of human health protection .
We feel unable to support Amendment No 32 , since we take the view that countries must also be prepared to play their part in financing such measures .
The programme itself is too poorly funded to allow for financial support to Member States .
Amendment No 40 - a relisting of the categories of data to be collected - is really a painstaking administrative task that is for the Commission to undertake and not the European Parliament .
Mr President , the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left supports Mr Poggiolini 's report because it is a substantial improvement on what the Commission submitted .
And it is true that both the Commission communication and the report constitute important progress and we welcome that .
In any event , there are three omissions in the report which we should like to mention so that they may be incorporated in the future if appropriate .
The first omission is related to the social context in which this report is made : it seems that the health of Europeans is likely to deteriorate for three reasons .
First the increase in unemployment which is becoming structural for young people and women , with all that that involves as regards health , and an increase in the number of people marginalized in Europe - and it ought to have been taken into account in making this communication - all as a product of the restrictions imposed by the neo-liberal policy of Maastricht .
Secondly the difficulty of a health information network working well throughout Europe when we are seeing a re-privatization of medicine and the resultant difficulties that brings for gathering information through the public system .
Thirdly the threat of various epidemics which - as we are seeing - may come from Russia and neighbouring countries .
The WHO has called attention to this and we must therefore improve the situation with regard to our health information .
The second important omission consists in not considering as an important indicator - although it was stressed at Alma Ata in 1978 and in Ottawa in 1982 - that there will not be health for all in the year 2000 unless the whole community takes part in the working of the health system , above all in the operation of the level of basic treatment .
Finally the third omission relates to information .
It is important to collect information - that is the main thing - and we therefore welcome this initiative , but the communication does not specify that information must be collected for action , to intervene publicly .
And I think that the recent example of what has happened in the case of mad cows is giving a reason for the need to improve the sum total of information and instruments in order to be able to intervene effectively .
Otherwise we shall simply be collecting information for publication but not for action .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , if there is any single sure belief shared by all industrialized countries , it is that fundamental choices must now be made over a public health policy .
I shall not again rehearse the reasons that have led various States to initiate a number of reforms but , whatever options are adopted by governments in this field , it is clear that one of the essential pre-conditions for taking any decision is the implementation at European level of a programme for assessing the current situation and the probable trends in the population 's state of health and in health systems .
This is what the Commission 's document proposes and that is the message our rapporteur is conveying with some skill in amending that document .
Parliament intended to propose a fully-fledged European Health Observatory like that set up in other fields .
The majority of the Council preferred not to go beyond simple coordination .
The Commission is therefore proposing to us a rather vague public health monitoring system , but whatever form this new instrument takes , it must be efficient and operational .
Health professionals and patients as well as governments require this to provide the decision-makers with all the material they need for the best possible insight into existing situations and how they are developing .
Parliament wanted the health professionals , the NGOs and the whole paramedical establishment to be more closely associated .
My feeling is that this wish has not been taken into account in the Commission 's document .
Thus , the Commission proposes to analyse the state of health of European citizens , to evaluate the impact of Community action programmes and to supply Member States with information on that state of health .
All this is perfect in theory ; but , behind this there must be real political will to promote health protection and disease prevention since , as we all know , the medicine of the 21st century must be centred more on prevention which would provide a better safeguard for the integrity of our currently threatened health systems .
In conclusion , I hope that the executive Commission 's proposal , even though it is not as elaborate as Parliament would have liked , will be , in agreement with the Council , a first decisive step towards the introduction of the preventive and protective medicine which is our expectation .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at noon tomorrow .
Alzheimer 's disease - health card - blood safety
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0051 / 96 by Mr Poggiolini , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on Alzheimer 's disease and the prevention of disorders of the cognitive functions in the elderly ; -A4-0091 / 96 by Mr Leopardi , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the European health card ; -A4-0094 / 96 by Mr Cabrol , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the communication from the Commission on blood safety and self-sufficiency in the EC ( COM ( 94 ) 0652 - C4-0016 / 95 ) .
Mr President , it is our common experience that , as people get older , we frequently come across cases variously defined as senile dementia or cerebral arteriosclerosis .
Only recently has the public - and the fact that this illness has afflicted former US president Ronald Reagan may be a factor here - become aware of a fact long familiar to science , namely that there is a degenerative illness of the human brain which , sadly , seems , as matters stand , to be irreversible and the treatment of which is currently at an early stage of development , experimental and unable to arrest its deadly progress .
The initial symptoms are common to other diseases , for some of which there is an effective treatment , so that an early and differentiated diagnosis is crucial to avoid confusing the different illnesses .
Alzheimer 's disease predominantly afflicts the elderly , and the early symptoms are commonplace - loss of memory , disorientation and personality disorders - but it then progresses fatally to the terminal stages characterized by the inability to take care of oneself , incontinence , bedsores and then , at the end , inevitable death .
It can take seven or eight years to progress from the initial symptoms to the terminal stage .
Because it affects the elderly , this illness has become and will increasingly become one of the great scourges of our society , particularly in a society like ours here in Europe in which life expectancy has reached levels inconceivable just ten years ago , as a result of better living conditions , greater access to medical care and improvements in that same care .
All of this means that the disease will spread .
It is calculated that in the year 2000 , at least 4 million of the some 52 million people aged over 65 in Europe will be suffering from Alzheimer 's disease : 4 million who will be the responsibility of families which will have - particularly in the more advanced stages of the illness - to meet increasing costs and cope with intolerable physical and psychological distress .
It is estimated that of those aged 85 and over - and we are starting to see many 85 year-olds - one elderly person in 4 , that is 25 % , will be suffering from Alzheimer 's disease .
This resolution seeks to encourage - effectively , we hope - the Commission to draw up a multiannual programme of funding and initiatives concerning everything that can possibly be done to help families and sufferers .
There is much to be done : support for research , the training of medical and nursing staff , particularly in regard to the need for an early diagnosis ; but above all providing information to and thoroughly preparing families for the progress of the disease , to prepare them psychologically , physically and practically to deal with the various stages .
Clearly , the Member States will have to understand that , particularly in the terminal stage , it is not possible to leave it to families always and exclusively to bear the burden of this tragic illness .
It will , finally , be crucial to set up a campaign of information geared to the public and to school children to teach them to understand the disease , to live with it and with those suffering from it , because this is still a taboo subject : there is an unjustified sense of shame in the face of senile dementia .
The European Community has not ignored the problem : although there has been no specific programme , the commitment for budget line B3-4300 has increased from ECU 2 million to ECU 5 million for 1996 in the context of public health measures .
That funding has been used for the purposes I have listed and also been made available to the different non-governmental associations , Alzheimer Europe , for example , which brings together no fewer than 18 national associations .
The very important question I put to the Commission asking how that ECU 5 million is to be used elicited what amounts to a very general answer from Commissioner Flynn .
However , we note that the Commission anticipates attending the important conference to be held in Ireland on 21 and 22 November next .
The European Parliament will have to ensure that better use is made of the funds , not only in terms of the issue of greater transparency but also to banish the current uncertainty and vagueness that surrounds this new great plague , so that citizens can be made aware of it . They alone can exert democratic influence on the Member States , encouraging governments to assist sufferers and their families .
One important step in that direction will be the programme that we are urging the Commission to provide .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the European Commission presents us with a communication prior , I hope , to a directive on blood transfusion aimed at harmonizing the valuable practice of blood transfusion over the whole European Union and at guaranteeing , in all Member States and for all citizens of the Union , both the safety of blood products and a sufficient quantity of them for everybody .
We are , of course , in agreement with the main points in the communication , but in our report we lay stress on certain aspects that appear to us to be essential .
Firstly , in order to guarantee safety , the blood transfusion chain must be considered in its entirety , beginning of course with the selection of donors , which should be strict , uniform and controlled over the whole of the European Union , so that donors at risk can be excluded by a meticulous examination .
The plan must also institute follow-up monitoring of the blood samples taken so that they can , if necessary , be traced back to the donors .
This is ' traceability ' .
But it is not enough just to select the donors .
The products taken from them must also be tested .
For this , what are called ' infectious markers ' must be defined and used , thus making it possible to recognize the possible presence of any dangerous microbes or parasites that could be transmitted to recipients .
Next , it is important to define and harmonize throughout the European Union the methods of treating , conserving , storing and handling blood products , to provide the highest possible guarantee of safety .
All these measures , harmonized throughout all Member States , will allow blood products to circulate freely throughout the whole European Union .
Finally , blood transfusion activities and the transfusion chain must be continuously monitored in order to detect immediately any accident or contamination , to find its cause and to prevent any repetition : this is ' haemovigilance ' .
The second aim of this communication is to ensure that there are sufficient quantities of blood and blood products to respond to the needs of citizens of the Union .
There are two possible ways of achieving this : either by reducing the quantities required or by increasing the quantities taken .
The quantities required can be reduced by a rational and reasonable use of blood products , reserving them for absolute necessities , and by encouraging alternative practices like auto-transfusion , the recovery and retransfusion of blood extravasated during and after operations , and the acceptance , by transfusing less , of slight post-operative anaemia that is normally rapidly corrected .
The professionals in blood transfusion - the nurses , doctors and technical staff - must become proficient in this rational use of blood products : hence the need for appropriate education and teaching in the training of students .
The second way of ensuring a sufficient supply of blood products is , of course , to increase the quantity of blood collected by making the public aware of the inescapable need for blood donations or simple plasma donations using the newly perfected technique of plasmapheresis .
Finally of course , the donation should not only be voluntary but also unpaid , thus avoiding the creation of a separate class of donors who , being paid for blood taken , may fail to give warning of possible dangers to recipients .
However , there is at present not enough plasma available in the European Union - not enough plasma , factor 8 and other products - and this forces us to import plasma or other derivatives from non-member countries , particularly the USA .
These products are mainly supplied by private companies , who use paid donors in order to make a profit since this is the only way they can obtain enough of them .
The European Union also has such private companies which must not be condemned to disappear to the advantage of public institutions which would then have a monopoly .
One way of ensuring that these private companies do not pay their donors would be to compensate them .
The two vital aims would then be achieved : the safety and self-sufficiency of blood transfusion in the European Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , if you allow me , I should like to pick out from the reports being discussed in this joint debate on problems essentially linked to the health of European citizens the Poggiolini report on Alzheimer 's , not only because I was also asked to draft an opinion on this subject , issued by the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment , but in particular because this disease and other senile deficiencies resulting from higher life-expectancy values is a burning issue and presents given perspectives as a result of the levels of development seen in different countries .
There is no doubt that medical and scientific research into this disease calls for a major commitment , considerable effort and growing financial investment .
It is important to find the means for preventing Alzheimer 's in scientific bases and , as early as possible , to make sure that men and women are treated because it is a disgrace that science should enable people to live longer and then do nothing to take away some of the side effects .
We are obliged to find increasingly appropriate solutions to deal with the problems arising from Alzheimer 's and other diseases related to ageing populations .
It is for the Member States of the European Union to define certain policies and strategies so that the whole problem related to neuro-degenerative diseases can be tackled in their medical , social , financial and other aspects .
However , it is understood that the growing dimension of the problem , its social importance and the opportunity once again for Europe to affirm the collective duty of solidarity are relevant motives for the Commission to present an action plan to fight Alzheimer 's , instead of making a modest response on behalf of Europe to the questions raised by the disease .
Finally , I should like to pay tribute to the social workers who in various European countries are dispensing the extremely demanding care , out of utter altruism , to Alzheimer 's sufferers , in conditions which are sometimes extremely difficult and in particular emotionally desperate .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the two aims being pursued are indeed the restoration and strengthening of confidence in the safety of the transfusion chain and the achievement of self-sufficiency in blood .
However , it is not very easy to accomplish all this as we find ourselves doing away with provisions which obstruct the free movement of goods and at the same time taking steps to guarantee maximum safety .
Common standards will therefore have to be set .
But it is worth pausing a little and looking at these common standards .
For the private sector claims that the measures introduced in the name of selfsufficiency in plasma , particularly through the resolution of the European Parliament of 14 September 1993 , prevent it marketing these products .
To be completely clear on this point : the free movement of goods is undoubtedly a sacred dogma , and engaging in industrial practices which generate economic activity and prosperity is undoubtedly sacrosanct but , to put it very bluntly , the life of our fellow citizens is probably even more important .
And , just as farmers ' income has to be preserved , but not at any price , we should expect strict regulations to be put into place .
They should not be over-fussy , but they must protect us .
On the same subject , barely a fortnight ago in this very chamber , we had a debate on in vitro diagnostic devices : serological tests .
The monitoring and regulation required provoked a general outcry , precisely in the name of the free movement of goods .
Yet only a few days after that debate , 50 000 HIV tests were recognized as defective by their manufacturers and the tests will have to be started all over again .
Strict regulation and monitoring would have protected us .
When we realize the dramatic effect that a false positive result can have on a family or a couple , when we realize the truly disastrous effect on health that a false negative result can produce , we can appreciate the necessity to remain unswerving , scrupulous and precise about the requirements for voluntary donations and for optimum use of blood and blood products ; about informing the general public of the harmlessness of giving blood , of the urgency of the situation and of blood donation as an act of solidarity .
We must demand that a standard file be drawn up on all donors .
We must demand that blood-saving techniques be developed .
We must encourage research on synthetic products and substitutes .
We must demand the training and retraining of doctors and nurses ; we must demand traceability and haemovigilance networks .
Finally , in connection with the haemovigilance network , a truly harmonized European system should be able to rely on the regulatory framework already established in Directive 89 / 381 .
The European Parliament already asked for precisely this in its resolution of November 1993 .
I hope we shall be able to remember this after three years .
Mr President , the European Parliament did not wait until the Maastricht Treaty was adopted to place constant emphasis on all public health issues .
Naturally , our commitment is now all the greater , it has increased , and it is no coincidence that , immediately following the approval of the three major framework programmes , the House is being called upon at this part-session to discuss a further four measures which are both a corollary and supplement to those programmes .
A few moments ago , we approved an important supplement to the framework programme for public health ; as regards the programme on health monitoring , I should like to thank the Commission for fulfilling the commitment it entered into at conciliation when we in fact approved the framework programme for public health .
As Mr Leopardi reminded us , the House has discussed the health card on many occasions - but we are now lagging behind .
I would say that one of the benefits of European citizenship should be that every European citizen is able , on request , to have a health card that will make it possible for him to avail himself of freedom of movement in Europe without having to face the problems that result from being away from home and dealing , therefore , with medical staff who are unfamiliar with his state of health .
I therefore believe that a health card of that nature has finally to be devised , and , on behalf of my group , I urge the Commission to submit as soon as possible a proposal for a decision so that citizens are at last able , if they so desire , to ask for a health card .
Turning to Alzheimer 's disease - we have said this on many occasions , and Professor Poggiolini put it very well : the ageing of the population is an achievement of the health system .
But just as the ageing of the population increases health costs , it is similarly bound to increase the incidence of agerelated disease .
Here again we are therefore lagging behind .
What Mr Poggiolini called for a few moments ago was right - and my group supports this , moreover - namely that we should finally pay greater attention to a disease that could assume vast proportions , by increasing the resources available for research and assistance , particularly because , as Mr Poggiolini said , we have to remember that hitherto it has been predominantly and almost exclusively families that have had to bear the anguish of those suffering from Alzheimer 's .
As regards the communication on blood , I have to say that since I have been a Member of this House , this is , I believe , the third time we have discussed this issue in the Chamber .
Well , here again we are lagging behind .
Here again I believe that , except for those involved in the work , no-one would believe that here in Europe we are not self-sufficient ; no-one can accept that blood in Europe is not safe .
But the two go together : it is self-sufficiency that will give us safety because we will not have to import or , rather , accept imports from other countries , in return for payment what is more , as seem to me to be continuing here .
We need more donations and those donations should be considered voluntary and non-remunerated ; but donors have also to be shown appreciation : they should , for example , be given a day off when they give blood and the value of their donation has also to be recognized through bonuses and merits .
In addition , the knowledge of those working in the health needed to be improved .
This precious gift must not be wasted and we need therefore to maximize and make the best use of resources .
Measures must be taken to reduce the number of transfusions , increasing the use of blood provided by the patient himself .
I believe it important - and I ask both the Commission and the Council to support this request - that we set up a body to monitor the collection and safety of blood in Europe , a European body that bears that responsibility towards the citizens of Europe .
Mr President , all of us must be greatly concerned with Alzheimer 's as a degenerative disease of the brain that inevitably leads to the destruction of all mental and physical functions .
Ultimately , it renders its victims immobile , unable to recognize even their closest family members .
At present , there is virtually no treatment for the disease and no cure either .
It is inevitably a terminal disease .
In Ireland more than 25 , 000 men and women suffer from this disease ; approximately 6 % of the total Irish population over 65 years of age and 20 % of those over 80 years of age are victims .
At European level it is now estimated that over 8 million - equivalent to approximately 2 % of the over-65 age group - will be afflicted by Alzheimer 's disease by the year 2000 .
Of course , this figure does not take into account the difficulties of the families of the Alzheimer 's sufferers , who are profoundly affected by the disease , both emotionally and practically .
All social life is disrupted and often financial and legal problems ensue .
In such cases there is tremendous pressure on those caring for those suffering from the disease .
In Ireland the invaluable work carried out by the Alzheimer 's Society of Ireland has made a significant contribution to supporting Alzheimer 's sufferers and their families .
As Europe 's demographic profile becomes older , it is clear that Alzheimer 's disease will become an even greater social and health problem .
I believe that the Commission clearly has a role to play in establishing a comprehensive programme of activities to combat the disease and , in particular , to foster research in order to ensure a long-term solution to the problem .
The Commission must put in place , as a matter of some urgency , a comprehensive programme of measures to combat the disease and provide for more resources under its Biomed programme for joint research into the disease .
Regarding research , the Commission also has an important role in coordinating Member State research into the disease and ensuring the optimum results from such research .
It is important to heighten public awareness of this disease and to provide information to affected families .
However , a European programme to combat Alzheimer 's should not be limited to simply increasing awareness of the disease ; it should also aim to provide practical support , particularly for carers looking after victims at home .
Finally , it is important that the European Union give practical recognition to the invaluable work of carers who live each day with the traumatic effects of this disease .
In this regard , the allocation of funding for carer support , including respite facilities , must be urgently considered by the Commission .
Mr President , I thank the three rapporteurs for their excellent reports .
Since I do not have much time , I shall go straight to the heart of the matter .
I do not believe there is enough money available for the fight against Alzheimer 's disease , for establishing specialized out-patient facilities or even hospital wards .
This money is not to be used for the absolutely essential research into Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease either .
The Commission ought to consider where else it could obtain these resources .
Nor do I think that schoolchildren are the appropriate target group for public information campaigns on Alzheimer 's .
I do not think that we as a group can support Amendment No 1 , because it is our view that research on foetal tissue is entirely necessary and should be permissible .
With regard to Mr Leopardi 's report on the health card , I have to say that free choice must be paramount .
My group will not be able to approve the report as a whole if the European Parliament seeks to force this benefit upon people .
We also believe that the persons concerned should be given the opportunity to delete all stored data themselves .
Thirdly , this card will be a great aid to quick and effective action if it is not overloaded with information in such a way as to make important details unrecognizable to the consulting physician .
So in my view there is no need to enter the names of medicines to which the cardholder has shown no reaction .
If I take medication at some time for athlete 's foot and it has no adverse effects , that information has no place on a health card designed for use in an emergency .
We must know from the outset what is more important to us .
Social security or other health insurance cover results in my opinion in twotiered health care .
I believe it can be dangerous for the person concerned if he cannot immediately prove who is financing his treatment .
Mr President , the measures we are discussing in the House form part of a group of reports by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , the main purpose of which is to prevent illnesses which are for some reason difficult to treat and where prevention is far the most sensible option .
In our modern society , we have conquered some traditional illnesses but others have come into being .
The solution to Alzheimer 's , like some tumours and certain types of cardiovascular disease , is certainly prevention .
With an eye to Mr Cabrol 's report in particular , I wish to draw attention to the fact that the problem involved in preventing viral illnesses is the avoidance of contact and , as we have seen , one source of infection is the use of contaminated blood .
To prevent that form of infection it is therefore vital that we pay the greatest attention to the difficulties involved in transfusion .
While I endorse the approach taken by the rapporteur , I have to point out that currently , despite the number of tests carried out on donors and batches of blood destined for transfusion , there is nonetheless a gap which means that we cannot have total guarantees .
Moreover , we have seen that , at certain times , the tests involve risks because they produce false negatives .
In the light of those circumstances , we need therefore to reinforce the preventive criteria and set in place all possible arrangements to protect our citizens .
Mr President , Mr Poggiolini 's report deals with a problem which has hitherto not been much in the public eye : Alzheimer 's disease .
The number of people over 60 suffering from this disease is growing alarmingly .
Patients become completely dependent as a result of their illness .
Care for such people often falls upon the shoulders of members of the family and neighbours and becomes a serious burden .
This report therefore rightly calls attention to Alzheimer 's disease and its consequences and presses for further research , the provision of more information and increased funding by the European Union and the Member States .
Such an illness and its social , mental and economic consequences cannot and must not be played down .
It is therefore with due deference and prudence that I put forward the following ideas , more or less inspired by an observation in Mr Poggiolini 's explanatory statement .
At one point he refers in particular to the fact that developing countries are little affected by this illness because life expectancy there is too low .
That is poignant and also significant .
Longevity has become normal in our welfare society .
That is something to be grateful for .
But it is striking that in our society the current ideology projects only the image of the ideal person as young and healthy .
We are scared of old age , sickness and death .
The crux of this problem naturally lies in the loss of the purpose of this earthly existence .
Without the hope of the gospel death is always final .
A disease such as Alzheimer 's certainly needs to be tackled .
But let us learn to accept that sickness and old age form part of our existence .
In our society we seem to want to detach that from our daily existence .
By that we deny the value of our fellow human beings with their own place in creation .
Because that is what they are : fellow human beings , nothing more , nothing less .
Mr President , I should like first of all to thank Mr Poggiolini on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists .
He has collaborated closely with us and has seriously considered and adopted many of our amendments .
What are we discussing with Alzheimer 's , since that is the report I now want to consider ?
We are talking about a question .
I should actually like to keep the word problem out of the discussion .
I have tried to do that too in an amendment to the annex .
It is not a problem but a question .
That goes also for what Mr Blokland has just said too .
I think when we are speaking about old people suffering from dementia , about Alzheimer patients , we must treat them with respect for what they are , and the very word ' problem ' , in any case in Dutch , has a negative ring to it .
I think it is more a question .
What are we faced with in our society ?
And it tallies , as other speakers have also said .
It tallies that Europe is the continent of the elderly .
Anyone who looks at the figures for old age in all continents notices that Europe will have by far the greatest number of old people in the coming decades .
Thus the young have the future , the elderly have the future , you should say .
There is something positive about that .
But at the same time it brings with it issues and difficulties , and that is what we are faced with in this report .
In that sense I am glad too that Mr Poggiolini has taken seriously our suggestion for encouraging Alzheimer associations for example - Alzheimer Europe is only one - the exchange of research to avoid duplication , the encouragement and establishment of specialized polyclinics and memory policies as we call them in the Netherlands , my own country , where we have already acquired a lot of experience .
To name one specific successful model , the Alzheimer telephone .
Our Group cannot accepts Amendments Nos 1 and 3 , Mr President , where there is reference to the use of foetuses for research .
We shall abstain on Amendment No 1 .
It is I suppose a relevant subject , but not in this report , rather in a report in which we are discussing ethical limits in research .
Mr President , may I begin by congratulating and complimenting Mr Poggiolini on the excellent reports he has drawn up .
I mean that genuinely and sincerely .
I think it can be seen here that a doctor , actually a president of the Italian specialist medical association , can also be a very good politician .
I greatly respect that .
In fact I want to include all the reports .
First of all there is the medical card .
It is a perfect initiative .
I think a card of that kind may be of vital importance for the holder if he or she needs medical help abroad .
Those travelling on holiday or on business can count on medical help and diagnosis without any language problem .
It should also be possible to make immediate contact with home in case of illness , since all those data can be stored on the card .
I think and hope that Commissioner Flynn is ready , now that we have the new state of technology , to take over this initiative which has been with Parliament for such a terribly long time .
I turn now to Alzheimer 's .
Mrs van Putten and Mr Blokland have each spoken about it .
We must recognize that something must be done at European level to see how we can best find a joint solution .
So that means that we must coordinate research at European level , exchange experience and so on .
At this point I should like to say that my honourable friend Karla Peijs is very sorry that because of extremely sad circumstances at home she cannot be present as she would have liked to put a number of other observations , also in a positive sense , to Mr Poggiolini .

Last but not least , I should like to give Mr Cabrol my best thanks for his excellent report on the standardization and safety of blood tests .
We have also put to the vote a number of amendments of mine intended in particular to bring into this report self-sufficiency and the provision of blood which are of paramount importance for the blood safety .
In his well-known expert way Mr Cabrol has been willing to adopt those amendments too and everything has been approved .
Thank you to the rapporteurs .
They have really done excellent work .
Mr President , I should like to say something about problems of safety in transfusion that should also appear on the agenda of a Council planned by the Irish presidency next autumn .
This is an extremely serious subject , when the memory of the controversies provoked by the contaminated blood catastrophe is still with us .
I should like , while of course keeping to both the subject matter of the Commission 's communication and the main arguments of the rapporteur , to call the executive Commission 's attention to the question of freeze-dried plasmas . This is a method of preservation which is quite effective but which nevertheless , because of the long time it allows specimens to be kept , has created and perpetuated a number of risks in transfusions .
It seems that a few residual stocks still remain - some use of them has been mentioned , particularly by the armed forces - and for several years have escaped all safety measures .
As part of the preparation for this Council on the safety of transfusion , I should like the question of these residual stocks of freeze-dried plasmas to be raised and I should also like steps taken to avert any risks that might remain in using them for transfusion .
It would appear that everything is not yet clear in this matter .
Quite apart from the problem of AIDS , there are still said to be problems relating to hepatitis .
I believe it would be a good thing for the planned Council to be the occasion for some clarification , so as to give the required assurances and to guarantee that the objective of safety is achieved , an objective we share with the rapporteur .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate Mr Poggiolini on his report .
I am particularly pleased to see this report on Alzheimer 's come to fruition because it was a motion put down by me some 18 months ago that has led to this report .
As we have heard , there are an estimated 3.5 million people in the European Union with Alzheimer 's disease .
It is the most common , chronic , terminal illness among our older people .
In my own country of Scotland , which has a population of five million , there are an estimated 61 , 000 people suffering from dementia .
It is reckoned that this figure will rise to around 73 , 000 by the early part of next century .
Forty to forty-five percent of those people with dementia are now living in some form of institutional care and are heavily dependent - although many with high dependency needs are being cared for by their own families and within their own communities .
Dementia is not just an old person 's disease .
The one serious point that Mr Martinez made is that we are learning that from some of the new cases of CJD .
There are between 2 , 000 and 3 , 000 people in Scotland alone between the ages of 30 and 65 suffering from dementia .
Dementia knows no social , national or economic boundaries .
Therefore I believe it is ripe for action at the European level .
I hope the European Commission will consider using this report as the basis for what could be called ' the first European action plan on dementia ' .
Such an action plan could contain the following elements : it could have an information / education element trying to give this disease a higher profile and help overcome the prejudice and misunderstanding that people suffering from dementia still face using , for example , the Year of the Elderly and some of the activities that took place under that programme .
We need to do something at the European level to improve training and the quality of standards for the care of the sufferers .
The Commission could use its good offices to bring together health and social care experts to disseminate good practice .
We could also use some of our existing research programmes such as BIOMED to play a greater role in fostering and motivating research in this particular area .
I should also like to encourage the Commission to consider establishing an advisory committee in this area , bringing together non-governmental organizations , users and carers , health and social care professionals ; again , so that we can disseminate good practice across the whole of the European Union . This seems to be a legitimate role for the Union and the Commission to play .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the health-policy experts are having their say this evening .
I wish to thank all of my honourable colleagues and in particular I should like to make some comments on Mr Leopardi 's report .
The quest for a European health card is nothing new in the European Parliament ; back in 1981 it was on the parliamentary agenda , culminating in the so-called recommendation of the European Community .
But at that time the health ministers were not even prepared to get together .
Those were the days when health policy was dealt with as a purely national concern .
We have now moved on a bit .
Firstly , Parliament has a right of initiative , and I hope that the Commissioner will make use of that to play an active part in this endeavour .
Secondly , Maastricht has given us coordination in the domain of health policy .
Now my question today is addressed primarily to the Commissioner .
What are the obstacles that have prevented coordination among the Member States with regard to the health card in the past , and what can we do to remove these obstacles ?
I have tabled two amendments , and therein lie two points of importance to the President as well .
My first amendment was intended as an improvement , but the motion was so disastrously mistranslated that the German text says something quite different to the French and Italian versions .
So misunderstandings have naturally arisen , since my amendment was based on the German text and is therefore somewhat incomprehensible to the rapporteur , who is Italian , because it does not refer to his text .
In other words , communication broke down here , which is why problems have arisen with the amendment .
The gist of the other amendment is as follows : my honourable colleagues are not only keen to see the health card introduced but would also like to combine it with coordination in the spheres of occupational diseases and social security provision .
Given that we have been unable in the past to coordinate even our actions in the field of health alone , I fear that the ministers of social affairs will have problems if we also include the domains of occupational illness and social security cover , for our systems are not coordinated .
What interests me is that we should introduce the health card as quickly and as simply as possible , so that the doctor can provide very rapid assistance to a patient who is ill and unable to communicate , either because he is unconscious or because he cannot speak the language , in cases where the wrong treatment might well prove fatal .
That is why my amendment seeks to exclude the issues of occupational diseases and social security cover , because they are so complex that we shall have to wait another hundred years for such a package .
I should indeed be grateful to the Commissioner if he would tell us which elements he is able to endorse and what can be done to ensure that the health card will actually be introduced soon .
Mr President , I congratulate Mr Cabrol on his report .
A man with his vast medical experience is a worthy rapporteur on blood safety .
A number of controversies regarding infected blood supplies in some European Union countries - including the Hepatitis B incident in Ireland - have somewhat dented public confidence in the blood transfusion chain .
The European Commission 's communication on blood safety and self-sufficiency in the European Union represents a considered attempt to restore confidence and to establish a specifically European response to the matter .
In response to the Commission 's suggestions , I believe it is necessary that the Commission introduces the necessary measures to guarantee the maximum safety in the supplies and the use of blood and its derivatives .
The Commission must also urge Member States to take appropriate action to achieve self-sufficiency on the basis of unpaid , voluntary donations .
It is also vital that the Commission establishes common regulations on the selection of donors , the establishment of uniform tests of the highest technological level throughout Europe : storage , handling , hygiene of plasma and the rational use of blood .
One only has to recall the tragic HIV infection of numbers of haemophiliacs by the infected blood products from America to realise the need for such regulations .
Such a tragedy must never be allowed to recur .
Finally , the Commission and Member States should also recognize the significant safety benefits from blood donors who donate frequently , and encourage new and existing donors to donate .
The Maastricht Treaty allows for a European Union role in coordinating national health policies .
The safety of blood products for Europe 's citizens must be one of the top priorities in this context .
I hope that the interest in the area of blood safety will help pave the way for a more fully developed European health policy that will allow for a more proactive approach to tackling Europe 's pressing health issues .
For many decades Austria has had an exemplary system of blood and plasma collection , which I should like to outline .
The mixed system comprises Red Cross branches , hospitals and industry .
The system , which has evolved over a period of time , consists of blood-donor centres run by non-profit organizations and of private plasmapheresis centres where plasma is collected for industrial fractionation .
Back in 1975 a special law was passed to regulate plasmapheresis , the first such legislation in the world .
It is primarily thanks to initiatives taken in the private sector and the years of experience that have ensued from these that Austria was able , in her first year of EU membership , to provide more than 120 000 litres of plasma , a substantial contribution to European self-sufficiency .
This figure was achieved by around 14 000 donors in 13 plasmapheresis centres .
The voluntary nature of these donations and the fact that the donors receive no payment are regarded as self-evident .
The plasma is not bought from the donor , although plasma donors in Austria naturally receive appropriate compensation for their time and for travel to and from the centres .
Each country has its own system , and all of them work more or less effectively .
We must accept that , in the realm of blood and plasma collection , the systems vary and operate on mixed bases .
Whether these are commercial or nonprofitmaking , the aims for Europe remain the same , namely efficiency and selfsufficiency .
While we strive to become self-sufficient , however , we must not ignore collection in the United States , for as long as plasma can be collected there for half of what it costs in Europe , economic logic , particularly in the light of the spiralling cost of our health systems , does not necessarily dictate that we focus our efforts on European self-sufficiency .
Mr President , I wish to bring to the attention of Commissioner Flynn the kind of problems experienced by European citizens which have been brought to me by a constituent .
A constituent 's son went to Greece and suffered an injury there .
Of course he presented his E111 form when he returned to the United Kingdom but was told that the receipt which he had obtained from the doctor was invalid because it did not contain a perforation on it .
Imagine the problem that young man faced : exhausted , tired and upset , he was required to insist upon a receipt with perforations on it .
The fact that he did not return that receipt with the appropriate perforations to the United Kingdom meant that he was unable to obtain reimbursement .
Now that inhibits , I am sure you will agree , free movement .
Therefore , I would like you to look upon the proposal for a health card in the light of the time that we have already spent on this as a Parliament .
You will recall this is one of a series of resolutions , the first of which was in 1981 .
So we have been asking for this for a very long time .
The difference now , however , is that we have Article 138b , which gives the power of legislative initiative for the first time to the European Parliament - admittedly with no sanction against the Commission should the Commission fail to deliver .
I urge the Commission to think very carefully about this , because , as I have already said , it is a matter of free movement ; it would reduce bureaucracy of the kind I have tried to illustrate , and I am sure that this is technically possible .
Indeed , Mr Leopardi , in an excellent report , says that much in part of the resolution .
I should like to say to Mr Flynn , who I know is aware of this , that if he were kind enough to come forward with a proposal , the kind of card which I have already presented to him would be available to every European Union citizen .
This is the kind of thing that the Socialist Group has already designed and would be of great value to every European citizen when making their way round the single market .
We ask the Commission to come forward with this and we hope very much that the Commissioner will respond in the way I have described .
Mr President , we have just heard from Mr David Martin a number of figures about people with Alzheimer 's disease in the European Union .
I should like to focus them still more specifically , Mr President .
At present the European Parliament has 626 Members .
The average age is about 45 .
One third of Members are 55 or older .
Statistically , within ten years five to fifteen of our fellow-Members will be suffering from Alzheimer 's disease .
That means specifically that they will be suffering , and I quote from Mr Poggiolini 's excellent report , from an irreversible and incurable degeneration of the brain leading to loss of memory , confusion and in some cases personality change .
And that is leading aside the emotions involved with Alzheimer 's disease .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is to be hoped that within ten years there will be efficacious therapies and medicines to prevent Alzheimer 's and similar diseases and if possible to cure them .
But that depends amongst other things on the readiness of the European Union to invest in the fight against such afflictions .
That needs to be done amongst other things by supporting and encouraging scientific research into the causes and consequences of the disease , that is fundamental , applied , medical and pharmaceutical research , and also by instructing and training both professional carers and voluntary companions , by providing help for the victims , both the patients themselves and their nearest relatives and live-in or local by establishing appropriate institutions within or near hospitals , homes for old people or psychiatric institutions ; by promoting cross-border exchange of data and experience with regard both to the disease and to the patients and by setting up or contributing to information programmes and investigative projects .
A Community action programme with a special and not merely symbolical budget heading ought to be able to supplement the existing Community initiatives and coordinate the campaigns started by the Member States up to a certain level .
It goes without saying that the Member States have a primary responsibility , particularly where reimbursement of medical expenses and social contributions are concerned .
One final point , Mr President , we must not play patients off against one another on budgetary grounds or compare one patient with another .
But as rapporteur for Community programmes on behalf of the elderly I must sincerely ask that this group of the population should not be forgotten .
In the year 2000 there will be more than 50 million of them in the European Union , so more than one million Alzheimer patients .
As a social personalist and a Christian Democrat I earnestly plead for a European approach to Alzheimer 's disease .
Mr President , with these reports we are taking three important steps in the inexorable path towards working together which shows - it is the principle of European Union , historically speaking - that 15 times the effort yields more than 15 times the result because of that added value which comes from sharing problems , setting priorities and tackling problems .
That is a principle which should be recognized by certain Member States which are still sceptical about a joint approach to certain problems as serious or as important as the three which are before the House today .

Congratulations to Mr Poggiolini , Mr Leopardi and Mr Cabrol for their excellent work in which they consider respectively :
Alzheimer 's disease and related problems , a nosological phenomenon which is still beyond the scope of aetiological and therapeutic research and which , as has been emphasized , constitutes by reason of its marked economic , human and social impact , one of our citizens ' main problems .
The health card , which must never , I venture to stress , become an obstacle to the movement of persons .
It must be made very clear that the health card is a voluntary matter .
It is something that will allow easier passage across internal borders and will facilitate freedom of movement and not act as a second passport or a second requirement .
Bureaucracy must not turn such an interesting initial idea into one more obstruction or one more compulsory document .
Blood transfusions , which are a major problem today .
They are a fully successful tissue transplant and therefore an extraordinary therapeutic tool .
Without prejudice to continual progress in self-transfusion I think that the approximation of Member States ' rules is a very interesting step .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should also like to comment on Mr Poggiolini 's report on Alzheimer 's disease .
Let me begin by associating myself with the thanks that have been expressed to Mr Poggiolini .
He has certainly submitted a very good report , which deals with various aspects of the issue .
As a medic , I have also met patients with Alzheimer 's , and I am aware of the extent of the problem .
I believe that Mr Poggiolini has adopted the correct approach and that the other speakers , such as Mrs van Putten , have set the right tone in this debate .
For that reason , I should like to restrict myself to one problem that particularly concerns me , namely the question of research .
I was the rapporteur for the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection on the research programme Biomed II , and at that time we held some very intense discussions on the extent to which we could permit research with foetal tissue .
Where do the problems lie , and where are the boundaries we must not cross ?
After our very intense discussion of the matter at that time , we agreed on a compromise that under no circumstances should financial or other pressure be exerted to compel pregnant women to have an abortion and hence to exploit them as suppliers of raw material , so to speak .
This is a real danger and not mere scaremongering , and I believe we should bear that amendment in mind here today .
It was adopted at the time by a large parliamentary majority but was sadly rejected by the Commission .
I should like to urge Commissioner Flynn to examine whether this idea of Parliament 's to rule out any exertion of pressure is not in fact a sound one .
I believe we have the opportunity here to reaffirm that we are most definitely in favour of research but that the limit is reached when people start to be exploited as sources of raw material .
The Green Group in the European Parliament has tabled an amendment rejecting such research altogether .
Parliament will surely be unable to agree to that .
What I am tabling on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , however , is a compromise , and I ask you all to support our Amendment No 3 to the Poggiolini report .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , blood transfusion is an important and highly sensitive act , often poorly understood in all its aspects but nevertheless crucial and irreplaceable for health , treatment and hence life .
So I wish at the outset to thank the Commissioner and the Commission for its communication , and the rapporteur , our colleague Christian Cabrol , for the quality of his work .
I want to make it clear that I support the communication , the report and the majority of the proposals , provided of course that some detailed changes are made .
While clarification was essential , the need to stress the safety of the donor and the recipient was even more so .
It is now imperative to promote the giving of blood by providing wide-ranging and precise information about blood , blood products and their use in treatment .
Harmonization of the rules for the transfusion process , particularly as regards the selection of donors and screening tests , is absolutely indispensable and urgent throughout Europe .
Finally , this calls for the creation of a European organization for monitoring blood safety .
This would be an enormous advance for the citizens of Europe .
The question of voluntary unpaid blood donation is very familiar to me : I am myself a blood donor .
The donors and their associations have suffered greatly at all levels from the effects of AIDS and contamination through transfusion .
Today , they need to be recognized , encouraged and supported .
In conclusion , if tomorrow we are to ensure optimum safety and European selfsufficiency - often a decisive factor in achieving safety - we must act still more quickly and still more firmly .
The communication from the Commission executive and Christian Cabrol 's report should help us in this .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , at this late hour I have brought along evidence to show that it has been worth staying on here this evening .
I have brought my own personal blood-donor card , which is linked to an emergency card and was issued by the Austrian Red Cross .
The good thing about it is that a donor always carries his own details around with him and that injections , active immunizations , serum administered , diabetes and allergies , as well as addresses of next of kin and special endorsements , such as details of antibodies , are also contained on the card .
It is extremely important for the blood donor or for the recipient of a blood transfusion to know how data are analysed , to know that quick and reliable diagnosis is permissible and available .
That is a crucial aspect of health policy , and the card introduces a dynamic element to health care , for I believe it is important that data are not only ascertained at a specific point in time but are stored and evaluated over many years .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I must begin by congratulating the three rapporteurs on the excellent quality of their work which lends the European Parliament both prestige and value .
I should like to say a few words about what seems to be one of the most positive and future-looking ideas , namely a European health card .
The creation of a European health card is a positive idea and one which is in keeping with the project of European construction , which deserves our wholehearted support .
The free circulation of persons cannot be complete as long as a European citizen travelling to another state for work , study or tourism , does not have at his or her disposal a system of health care of quality in keeping with perfectly obvious rights to access .
Since I come from a touristic area - the Algarve - and since Portugal is a country of considerable migration , I think that I am particularly sensitive to the defence of this idea .
The Treaty itself commits the European Union to responsibility in ensuring a high level of human health protection .
Indeed , at present , there are technical conditions for the creation of a European health document which can be accepted by all Member States and by the various health system sectors .
The health card which cannot and will never be able to be a new passport , a new hindrance to free circulation , which is a serious contribution against red tape and which will have to respect the principles of the inviolability and security of respective data .
This idea is far from a new one and it certainly needs to be developed and accentuated .
It is already ten years since the first Council resolution in favour of an emergency health card for Europeans , a project which came to nothing .
But now the times are different and this idea is more urgent and there are also greater technical possibilities .
The progress already made ( the Commission has achieved enough work and has enough knowledge for an initiative of this dimension to be given a fillip ) and the assessment of experiments resulting from cards which are already in circulation ( 60 to 70 million ) are positive examples which should be grasped at .
And finally this opens the door to the participation of society , professional health organisations , state and regional health services and the consumers . In other words this breaks up all of the talk and actually brings us closer to the card .
So that is as far as we have got .
Mr President , it is interesting that Commissioner Flynn should have been here earlier today when we were discussing a mainly young people 's problem , namely drugs .
Here we are this evening discussing what is mainly a problem which affects the elderly - Alzheimer 's and senile dementia .
As has been pointed out , these diseases affect millions of people throughout Europe .
In Ireland it is estimated that about 25 , 000 are affected .
The programme proposed would serve to initiate coherent policies at European level .
It would coordinate measures at national level and act as a catalyst for measures both in the public and private sectors .
I support the call that has been made for support for the families .
We know that many women have to care for these patients and these patients can be very difficult , troublesome and sometimes violent .
The families also suffer because the legal affairs of these people may have been left in limbo .
Deterioration can be very quick and they may be unable to attend to their business affairs .
I also urge the Commission to take up Parliament 's recommendations for a voluntary European health card system by January 1999 .
While this will not provide for a free European health system , such a card would enable EU citizens to gain access to medical treatment more quickly and it would also help if it was coordinated with the donor organ card so that in case of accidents , action could be taken very quickly .
Finally , in relation to the blood supply , as Mr Fitzsimons pointed out we had a huge problem in Ireland with the Hepatitis B scare .
I welcome the Commission 's proposals in this regard .
Mr President , the time it has taken for us seriously to discuss an illness like Alzheimer 's disease is a sign of the problem we have in understanding how a change in the population pyramid means that we need to redirect our priorities in both scientific research and the way society is organized .
An increase in average life expectancy cannot be viewed as a problem but as a major achievement of our civilization , but that achievement has to be supported by the appropriate political decisions .
The report we are debating - Mr Poggiolini 's most excellent report - properly places the accent both on the need to expand medical research , to identify treatment for or at least manage and contain age-related diseases , and the vital need to adopt measures to inform and prepare families and social and health workers .
In many parts of Europe there is excellent experience of work on Alzheimer 's , but exchanges of information and the development of trans-national initiative remain at a low level .
That being so , the request that the Commission draw up a programme of action to combat Alzheimer 's disease and related illnesses is more opportune than ever and has our firm support .
Mr President , I am pleased to have the opportunity to present the Commission 's position on these three important health-related issues .
I deal first with Alzheimer 's disease and Mr Poggiolini 's report .
The Commission welcomes the initiative of the European Parliament and notes that Parliament has not limited its resolution to Alzheimer 's disease but has extended its scope to encompass the prevention of disorders of the cognitive functions of the elderly .
This is a very constructive decision .
Neuro-degenerative diseases have great social effects .
I am , therefore , particularly happy that your resolution focuses not only on the medical aspects of Alzheimer 's disease but also on the loss of cognitive functions and equally on its social impact .
Awareness of the disease , as well as support to family members and their organizations , are some of the priorities that have been set out in your resolution .
All too often the consequences for families of the sufferers of such diseases are forgotten .
This fact needs to be recognized .
It has been well spoken of here by the rapporteur and by all of those who have contributed .
In 1993 in its communication on the framework for action in the field of public health , the Commission considered that whereas mental illness could not , on the basis of the criteria developed for selecting areas for Community action and also on account of the limited resources available , be considered as a priority for the immediate future , it should , nevertheless , be kept under consideration .
I am pleased that the European Parliament , which supported the communication and our selection of priorities , has now taken the bold step of placing mental diseases , and particularly those afflicting mostly the elderly , such as Alzheimer 's , at the forefront of its agenda .
Parliament has therefore reinforced the budget available for such diseases .
In 1995 Parliament made a special appropriation of ECU 1 million for actions in the field of Alzheimer 's disease .
This year it has added ECU 5 m to the public health budget line .
I share Parliament 's concern over the progression of this terrible disease and believe that the funds will be used to enhance the quality of life of those suffering from neuro-degenerative diseases , in particular , Alzheimer 's sufferers and their informal carers .
These are the very things you have asked priority to be given to .
So Parliament 's report makes the point forcefully that Alzheimer 's disease will become an increasingly big problem for European society .
That is obvious from the demographic changes that are taking place in our society .
The accelerated ageing of the European population and the particular needs of Alzheimer 's patients will increase demands on health and social services .
So there is added value in addressing these increased needs at European level .
The programme of activities which the Commission will undertake should provide us with valuable insights into the correct approach to be followed .
Given the scale of the challenge , I am sure that this is an issue which will confront us increasingly over the coming years .
I now turn to the question of the European health card and Mr Leopardi 's report .
The question of the health card has been with us , of course , for a very long time .
Some Members will even remember previous debates in the House on this particular issue .
Both the resolution of 1986 , on the European emergency health card , and the Council 's recommendations which concern the use of electronic cards , deal with the issues raised in Mr Leopardi 's report .
I also wish to point out that in 1995 the administrative committee on social security for migrant workers included two relevant projects in its master plan for the second stage of the telematics for the social security programme - that is the TEST programme .
The feasibility of introducing such cards in appropriate forms and conditions has been studied by the Commission .
Research on the use of the cards in the health sector is currently a major topic in the context of the telematics application and the G7 information society programmes .
Since 1986 the Commission has held a number of meetings of experts to exchange information and to share experience on the design and the introduction of the health cards and has also supported some pilot projects .
The results have not been particularly encouraging as only a few Member States have begun to use them .
However , a number of Member States have gradually introduced electronic cards in the social security sector where prospects of a more generalized use are more promising .
Referring to the report of Mr Leopardi and the resolution that follows , I wish to say , firstly , that there are a number of advantages that may accrue from the use of health cards and these have been eloquently put forward in this particular report and have been referred to by many of the speakers here this evening .
However , I should like to draw Parliament 's attention to a number of practical considerations and , indeed , some problems that the Commission has had to reckon with in its previous attempts to promote the use of similar cards and which point to the severe difficulties that will be involved in implementing the measures that have been advocated in this particular report .
To introduce the card , as you propose , will require all medical facilities and offices in the Community - doctors , hospitals , health centres and the like - to install the necessary infrastructure in terms of hardware and software at a cost which is likely to be very considerable .
Moreover , as existing national systems would have to be used in parallel to a Community voluntary system , citizens may be required to carry more than one card .
Fundamental questions arise at present concerning the protection of the very sensitive medical data that you propose to store on the cards .
This is of particular importance in the case of theft , loss or unauthorized use of the card .
There is also the point concerning the responsibilities of doctors or other health professionals .
Can they rely on the data for accuracy and completeness ?
Do they understand all of the information therein contained ?
Do they know whether it is complete and up to date or do they have to double check all information by running their own examinations to protect themselves from charges of negligence ?
What of the ethical issues , such as blood transfusion acceptance or , indeed , organ donation ?
I could continue along these lines to illustrate that there is a whole range of very practical considerations which have taxed us , and the Member States in the past , and these must be taken into account when discussing the possibilities for a European health card .
What exactly it is to be used for and what information is to be stored on it are two of the key questions .
Concerning social security : perhaps a more limited application of cards to become an electronic E111 form is feasible .
There is a case for practical solutions , including the mutual recognition of national insurance cards in accordance with the recommendation of the Council on 29 September 1989 .
I am very conscious of what Mr White says .
He very kindly gave me a smaller version of the card he is now displaying up there himself and I have taken particular notice , not of the photograph - so very suitably embossed on it - but on some of the writing that is also incorporated on the card .
The particular card Mr White has given to me for my perusal is considerably different from the comprehensive health record card under deliberation and the one that is being talked about here this evening .
I was going to put the question to the House : Is this the limit to which you wish to go now , having considered some of the practical difficulties I have put before you and which have been the cause of very considerable difficulty in seeking to promote this idea in the past ?
Perhaps it is something the House might reflect upon . That might alter the whole attitude and the possibilities .
In conclusion I should like to stress that the Commission will continue to keep the health cards issue under constant review and will report to the House if there are any developments which may improve the prospects for their generalized introduction .
But I am conscious of what Mr White 's card seeks to promote , as distinct from what has been the general understanding of what we would like to see included in the type of card you have been talking about this evening .
On the third issue , the question of blood safety and self-sufficiency in the European Community , the Commission welcomes the report of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection and I am especially glad that our own concern about the quality and the safety and the supply of blood and blood products available in the Community is shared by Parliament .
In its communication on blood safety and self sufficiency , the Commission addressed the duties imposed by Directive 89 / 381 regarding the preparation of stable , medical products and the ethical considerations regarding self-sufficiency on the basis of voluntary unpaid donations of the source material of all these products .
It also examined the issues concerning the safety and supply of whole blood , plasma and blood cells of human origin that are not used for the production of medicinal products and do not therefore come under the ambit of the directive .
The problems surrounding blood safety and self-sufficiency that were identified led the Commission to conclude that there was a clear need to formulate a Community blood strategy covering both the source material for medicinal products as well as whole blood and plasma which is used for transfusions .
The main activities which were proposed towards this end were reflected in the Council resolution of 2 June 1995 , which encompasses points which were suggested by the Commission in its report at that time .
The Commission intends to pursue these activities in response to the Council invitation and in line with the wishes of Members of the House in this area .
In fact , several have already been addressed .
A meeting of experts to discuss issues related to public awareness of blood and blood products is scheduled for next week in Rome under the Italian presidency .
Also , work on a feasibility study on the establishment of a haemo-vigilance network should commence very shortly . This matter was also mentioned by one of the Members .
A project to identify existing practices regarding inspection and accreditation of blood centres in the Member States is currently under way .
These are some of the issues we are pursuing at this time .
It is anticipated that additional activities will be carried out during the Irish presidency so that the other points of the emerging Community policy on blood safety and selfsufficiency , namely donor selection , testing , quality assurance as well as educational programmes for health professionals , will be covered by appropriate Community instruments which will all be activated in the very near future .
This has of necessity been only a very brief outline of the Commission 's position on these three reports .
These are very important issues . I appreciate that they deserve very wide debate .
I would like to assure the House that my services will pay very close attention to what has been said here this evening . It is my personal intention to seek progress in all three matters on behalf of the Community .
Mr President , I should like to respond to the point raised by Commissioner Flynn .
I am glad he read the card .
He makes a good point in saying that it is more limited than that described in the Leopardi report .
I refer the Commissioner to paragraph 1 ( a ) of the Leopardi resolution which says that the object of the European health card would be to facilitate the free movement of persons within the Union by providing them with appropriate access to the healthcare and treatment required by their state of health .
That is a technically feasible possibility .
My concern is that if we make things too complicated we will go another ten years .
One of the big problems the Commission and Parliament face is the tabloid press accusing us of making all sorts of silly legislation which has no relevance to daily life .
This proposal by Parliament would be relevant .
Therefore , I wonder if you have looked at paragraph 1 ( a ) .
I would refer you to it .
I note what Mr White says and I will pay particular attention to that particular aspect .
He and I both agree that the type of thing we are talking about here is a much more limited thing and designed to promote freedom of movement and mobility of people .
That is a slightly different thing and deals with some of the political , legal and technical problems which are associated with the wider data record card .
I take note of what you say .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will be held at 12 noon tomorrow .
( The sitting was closed at 11.55 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Madam President , I have a point concerning page 20 of the Minutes .
At the end of the debate on the eight reports on discharge - when you were in the Chair - there is a reference to a remark by me that ' although it was true that the Council had not attended the whole debate , neither had all the rapporteurs been present to hear the Council speak ' .
This only records part of what I said .
I pointed out that although the absence of the Council and the Commission had been noted at the start of the debate , it was unsatisfactory that four of the eight rapporteurs were not present during the Commissioner 's reply .
I also stated that rapporteurs , when they accept reports , should undertake to be present at the debate on those reports .
I should like those details to be included in the Minutes .
I can testify to what you say , Mr Fabre-Aubrespy .
That will therefore be corrected .
( Parliament approved the Minutes )
European Council in Turin
Mr President , Mr President-in - Office , ladies and gentlemen , on 29 March in Turin , the European Council launched the Intergovernmental Conference .
It approved the guidelines for the negotiations and the way in which the European Parliament would be involved .
The decisions taken at the European Council in Madrid were therefore acted upon .
To recap , the European Parliament is to be kept up to date on the progress of the Conference , so as to enable it to influence the IGC 's work , but without taking part directly in the Conference .
This decision certainly falls short of your expectations and ours , but does allow Parliament to be associated with the work in hand , which to my mind is essential .
The basic document approved by the European Council would seem to be a good starting-point , bearing in mind that since it is intended for initial guidance only , it is not particularly detailed and is therefore flexible as regards solutions .
The document 's main aim , which is worth noting , is to ensure that there is consensus on the issues to be dealt with during the Conference .
The fact that there was no such agreement before either the Single European Act or the Maastricht Treaty should be a salutary reminder .
The preliminary work carried out by the Reflection Group has therefore been most valuable , and even though they may not have enabled us to come to definite conclusions , it was not , after all , their job to find the answers .
It is notable that the basic document produced by the European Council once again clearly focuses attention on the main problems afflicting our peoples , whilst emphasizing Europe 's role in overcoming them .
It would not be acceptable to reform the Treaty without first convincing our citizens that Europe does really care about their problems .
Unemployment , competition , the environment , social policy , internal security , increasing democracy , and the role of Europe in the world are other issues dealt with in the document .
This does not , of course , guarantee that the work carried out during the Conference will automatically be successful .
Such an outcome can only be achieved through the efforts of the negotiators and the institutions to secure both a compromise and a quality result .
It is also worth noting that the European Council has highlighted the enlargement issue - a challenge which Europe must face up to in the future .
We need to outline a Europe-wide scheme for peace and cooperation for the twenty-first century .
The number of debates that have taken place before as well as in the wake of the European Council in Turin , on topics covered by the Conference and on Europe in general , is impressive .
This seems to me to augur well for Europe in the future , since it needs to elicit the attention and interest of its citizens .
However , an ' open ' conference , such as I have just described , does not take responsibility away from either the governments or parliaments of Member States .
This ultimately remains with them .
The Commission intends to carry out its role with this in mind .
It will promote the general interests of the Union , whilst at the same time defending the spirit of the Treaties that are in force - the result of nearly 50 years of European cooperation and integration . In a firm but ideologically unbiased way , the Commission will uphold the acquis communautaire , as well as the vitally important principles responsible for maintaining a balance between the Member States themselves and an institutional structure strong enough to further our common interests .
It is absolutely crucial that the major changes arising from the Conference , such as the introduction of a single currency , the revision of policies and financial perspectives , and enlargement , should be founded on a firm base of shared , solid and accepted experiences .
The reforms which we should like to see implemented are intended to protect our own European social model , which has become firmly established over the years . It has enabled us to make outstanding progress , without sacrificing solidarity , within a framework of democracy and respect for fundamental rights .
It is the very model we are offering those countries whose aim is accession to the Union .
However , to keep it intact , we need to introduce the far-reaching reforms set out in the opinion put forward by the Commission on 28 February .
The citizens of the Member States must feel like citizens of the Union too , since this extends the rights of citizenship which they already possess in their own countries , whilst maintaining respect for fundamental rights .
It is imperative that our citizens find , in the Union , a reliable reference point in those areas where Member States cannot cope alone , such as security , the environment , immigration , the fight against unemployment , and competition .
If Europe does not concern itself with the plight of its 18 million unemployed , then it has no meaning .
The Union must project a strong image - a guarantee of peace and stability - particularly throughout our own continent .
The institutions will have to be adapted to deal with the Union 's new dimensions and responsibilities .
The principle of unanimity causes paralysis , particularly as regards enlargement . Flexibility must therefore be considered and Parliament 's role strengthened if we wish to establish a firm democratic reference point .
We cannot offer applicant countries membership of a Union that is neither sufficiently prepared nor democratic enough to welcome them .
The European Council had an exchange of views on a draft text which I put before the House at the sitting of 31 January 1996 .
It concerned my proposal to introduce a European pact on employment , which I had the opportunity of putting forward in Turin .
The Heads of State and Government reaffirmed their commitment to job creation and agreed to attach the utmost importance to this issue at the Council meeting in Florence .
The Italian presidency also intends to convene a tripartite conference on growth and employment in Rome in mid-June for governments , the social partners and the Commission .
My aim is to encourage actions to combat unemployment .
It is clear that most of these measures need to be carried out at national level .
I do not wish to impose my own ideas , but rather encourage a dialogue between governments and social partners , in order to boost confidence .
There is no need to come up with radical new solutions : the basic ideas can be found in the Commission 's White Paper , approved in 1993 , on growth , competitiveness and employment .
What we are lacking is a coherent policy on employment through which to implement its proposals .
Governments and the social partners have a special responsibility to combat unemployment .
The Union can help by continuing its efforts to ensure that the task of establishing a single market is completed , that there is a policy on competition , and that employment features both in our own policies and in the Structural Funds .
The construction of trans-European networks , increased research , and support for the 17 million small and medium-sized businesses that alone account for 70 % of new jobs created within the Union , are all equally important issues .
Our European pact on employment will make progress because we cannot do without it . The solidarity it will inspire will provide the dynamism that Europe needs to make full use of its employment potential .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the text of the joint resolution to wind up this debate , signed by virtually all the political groups , states that ' the European Parliament congratulates the Italian presidency on its successful conclusion of the IGC 's preparatory stages within the timetable , thus enabling the European Council to confer on it a sufficiently broad mandate to permit significant progress by the Union . '
The Socialist Group shares that view .
Despite the difficulties arising from the situation in Italy , and contrary to the rather pessimistic forecasts that were widespread even in the European Parliament , at Turin the Italian presidency proposed a range of content for the conference which corresponds suitably to the expectations of Parliament and of everyone who believes in Europe .
It is positive that the reduction of issues to be dealt with in the new Treaty to the lowest common denominator , which we feared and still fear for the future , has been avoided , it is positive to have highlighted the need for a Union that is stronger because it is supported by a different balance between political union , economic union and monetary union , and it is also positive to have prioritized employment , the fundamental issue for the Socialist Group , which informed you of that personally , Mr Dini , in Rome before the start of the Italian presidency .
I would add personally that in the last few months Italy 's role as a proEuropean country committed to building the European Union , a role which had seemed to be missing or even lost , has been reconstructed .
The Socialist Group also appreciates the work that has been done on citizenship , justice and home affairs .
On unemployment , we emphasize the need to implement all aspects of the Delors White Paper , to develop the Employment Pact between the social partners proposed by the Commission and consequently to revise the financial perspectives .
Of course there are unresolved problems , ignored by the Council or inadequately dealt with , and they are set out one by one in the joint resolution .
Let me give some examples : we are not satisfied with the role of the European Parliament as regards both the relative positions of Parliament and the Council during the conference , and the extension of codecision and assent by amendment of the Treaty , and also as regards the still unsatisfied request to put the signing of the future Treaty to a vote in Parliament , and so on .
So , while we appreciate the need for the reinforced cooperation clause , it is not clear whether and how it also guarantees the necessary institutional unity .
The Union 's social policy is still in limbo .
We are far from finding a satisfactory solution to fundamental problems relating to the institutional structure and the instruments of common foreign and security policy , even though these are already in place .
It will be the task of the conference to resolve this , of course .
If the Tripartite Conference on growth and employment between governments , social partners and the Commission , and the next European Council in Florence , decide on a far-reaching and effective initiative on employment , the Union will have finally laid the foundations for renewed public confidence and it will be possible to say the Italian presidency ended with a flourish .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission . The main political groups of this Parliament are united in congratulating the Italian presidency on its success in preparing the Intergovernmental Conference and on the broad mandate agreed in time for these negotiations .
We hope that these negotiations will be completed in Amsterdam under the Dutch presidency by the end of June 1997 .
Seldom , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , has a tableau been drawn up so full of fundamental questions and challenges facing the European Union .
Seldom too in the history of European unification was the risk so great that we would lose control of the political goal to which our generation owes decades of peace and prosperity .
That is the reason for our political responsibility in the months ahead .
This calls for a clear head on what is at stake in Europe , on the elements which determine peace on our continent and which regulate our ability to build a strong and soundly based European Union where Europeans feel comfortable and confident .
We have inherited the fifty years which is now drawing to a close from the forwardlooking political courage of the statesmen who planned and built up the Community of peace and progress .
Western Europe was the first to reap the benefits of its creativity , but soon the whole continent will be able to share the results of Community Europe after the accession of the countries from central , southern and eastern Europe .
The question we must answer is the following : what do we want to leave to the coming generation ?
There is every reason to be worried ; nationalism is flaring up again , of which the persistent , gruesome conflict in Bosnia is a tragic example .
The xenophobia which is difficult to suppress , the allurement of fundamentalism which is cropping up almost unnoticed in Europe .
What kind of Europe are we going to hand on to the younger generation ?
What kind of message of hope can we transmit to the young people who all too often in our countries are deprived of the right to work and develop ?
Our people are frightened when they think of the future .
Will the globalisation of the world economy mean definitive structural unemployment for Europe which will make our society crumble , wipe out the social achievements and destroy once and for all the European social model , the fruit of a subtle blend of economic efficiency and solidarity between people ?
We really expect the European response , the response of the IGC , to these basic issues to be the right one as we are building Europe because Europe embodies values which respect the human being and does not doom him to be subjugated to the laws of economic competition but which on the contrary , can create a pact of confidence , as the President of the Commission said .
That is why we urge the Presidents of the Council and the Commission not to take a short-term view of the problems during the IGC but to demonstrate courage and magnanimity by accepting an agreement which enables a genuine European political Union to come about .
We do not underestimate the difficulties of the negotiations .
The diversity of our aspirations , the force of our traditions , the divergence of our cultural sensitivities , political fears , all these differences if taken together and allowed to influence could lead to the result of the negotiations being a minimum minimorum .
That would be the worst possible hypothesis , for that would mean a postponement of all the basic problems .
In this respect I would remind you of a famous declaration and confirm that our group will never be satisfied with the European convoy only sailing at the speed of the slowest ships .
The EPP Group can accept the way in which the European Parliament will be involved in the IGC .
A public debate was wanted .
This time a new treaty will not only be negotiated by ministers , technocrats and diplomats , but the voice of the people in Europe will be heard through those whom they democratically elected .
Mr President , first of all I am delighted to welcome President Dini at last , on his first official visit to the European Parliament , after over 100 days of the Italian presidency and with barely more than sixty left .
But perhaps it is legitimate to voice a slight suspicion that there are three days to go before the Italian elections and Europe is unfortunately being used as a platform for national issues .
As the Member of the European Parliament for Turin , I had the good fortune to be present at the Turin Conference , though certainly not by official invitation .
I was present for the public part of the conference of course , certainly not in the control centre which not even President Hänsch was invited to , unfortunately .
I saw and heard many important things .
Certainly not everything this Parliament wanted to hear , but many of them are vital , if they are properly followed up .
Obviously this must not be allowed to come to an end on 30 June in Florence when , as President Dini mentioned , the six months of the Italian presidency ends .
These issues represent Europe 's future , because we know that these are the years which will make or break Europe .
One issue dealt with in Turin stands out , although it is still clouded by the more pressing problem of mad cow disease , and that is the issue of employment .
Mr President , I want to confirm what I said in this Chamber in January , in front of Minister Agnelli , and I want to thank him again for his helpfulness and commitment to the European Parliament 's full involvement in the work of the conference .
What we say on employment , as a group , is that we should not be trying to create the new jobs where mechanization and robotization is gradually eliminating them .
They must be made to emerge in economic sectors and on a business scale that we have underestimated so far .
I am talking about small and medium-sized enterprises , the only real alternative for the socio-economic development of the European market .
Mr President , the future belongs to small and medium-sized enterprises .
They must be supported in every possible way .
They need financial help to grow until some of them can operate abroad in the increasingly internationalized market and they need to be freed from the constraints , particularly fiscal burdens and red tape which currently prevent entrepreneurs from developing their businesses .
I shall end , Mr President , by recalling an idea Minister Agnelli has already expressed here in Strasbourg .
We should think of Europe as a triangle : institutions and politics are its base , but its sides are the people of Europe , and I would add that they should not just be regarded as an electorate all the time , but , especially in this forum , as citizens .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , the Maastricht Treaty , which had the merit of laying down the stages for introduction of the single currency , nevertheless failed to meet the expectations of the representatives of those states that wished a further step to be taken towards European integration .
It will be up to those involved in the Intergovernmental Conference to make good that shortcoming .
And that is a great responsibility , since the future of Europe is at stake .
Improving the effectiveness of decision-making in the Council , maintaining the authority of the Commission and simplifying parliamentary procedures are essential reforms as the Union is now .
But the prospect of enlargement - which must be accepted , since Europe 's goal is that of opening its doors - makes these changes unavoidable .
One decision seems to me to have priority over all others : to incorporate into the Treaty - by announcing it at the start of the Conference , so as to avoid any doubt - the clause on forms of increased cooperation .
Let us be clear : while there is no question of imposing new commitments on Member States who do not want them , it would be unacceptable to prevent those which do want them - who , let us hope , will be in the majority - from going further down the road of increased integration .
Marking the existence of such an ambition at the outset will be a sign of hope that is expected by the great majority of Europe 's citizens .
Mr President , I want to thank the President-inOffice for being here just a few days before voting takes place in Italy , an event so important that it involves all the political and social forces of our country .
I thank him on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left , but also on behalf of my party in Italy , the Movimento dei Comunisti Unitari , which has had positive relations with his government and often been criticized for it .
I have a criticism to make here , because in my view the concluding document from the Turin Council is too vague and imprecise , if we consider that the task of the Intergovernmental Conference is to revise the Maastricht Treaty .
Instead it seems to me that in Turin the determination to respect all the provisions for economic and monetary union has once again prevailed , despite the fact that in some countries , including my own - as you are well aware , having governed it all these months - the rigid application of the convergence criteria involves serious social consequences .
Moreover we feel there is insufficient commitment to dealing with the most serious problem in every European country , the problem of employment .
I think a different commitment is needed , one that involves all the social partners , and first and foremost the trade unions of the European countries .
Before I end , let me make a recommendation : I do not think it is true , as someone stupidly said in Italy for purely electoral purposes , that certain countries , including ours , are being sold to the Franco-German axis , but it is crucial , Mr President , that the possibility now open to some countries to move ahead with closer cooperation should not lead to a multi-speed Europe , based on discrimination , competition and inequality .
The Italian presidency can continue to make a fine contribution , as it has done up to now , to the great commitment to make Europe a political union and not just a monetary union .
Presidents Hänsch , Santer and Dini , ladies and gentlemen , one particular image of the Turin summit sticks in my mind .
I think of the building in which it took place ; I think of the Lingotto of the Agnelli family , I see the racetrack on the roof of that building , I think of the German Foreign Minister , Klaus Kinkel , who drove round the track in a Ferrari , and I recall that another famous German , the world Formula One champion , also drives a Ferrari ; only it seems that Michael Schumacher somehow has a spanner in the works , which is affecting both his car and himself .
The project to revise the Treaty , of course , had a spanner in its works from the very beginning , and in our view the Turin Council summit has done nothing to alter that .
The cosmetic involvement of the European Parliament that was decided upon is miles away from what we ourselves were demanding , namely a role in the ratification process .
But above all , nothing has happened to resolve the underlying dilemma , in other words the basic decision to carry out the necessary revision of the Treaty in the framework of an intergovernmental conference along the lines of Maastricht I , which is simply not open to public scrutiny , which simply does not promote a transparent and democratic process based on popular participation .
Public participation and debate in the widest possible sense are the only ways to overcome the clandestine nature of the intergovernmental conference and to let public acceptance gain ground over Euroscepticism .
The fact is , of course , that the European Union pursues an unfathomable policy , its words speaking of transparency but its actions of secrecy .
So we can scarcely wonder at people being every bit as distant from the EU as the EU is from democracy .
The tide did not turn at Turin , and that is certainly not the fault of the presidency , which tried very hard .
Klaus Hänsch asked the Council not to let its meetings degenerate into declaratory summits , but now , when I compare the statements with what is actually happening , Mr Hänsch 's call remains a pious wish .
So what are the candidate countries to think of the outcome , of the fact that foremost importance attaches to economic harmonization , when they played no part whatsoever in the conference ?
What is it other than hollow rhetoric when the Council refers to the struggle against unemployment as its prime concern and as a common goal without any real guidelines being formulated on the form this struggle should take , and when the finance ministers seek to whittle away at Mr Santer 's project after the summit ?
That is something they ought to tell us .
Where , then , are the guidelines for improving the environmental situation ?
Not an inch did we move in the direction of a CO2 tax , not an inch towards a link between economy and ecology , not a single inch towards a real pact to promote employment and combat ecological destruction !
What are we to think of the decisions on mad cow disease ?
When was there a better time than now to make the switch towards species-related husbandry , natural feeding and controllable markets and away from the agroindustrial mentality ?
I fear that we have not moved on from that original racetrack image , from the picture of a car churning up clouds of dust as its engine roars but unable to head towards the finish because it is immobilized in the pits .
Mr President , despite all the speeches and promises , the Maastricht Treaty appears increasingly to be the biggest stumbling-block to economic recovery and the fight against unemployment .
The figures are disastrous .
In Europe , the average rate of unemployment rose from 9.6 % to 11 % between 1990 and 1995 .
Six million jobs have been lost and 55 million people are living on the poverty line .
While fanatical supporters of European integration have for years been doing their utmost to advance the process of building Europe , or so they claim , industrial production has stagnated and social breakdown has become worse .
While some of their leaders engage in trivial pursuits , the French people are growing increasingly concerned about relinquishing national sovereignty , and how this will affect their daily lives .
How can we therefore expect France , which has only ten votes in the Council and 87 out of 626 Members of the European Parliament , to entrust its future to the representatives of countries which , while they may be friends , have not been elected by the French people ?
Before the next general election in 1998 , the Gaullist renegades within the majority should once more call to mind the battle that the French people , on both the right and left , have been fighting since time immemorial to protect their independence .
In this respect , the idea put about in some quarters of increased cooperation between some Member States , with others constructively abstaining - what a joke ! - can only be a prelude to further withdrawals .
This puts us in mind of the Fourth Republic , and what is known as the policy of letting sleeping dogs lie .
A new referendum is now in order , in view of the insidious implementation of a federalist Treaty that only just secured enough votes in 1992 .
The proposed changes arising out of the Intergovernmental Conference should provide a good reason for again asking the French people whether they are willing to entrust the most important aspects of French economic policy to supranational bodies .
Life shows that any living creature that gives up the struggle is condemned to extinction !
Mr President , 15-19 January , 12-16 February , 11-15 March , 31 January - 1 February , 28-29 February , 27-28 March .
These are the dates , Dr Dini , of the other plenary sessions of this Parliament which you did not attend .
Parliament 's lack of interest in your appearance , demonstrated by this empty Chamber , is a response to the lack of interest you have demonstrated towards us .
The President of the Italian Parliament , Mr Pivetti , came here to testify to the interest Italian Members of Parliament take in their European colleagues .
You never came , and you represent the Italian presidency .
But you come today , four days away from the Italian election .
Perhaps your lack of interest in our Parliament , not to say your scorn , derives from the fact that you have never been a Member of Parliament , you have never been elected , which means the people have never given you any mandate .
Perhaps your presence today is not even a belated apology to all of us who have been elected , but another attempt to use the European platform for base domestic motives .
You are the only person who ever decided , when President-in-Office of the Council , to enter an election campaign by founding , in a fit of megalomania which finds no parallel in the history of western democracy , a party which bears your own name .
You have come to Strasbourg to get coverage in the European press which you hope will reflect in publicity for you in Italy , because you are here to promote your election campaign , following the route of those who use foreign platforms to send messages to Italy and who would do better to keep silent .
But you should know you have done your country a disservice .
Decent men are capable of a little humility .
Shrewd politicians know that the form is often the substance and in terms of form you have been extremely rude to this Parliament .
In terms of substance , a list of issues was drawn up at Turin without indicating effective solutions for the great challenges at home and abroad : unemployment , lack of unity in foreign policy , lack of results in the common struggle against organized crime and drugs , lack of any effective will to build political unity , at least in parallel with economic union .
We have waited in vain for Italy and its European partners to confront the problem of the 20 million people currently unemployed , which could become 30 or 40 million if the enlargement takes place without first solving the unemployment problem of the existing European jobless , and promote the issue of political union which now seems to interest few people .
But you continue to speak of preparation for the enlargement and fail to concern yourself either with genuinely combatting the growing poverty in Europe or with closing the gap between the citizens and the Union , which is becoming more obvious and worrying all the time , given the failure of the Commission 's White Paper .
In Turin you talked about challenges , but you ignored the risk of making the Union look like the ideal model for destroying jobs in the eyes of the world , safeguarding positions of privilege for those lucky enough to be in secure categories and protecting certain sectors which are almost always unproductive .
This state of stagnation stands in the way of the creation of new wealth .
The challenge of becoming competitive is met with fear and a preference for sheltered niches , protected from innovation , forgetting that competitiveness is an indispensable condition for growth and employment .
You are silent about relocation , about fundamentalism , about the deaths caused by failure to achieve political union .
As regards the Verona Summit , I merely point out that the economic disorder which prevents Italy from enjoying the necessary credibility is the responsibility of many of your current electoral partners .
But at Verona , just to keep the support of the Bundesbank you refused to face the obvious , which is that Germany is pushing forward the deadlines for achieving monetary union in order to obtain the immediate enlargement to the east that has been mentioned .
We hope that in the short time remaining to the Italian presidency the next government will be equal to the task of restoring the prestige Italy is entitled to .
Welcome
Ladies and gentlemen , I should like to welcome a delegation from the Interparliamentary Organization of ASEAN , who are here to take part in a meeting with our colleagues from the Delegation for relations with the ASEAN Member States .
The visiting delegation is led by the President of the Thai National Assembly and includes parliamentarians from Indonesia , Malaysia , the Philippines , Singapore and Vietnam .
On behalf of our entire House , may I bid you a warm welcome to the European Parliament and wish you every success in the work you are about to begin .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen of the AIPO , welcome to the European Parliament !
( Loud applause )
European Council in Turin ( continuation )
Mr President-in-Office , rarely have we received information as important as that which you have given us about the Intergovernmental Conference , because it is mainly we who will be conveying a bad or a good impression to Europe 's peoples and so influencing their ultimate judgement of your work .
Already , however , as the IGC , you have made the first historic mistake . You have excluded us from your work .
Take note that this will stand in your way .
Our Parliament 's voice has been devalued .
I was surprised to learn that our two representatives , who will be silent recipients of regular information from you , had gone as far as actually to thank you for your relative willingness to provide it .
You should know , however , that Parliament does not thank you , but blames you most severely for its exclusion .
Of course , I have no hesitation in welcoming some positive aspects of the Turin point of departure : the weight given to employment and transparency , your intention to strengthen the role of the European citizen , your wish to support the CFSP , and your decision to keep your agenda open .
Unfortunately , however , your Conference does not seem to have the power to make History .
Some do not wish to , and others do not dare .
No strengthening of the Union 's bodies , nor any deepening of cohesion .
It is indeed unbelievable that you proclaimed the protection of our frontiers in a limited way and no more than that , and so did a disservice to the peoples who bear the brunt of safeguarding Europe 's frontiers .
On the subject of a more multi-speed Europe too , we have not heard positive messages .
Our aim should be to make the differences between the strong and the weak less pronounced , not to give those differences official expression and establish them institutionally .
I am still not sure that in the hands of this IGC the ideal of a United Europe will gain ground . Europe 's credibility is in your hands .
Do not sacrifice it on the altar of any minor political expedients , whatever those may be .
It would be a pity for History one day to pronounce that your hands were shown to be lacking in strength and not entirely up to the opportunities this historic time offers .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in a little over a year , when the Intergovernmental Conference should have concluded its work , we will not be able to run away from the final decision about whether a united Europe becomes a reality or not .
If the mediocre compromise , the idea of a minimal Europe prevails , with obstinate emphasis on the prerogatives of national traditions , this will not happen . It will happen , if we are capable of breathing new life into the great ideals of the founding fathers , if we can convincingly define realistic and complete arrangements for a citizens Europe , if the path we trace can unite in a great common hope the European democracies with the longest tradition which have progressively integrated since the war , and the younger democracies of Mediterranean , central and eastern Europe which believe , on the basis of the positive experience of western Europe , that they can anchor their own future in liberty , democracy , peace and prosperity by joining the enlarged Union .
Will Europe happen ?
Yes , if by treasuring the experience so far acquired we are able to overcome uncertainty , reservations and timidity , and if we are really able to pool the extraordinary heritage of liberty , democracy , solidarity and initiative that we have available . If , in other words , we can progressively overcome the intergovernmental dimension to the benefit of a steadfast and consistent Community approach .
It is actually through this awareness that the European Parliament , the only European institution elected by universal suffrage , is standing up for the need to finally introduce the clause on assent by the European Parliament to any amendment of the Treaty , and calls on the Council today to make the political commitment to ensure that when the future Treaty is signed and ratified it will not go through until it has been approved by a vote of the European Parliament .
For us this is obviously a fundamentally political point , even more than it is an institutional one , and it is even more important than the actual association of the European Parliament in the process of revision and reform of the treaties .
And with reference to the call made at Turin on the aim of introducing a uniform electoral procedure for Members of the European Parliament , we would confirm that if we really want to make strides in this direction , Article 138 ( 3 ) of the Treaty needs to be amended to remove it from the straitjacket of unanimity .
Mr President , evidence given in this Chamber in today 's debate has revealed who shares the common feeling for Europe and who does not , who will support the commitment to a united Europe and who cannot and will not do so .
Mr Martens for the PPE and other group Presidents , setting aside some provincial propaganda which was exclusively for domestic use , have given the Italian presidency credit for ensuring that the IGC has made a good start .
Our hope is that thanks to the contribution of the Italian presidency Europe may soon be able to demonstrate that it has rediscovered itself and the greatest moments of its great tradition .
Mr President , I yield to the temptation to borrow a phrase from Sir Christopher Wren on this occasion : ' Si monumentum requieres , circumspice ' .
If the President of the Council of Ministers required to see a monument to the success to the Turin conference , then obviously he would have been greatly disillusioned and disappointed here this morning when he came to report on the conference to the European Parliament .
There was nothing to report , sadly .
In fact it would have been long-forgotten but for the fact that the major item for discussion was the BSE disease and that the conference itself was held in the Ferrari buildings .
The European Union and its Member States have a number of very major political , social and economic problems to confront over the next few years .
Policies will have to be developed which are capable of generating economic growth and new jobs for the millions of unemployed ; of tackling international crime and drug smuggling ; of settling the difficult question of the future funding of Europe from the year 2000 onwards and of moving forward with the single currency project .
At the same time existing Member States will have to prepare the way for the accession of up to 10 or even 15 new Member States from Central and Eastern Europe .
The likely accession of these countries will provide all Europe with a unique opportunity to work together for a peaceful and secure future .
However , we will have to ensure that the burden of admitting these new countries , all of whom will be net beneficiaries from the EU budget for the foreseeable future , must be shared equally by the existing Member States .
A straightforward redistribution of the existing resources from the structural funds and the common agricultural policy will result in the Union 's agricultural regions taking on a disproportionately large share of the cost of enlargement .
The budget will have to be increased significantly if the existing common policies are to continue to operate effectively in an enlarged Union .
After the IGC conference there will be a wide-ranging public debate in each of the 15 EU countries and in some cases a referendum before the ratification process can be completed .
Finally , during the course of these debates our citizens will be expecting clear evidence that the European Union is capable of providing clear-cut and effective solutions to these major political , social and economic problems .
Mr President , the conclusions reached at the Turin Summit from my point of view deal very correctly with a certain number of extremely important points concerning the revision of the Treaties , although it has to be recognised in certain cases that we have not got any further than a few platitudes .
But a positive note has been struck , nevertheless .
We do note , however , certain omissions which are a cause for concern , but I would like to begin with the points which we feel are more positive .
It is recognised that the fight against unemployment must be our main priority - this calls for an economic policy which is orientated towards stability , greater competitiveness and far swifter growth .
As far as free circulation is concerned , there is an intention to implement coherent and effective policies in terms of asylum , emigration and visas , as well as stepping up controls at external borders .
The omissions which concern us start , for example , with the failure to make any reference to economic and social cohesion .
We are certain that the 15 heads of state and government will not call into question this principle because it is vital to European construction and must underlie all of its policies .
But it would be useful and reassuring if the principle could have been reiterated in the final communiqué , something which did not happen .
The same concern is also valid for the problem of statutory equalities .
It is vital to ensure that demographic differences cannot have repercussions on the exercise of the presidency of the Council of Ministers , the representativeness of the Commission or the equal status of all commissioners .
What is firmly fixed , following the meeting in the wellguarded factory area in Turin , is some clear outline of what we can expect .
It is a clear procedure that has been adopted , and the outlines of the future Union are more or less clear .
This is also shown by the joint resolution which has been submitted by the large groups .
It is specifically , as mentioned under item D , that Europe must assert itself better at international level and must administer a joint foreign and security policy which is in keeping with its rank in the world .
That is one decisive point , and the other decisive point , which is stressed in item 2 , is the importance of the intergovernmental conference making discernible progress with regard to union citizenship as well as legal and internal matters .
It concerns areas which are of decisive importance for the development of the European Union .
It means , simply , more Union , but in Denmark we have a tradition of asking the people for their views about extending the Union , and on the Danish side we have already once before declined the recipe which exists here .
I believe that we will do so again , and if the Danish tradition is applied to the whole Union , then the Union project will encounter difficulties .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Dini has just told us that the Heads of Government were particularly concerned about employment .
That is good news , and I think Parliament can take some credit for making it understood that our citizens are deeply anxious about this problem .
Mr Dini also said that employment policy was above all the prerogative of the Member States .
No doubt that is true , but there are three points which I should like to make .
Firstly , Parliament believes that employment should be one of our guiding principles as we move towards economic and monetary union .
In introducing a single currency , we must have a goal , and this should naturally be employment .
Secondly , I believe that if the procedures approved in Essen are to bear fruit , they must be improved .
In our view , it would help to make employment a truly European issue - and this is essential - if a chapter on employment were to be inserted in the Treaty .
Thirdly , there can be no employment policy without a social policy .
This concept needs to be reiterated .
But I should also like to mention the status of the European Parliament , and to acknowledge the considerable effort which the Council and the Italian presidency have made in order to reach a solution .
I think the outcome is a purely symbolic one , but it should not be ignored .
The opposition of the French and British Governments seriously affects us all . We must overcome France 's over-sensitivity about national sovereignty and the British Government 's refusal to accept both Europe and democracy .
But in its resolution last December , Parliament also referred to the interinstitutional conference .
It seems to me that relations between Parliament and the Intergovernmental Conference are more conflictual than amicable .
Naturally , there are points of view to be defended , and in this respect , I believe that the interinstitutional conference format should be retained , since in the end , it brings together 15 government representatives against - if I dare use the expression - 15 representatives of the European Parliament .
From an institutional point of view , this arrangement maintains a balance of power that is fairer to Parliament .
I believe that the interinstitutional conference , which paid dividends at the time of the Maastricht Treaty , can be revitalized and improved , but that it is crucial in terms of the role of the European Parliament vis-à-vis the Intergovernmental Conference .
Although our achievements have been reasonable , we are prevented from doing better by the role and status of the European Parliament itself , and by the difficulty of persuading governments to accept that major institutional change is vital , and that we need more democracy and more policies .
Mr President , I trust that you will once again put the interinstitutional conference on the agenda , in accordance with the wishes of the House .
And that is why the Socialist Group will be voting in favour of the amendment which the Green Group has tabled on this issue .
Mr President , in his introductory remarks Prime Minister Dini stressed how very important it is to fight unemployment .
I fully share this point of view .
However , the fight against unemployment cannot comprise merely fine words , not even if a separate title in the Treaty is devoted to the subject .
The Swedish proposal for an employment union is an example of this .
Originally , this proposal was a proposal to coordinate finance policies and make them more expansionary and to increase demand in times of economic recession .
It was a proposal which really could have had an effect at European level in checking the recession .
Now the proposal has been abandoned totally .
It was not taken further because it conflicts with monetary union and the policy of convergence .
This is thus another example of the fact that today the policy of convergence is the biggest single stumbling block in the fight against unemployment in Western Europe .
This policy must therefore be reviewed , as must the EMU project .
If unemployment could be ' talked out of existence ' we would have got rid of it here a long time ago - but that is not possible .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I will reply briefly to the speeches honourable Members have made and in particular the last speech by Mrs Dury .
I do not think there is any obstacle to pursuing the interinstitutional dialogue : the Turin resolution is not an obstacle to that , nor is the so-called understanding on Parliament .
As regards the other speakers , I simply make this comment : without prejudice to the importance of the fight against unemployment , which has already been emphasized , I cannot agree with the view that nothing remarkable happened at Turin , that in reality Turin was useless , as Mr Collins said .
Well , Turin had a single task : to launch the Intergovernmental Conference and set the agenda for that conference , not to offer the solutions already , when they are to be the outcome of the conference itself .
And this also applies to other comments honourable Members have made about citizenship , about pooling a common heritage , about border security , multi-speeds , and all the various points which have been raised .
I repeat , all that will be the task of the Intergovernmental Conference , with the help and suggestions of Parliament .
Italy has fought - successfully , in my view - to have Parliament associated with a conference which is indeed intergovernmental but in which the governments have need of the suggestions , the advice , the support and the encouragement of Parliament .
On behalf of the presidency then , and I would also like to say on behalf of Italy , we cannot but thank Parliament for the attention it will devote to the Intergovernmental Conference and the advice it will be able to give .
I have received eight motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
Preparation of CCEE for accession
The next item is the report ( A4-0101 / 96 ) by Mr Oostlander , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , on preparation of the countries of Central and Eastern Europe for accession to the Union on the basis of the White Paper on the subject ( COM ( 95 ) 0163 - C4-0166 / 95 ) .
Madam President , the White Paper on adapting to the internal market , which is the basis for our opinion , provides an excellent indicator for membership of the Union .
It does not contain data on accession , for that is up to the acceding countries themselves .
The speed at which they move towards accession and the ground they have to cover will dictate the time at which they can accede to the Union .
Of course what will happen is that in order to treat everyone at the same level we will have to choose a starting point which is at least symbolically and politically the same one .
For example it could be the Commission offering advice on the various applicant countries , or it could be a symbolic starting time for the beginning of the process .
The path indicated can be travelled voluntarily , nothing is being forced .
We are not even forcing ourselves to do anything .
The White Paper is not a recruiting instrument to enlist newcomers .
That means we must be quite straightforward and insist that the whole of the ' acquis communautaire ' we have built up together must be accepted by applicant countries ; which in turn means that special attention must be paid to the development of the rule of law and democracy in the countries concerned .
Often applicant countries are well on the right tracks .
Sometimes , however , they have a lot of ground to cover .
In this House we have debated the actions of the prime minister of Slovakia who is making life extremely difficult for the president of the republic and we fear that things are not well in that sphere .
The rule of law and democracy and the creation of a responsible , well organised society is very much in the interests of the Union and the applicant countries .
By emphasising this we are showing our clear support for democratic processes and forces in the applicant countries .
We want to be an alliance of countries based on the rule of law , with a proper community character , and not just a club of rich countries .
And so I think that we in this House should take a look at the community spirit of applicant countries .
For that could be a very good reason for saying yes or no when it comes to our vote , and we do , after all , have the last word .
The IGC will have to prove that the present Member States take enlargement seriously .
A strengthened Union must at least make it possible for new countries to join .
At the end of their journey they should find a house and not a shack awaiting them .
If the IGC does not produce the goods in proper measure , the Union will be so weakened that it will no longer attract new candidates because it will just be a free trade area .
Europe will then remain impotent and be forced to call in the Americans to help solve the slightest conflict .
The report emphasises the need for mutual cooperation between the relevant applicant countries .
It is good that we are getting away from channelling everything through Brussels .
Formerly they had to channel everything through Moscow .
They will have to get used to working together , to trading with each other and to developing together , just as we had to in the Union .
That is also true for cooperation with countries outside the scope of accession .
I am thinking in particular of Ukraine , Belarus , the Russian Federation , Moldova .
We are not forgetting them and stress that trans-border projects with them are also a very important factor in optimising mutual relations .
The report also emphasises the social aspects because a situation of major changes can also lead to significant social harm in the applicant countries and so even undermine confidence in the forthcoming accession .
We also insist that due attention be paid to the environment .
Important aspects are taken up by the many draftsmen of an opinion .
Together with industry a code will have to be worked out for our own ailing industry so that we genuinely contribute to a healthy and sustainable development .
The report contains many sections because there were so many draftsmen of opinions .
It also calls for proper information to be provided for the public in the central and eastern European countries .
They must discover what European integration is all about .
Strangely enough even some of the politicians there have little idea of it .
But we must also prepare our own people and explain how important the enlargement is and the moral commitment we all have to strengthen the union of democratic states .
People in the applicant countries , just like our own citizens in the Union , must clearly understand that we are serious about ensuring that no major mistakes are made and that the surveillance and antifraud procedures are operating .
The debate on security policy is also echoed in this report , particularly in the section on EU security guarantees or indirectly via the WEU and the possibly imperfect overlap of our membership with NATO .
The enlargement of the European Union is a challenge for the decades ahead .
We now have the opportunity with the applicant countries to do something that for all too long was unthinkable .
Enlargement will take time .
It is not possible , as one of the amendments says , that every time we take a decision we must wait until we have a complete insight into all the financial repercussions of the accession .
It will be a very long time before we have a complete picture and we must not do anything to depart from the strong stance we have taken in favour of enlargement .
There is a whiff of isolationism in the air even in Europe .
But to entrench ourselves smugly in a fortress Europe would be the worst thing we could possibly do .
The applicant countries are carefully watching our reactions and this debate must send out the right signal to them .
That is why I would strongly oppose any manoeuvre to postpone or set up financial barriers , for example , or undermine our determination to work confidently towards enlargement .
Madam President , I hope that in the decades ahead there will be many a report from the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy and from the specialised committees , for we need everybody to pull together in this sphere .
Madam President , the White Paper on the preparation of the associated countries for membership of the internal market of the European Union only deals with agricultural aspects in a small way .
It deals with guidance for the associated countries relating to some agricultural sectors and connected with veterinary checks , the free movement of goods , phytosanitary products and fodder , and the requirements for marketing certain products .
To this end the Oostlander report takes substantial note of the European Commission guidelines which are very clear , very precise and do not leave room for subjective interpretation .
The problem for agriculture is a problem of outlook .
I believe , in agreement with the Oostlander report , that it is not possible to say we will do the accounts first and then see what implications the enlargement will have . Instead it is a matter of working right away for the enlargement and adapting the common agricultural policy to the guidelines that the Commission adopted at the Madrid Summit .
In my opinion this constitutes a good starting point for ensuring that the whole of European agriculture spends less on traditional support to markets and more on structural policy and rural development .
Madam President , the Economic Affairs Committee is in favour of enlargement but disagrees with the Oostlander report on its timing .
An overhasty accession , in other words before the applicant countries and the Union itself are ready , is not in the interests of either the applicants or the Union .
First of all the Union must through the IGC re-assert its authority to take decisions and become more democratic .
The applicants must have grown sufficiently strong in terms of their economic and social development to stand up to the tough competition on the internal market without protective measures .
Because unlike the accession of Spain , Portugal and Greece long transition periods are no longer possible .
Now that there are no more border controls there is no longer any scope for a special status on the internal market .
Accession might well take a long time , certainly into the next century .
But in the meantime the applicant countries should not be expected to travel that path empty-handed .
The present trade regulations with central and eastern Europe are hypocritical .
The most difficult and restricted access to the Union is reserved for the most competitive products .
It is no wonder that the European Union has built up a trade surplus .
That must change quickly if the Union wants to remain credible .
Madam President , to deal with energy in the countries of Eastern Europe in just one minute would almost be a record !
But I am going to try and be extremely brief , if not terse , and say simply that the recommendation contained in the Oostlander report touches on two main points .
Firstly , we must take into account that the countries of Central and Eastern Europe are heavily dependent on nuclear power .
In this respect , we therefore have two aims .
On the one hand , to do everything that needs to be done to improve nuclear safety , in order to instil in our future partners in Central and Eastern Europe our own safety culture , which they still do not have .
And , on the other , to envisage a realistic timescale for the possible closure of nuclear power stations that do not comply with basic safety regulations .
The second point in the recommendation is that we must investigate all the different energy sources which might be available in Central and Eastern Europe .
I personally had suggested that the Commission should organize a regional energy conference in these countries , with a view to encouraging diversification .
Madam President , we are aware that the integrationrelated problems of the countries of Central and Eastern Europe are great , and that the starting-point of each country is different .
Given that their social structures are diverse , we must look for convergence in terms of increased democracy , the rule of law and responsible administration .
I shall now try to summarize the three areas on which the Committee on External Economic Relations wishes to place particular emphasis .
Firstly , the transposition of the Community 's laws into the national legislation of each of the countries concerned , with particular attention being given to social and environmental requirements , will involve a huge legislative effort .
Furthermore , we must bear in mind that cooperation between the Union 's undertakings and those of the applicant countries must not be impeded by the kind of legal , fiscal or administrative difficulties which frequently have their origin in attitudes and habits acquired under the previous economic system .
Similarly , a revision of the common agricultural policy must prevent increased rural desertification and serve to maintain the standard of living of the Union 's farmers .
Secondly , competition rules must be applied to ensure that the policy is effective , and that legal harmonization in the social and economic fields produces equal conditions for the undertakings on both sides - the applicant countries and the European Union .
And thirdly , as regards the countries of Central and Eastern Europe and the internal market , there is a need to combat fraudulent activity in the field of imports , particularly along the European Union 's eastern frontier , whereby the Union is losing hundreds of millions of ECU and thousands of jobs every year .
Finally , I regret the fact that the Commission has not examined the situation of each of the countries of Central and Eastern Europe likely to join the Union separately , specifying their current degree of integration into the internal market .
Madam President , the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights welcomes the White Paper .
Along with the improvement of economic and social conditions , our opinion states that the existence of a democratic system and respect for fundamental rights and the rights of minorities are essential preconditions for membership of the European Union .
A proposal has been made to strengthen the legal system by creating an administrative , organizational and legal infrastructure .
It will not be enough merely to inform the candidate countries of current Community legislation .
That is why our committee has also proposed that enlargement should go hand in hand with a codification of existing Community law to make it clearer and more transparent , as well as with exchanges and training of officials and judges .
I should also like to refer to the following two points : enlargement must be based on the principles of solidarity and cohesion and must therefore be accompanied by a strengthening of cohesion policies and the cohesion fund , and in the realm of working conditions and social protection of workers the highest possible standards must be developed so that enlargement is not used as a pretext for a levelling-down process .
Finally , the question of the free movement of persons has to be settled so that enlargement can play an important part in creating stability , security and peace in Europe .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin my remarks with three basic observations .
First of all , the gradual eastward enlargement of the European Union is a task of historical necessity .
Secondly , many countries of central and eastern Europe are plagued by indescribable poverty and social deprivation .
Thirdly , many Member States of the Union are also faced with serious social problems .
These observations form the basis of my opinion .
The fundamental requirement is the incorporation into the integration process of the social dimension as reflected in the European social model .
Unfortunately , too little account is taken of this requirement in Mr Oostlander 's report .
In order to avoid undesirable social repercussions in the countries of central and eastern Europe and in the EU Member States themselves , a phased plan is needed for the gradual integration of the central and eastern European states into the internal market .
This phased plan must include the social dimension .
The Union must assist the candidates for accession to establish and develop socially orientated administrative and organizational infrastructures .
This socially acceptable form of integration will entail extremely high costs both for the Union and for the acceding countries .
That is why the Union has to adopt the appropriate measures in good time .
The necessary integration of the countries of central and eastern Europe must be managed judiciously and in a socially responsible manner .
Otherwise the unwanted social side-effects of such integration could jeopardize the gratifying democratic developments in the applicant countries and their commitment to the idea of a common European home .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the enlargement of the European Union to include some central and eastern European countries represents an enormous challenge in the cultural sphere as well as in the domains of education and the audiovisual media .
The integration of these states means far more than restructuring national economic systems to adapt them to new legal norms and regulations .
Although in its White Paper the Commission only deals with the economic aspects of accession , it is quite clear that this can only be one part of the accession process .
There is a danger that the countries of central and eastern Europe will see this document as an indication that harmonization of their market economies with the internal market is the only important criterion at the end of the day .
The European Parliament and the Oostlander report have made this point very clearly .
Our unequivocal position is that although economic adjustment is immensely important , the other areas - culture , education and the audiovisual media - should also receive the full attention of the governments of these countries .
The Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , on whose behalf I speak here , takes the view that culture has to be seen as a separate issue .
The cultural heritage of Europe must not be considered within the confines of the Union alone .
In the domain of education , the committee warns everyone concerned to avoid putting immediate political gains - such as securing industrial jobs in the short term - before the long-term goal of high-quality basic and advanced training .
Such strategies would lead in the medium term to stagnation and decline .
If culture and education are ignored , enlargement will become a mechanical process that can only lead to disillusionment and inefficiency in the long run , and that is certainly not in our interests !
Madam President , it is the historic task of our generation to make Europe whole , to remove the vestiges of 50 years of ideological dictatorship and repression in Central and Eastern Europe .
It is the biggest peace project ever , and if it is successful , then the Union will be the guarantor of democracy and peace , and we will live up to the ideals which prompted our parents to set up the Union .
Yet peace and security also means freedom for crime and terrorism .
Crime has spread in the vacuum left by the dictatorship .
Criminals get through traditional border controls because their organizations have become far more international than the police .
We shall require the new Member States to take action against Mafia activity , drug-related crime , trafficking in human beings , illegal immigration , etc .
And we shall make demands of ourselves .
In our own countries we have allowed crime to overwhelm us .
We continually deploy too much manpower at borders , where citizens ' passports and luggage are carefully checked .
It is to no avail and , furthermore , we cooperate far too little to make common cause against international crime .
This is a key issue in regard to enlargement , because if we are to sustain the public 's confidence in enlargement , then it must not be seen to be associated with rising crime .
Therefore , Madam President , the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs will be holding a conference in June , with representatives from the parliaments of all the Central and Eastern European countries , which will examine these issues over two days of intensive dialogue .
Madam President , real socialism leaves behind a catastrophic environmental legacy .
The alarming environmental situation is a real danger to public health .
The available know-how must be deployed to ensure that the quality of water , air and soil undergoes constant systematic improvement , not only in western Europe but in the East too .
Safety standards at nuclear plants , as well as the safeguards in place at the numerous storage sites for radioactive waste , are of the utmost importance to the entire global population .
The commitment of Europe , and especially of its Parliament , can not only help to analyse and evaluate sources of danger but can also be a means of identifying numerous opportunities for energy saving , efficient management of resources , strategic environmental legislation and so on .
The technical capability of the waste-disposal plants available in individual countries to recycle hazardous waste safely could be used as a criterion in decisions on waste management .
Minimum environmental protection standards should be defined , and states should receive financial and advisory assistance to make those standards attainable .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Institutional Affairs regards enlargement as both a political necessity and a historic opportunity for Europe .
However , we have stressed the fact that if the European plan is to be viable , the new Treaty must first of all provide for institutional instruments that meet the requirements of an enlarged Union .
Because if institutional reform does not go far enough , it will endanger the very process of building Europe .
We must avoid the risk of Europe being watered down .
Broadening and deepening must be reconciled , through in-depth strengthening and reform of the present institutional framework .
Increased democracy , efficiency , solidarity and transparency must be the key elements in that reform process .
Whether or not the Union is ready for enlargement will depend on the outcome of the IGC .
In this context , the Committee on Institutional Affairs would like to lay down a condition which it believes is unavoidable , namely that the House should deliver a favourable opinion at the end of the negotiations .
Madam President , I agree with the view expressed by the previous speakers that the enlargement of the European Union to include the states of central and eastern Europe will not only foster security , prosperity and peace in Europe ; we are also well aware of the opportunities that will present themselves to the European Union as a result of future enlargement .
Fisheries , as it happens , vary greatly in their importance to the economies of the individual candidate countries .
Nevertheless , there are common features , which demand a uniform approach by the European Union .
The impact of integration on the applicant countries will be considerable .
The local socioeconomic importance of fishing in some countries cannot be ignored ; coastal fishing and aquaculture still account for a substantial number of jobs in the Community , and indeed fisheries are the sole source of income in certain places . When I speak of the Community here I am referring to the work done by the Community in the various sectors .
Our accession strategy must take due account of this fact .
The development of new economic structures and an integration process without traumatic consequences must be our stated objectives .
The present report by Mr Oostlander has been long awaited , not only by us .
These countries are looking hopefully towards a future in the European Union .
In this report we are giving a political signal , telling them that we await them in the Strasbourg family .
But until then there is much to be done by all sides .
I thank Mr Oostlander , who devoted particular attention to the situation of women in central and eastern Europe and adopted the main points from the opinion delivered by the Committee on Women 's Rights .
These women need to know what they can expect from membership of the European Union .
They also have to be sure that joint efforts will be undertaken to promote employment and education as well as social and health services for women and girls .
Efforts must be made from the very outset to ensure that women are not economically and socially marginalized .
In eastern and central Europe many women are trained for technical occupations and are to be found in far greater numbers in the realms of science and research than is the case in western Europe , for example .
Let us ensure that they can assume an increasing amount of political responsibility and can thus effectively play an active part in helping to shape life in the European Union .
Let us support the young democracies by means of reliable partnership and clear messages .
Madam President , I shall restrict myself to two points after congratulating Mr Oostlander on his fine , factual , in-depth report .
The two points I want to make are as follows .
First of all everyone will agree that it is extremely important that we increasingly adopt a pan-European approach to transport .
We see the trouble in our part of Europe caused by not managing to set up a proper transport policy in the European Union .
Let us now try to do that on a pan-European basis , and that is also why we , together with the Commission , are in the process of preparing the next pan-European transport conference next year in Helsinki .
There we hope , together with the relevant authorities from the eastern European countries , to shape the pan-European transport policy .
The second point I wish to highlight is the area of tension on the requirements necessary for vehicles from eastern European countries operating on our markets .
We all know how important it is to reduce the environmental pollution from traffic .
We lay down stringent requirements on vehicles stationed in western Europe .
We now see an increasing number of vehicles from eastern Europe which do not come anywhere near meeting these same requirements operating on our road network .
The tension is obviously there because we on the one had want to give these countries the chance to develop their economy but on the other hand , Madam President , it is becoming extremely difficult for our people to accept that they must meet these more stringent requirements while vehicles from eastern European countries do not need to come anywhere near meeting these requirements .
I would appreciate hearing what the Commissioner has to say on this area of tension .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , back in the summer of 1993 the European Council decided that those countries of central and eastern Europe which wanted to join the European Union could do so .
The European Council set out the conditions , and quite tough conditions they are too .
They relate to the development of democracy in those countries , but above all they relate to harmonization of those states ' economic and legal systems to the acquis communautaire , to the development and the aims of the European Union .
The obstacle to accession is not insurmountable , but it is very high .
Today in the European Parliament , not for the first time and surely not for the last time , we are discussing , in the context of Mr Oostlander 's report - for which I should like to thank him sincerely on behalf of my group - the question of the amount of progress that we - and by ' we ' I mean both the associated countries of central and eastern Europe and the European Union itself - have made in the preparatory process .
To make it quite clear once again to many people , let me say that we are not discussing the accession of the central and eastern European countries today but are reviewing the progress made with these preparations and identifying the tasks that still have to be accomplished .
President Dini stated this morning that preparations for enlargement are also on the agenda of the Intergovernmental Conference .
He said that the agenda was ambitious and kaleidoscopic , that the Council will present an interim report and that the Madrid decisions are to be implemented .
Those are clear words .
The requirements set by the European Union when it held out the prospect of EU membership after the end of the East-West confrontation are demanding , but the countries of central and eastern Europe set about their work right away , doing everything in their power to achieve the necessary objectives as quickly as possible .
The European Union provided help .
The funds disbursed so far under the PHARE programme have done much to promote the establishment of the private economy in those countries , to pave the way for restructuring of state enterprises and to develop a sound financial and banking system .
In short , the European Union has made a decisive contribution .
But the really strenuous efforts to date have been made by the governments and more especially by the people in the countries of central and eastern Europe themselves .
This led the Czech Prime Minister , Mr Václav Klaus , to state that not only had the countries of central and eastern Europe left the operating table and were on the road to recovery , but they were also completing the first phase of economic transformation , the main aims of which were to achieve macroeconomic stabilization and to create a regulatory framework for the market economy .
The preparatory work for the accession of these countries , however , is not only theirs to do ; important decisions also have to be taken by the European Union , decisions over which the states of central and eastern Europe have no influence at all .
They have no say in the form , the direction or the speed of the western European integration process , nor have they any influence whatsoever on the proceedings of the Intergovernmental Conference , where the conditions for the smooth entry of their countries into the institutions of the Union have to be formulated .
Moreover , they have no influence over the essential reform measures that we still have to adopt within the Community , for example in the domains of finance and agriculture .
The countries of central and eastern Europe , however , are not deterred by this , nor should we in the European Parliament be deterred by the magnitude of the tasks facing us .
We want to modernize the European Union .
We want to guarantee stability in Europe , both now and in the long term .
We want to secure the future of the entire population of the European Union , which means being prepared to offer the countries of central and eastern Europe an honest assessment of their prospects of acceding to the European Union and hence of playing a part in our common development .
We know that this will not be free of charge , but the cost of non-accession , the cost of instability in Europe and the cost of separate development would be far , far higher .
The future accession of the countries of central and eastern Europe to the European Union is no reason for euphoria and certainly not for arrogance .
The future enlargement of the European Union gives us no cause for excessive optimism , but neither should it cause us undue alarm .
We must set about our task of creating the new Europe of the twentieth century realistically , critically and confidently .
The forthcoming enlargement is part of that task .
Our Europe will become what we ourselves make of it .
Madam President , I speak not only on behalf of my group but as chairman of the Joint Parliamentary Committee with the Czech Republic and as someone who believes that the reintegration of Europe is both a duty and a joy .
I have spent considerable time in Central Europe since the revolutions and I believe that we owe our fellow-Europeans the courtesy of the truth .
Enlargement is not only necessary , it is urgent .
It will not come all at once , it will come in waves of countries determined by geopolitics , by economic and political readiness and , only marginally , by economics .
We can help that process by the raft of programmes we already have in place but , most notably , we can help by training their civil servants .
We can hinder that process by failing to put our own House in order over the common agricultural policy and over budget reform .
Above all we can hinder that process by a failure of imagination and by self-absorption .
I fear we are about to see a classic example of that self-fascination in the parochial stance that has been taken by the Socialist Group , in obedience to Mr Wynn and his Committee on Budgets ' colleagues , in today 's vote .
How are we supposed to explain in Prague that the European Parliament is in danger of taking apart the Oostlander report because of an argument with the services of Parliament over the timing of this debate relative to the Committee on Budgets ' hearing on the financial aspects of enlargement ?
The financial aspects of enlargement will not be clear for some time yet .
They will depend on the sequence and on the timing of that enlargement and on the progress of the CAP reform .
This is no time for bean counting , it is a time for clarity of intent and honesty of purpose .
Madam President , now that the IGC has started it is not merely necessary but also very desirable that a signal should go out from Parliament to the associated countries in central and eastern Europe .
This signal is not only important for these countries themselves but also for this House , and the basis for this signal is the outstanding Oostlander report which towers over everything , and although it may ramble on a bit in parts , it is nonetheless a very clear signal .
In this resolution Parliament rallies behind the view of the Commission and the Council .
The Commission must present its opinions on all the applicant countries soon after the IGC negotiations .
The applicant countries should be treated on an equal footing and the complete acceptance of the ' acquis communautaire ' should be central to the negotiations .
The Commission 's White Paper is a very useful tool in this exercise .
The preparations in the individual countries will determine the time of accession .
The consensus between the institutions on the procedure to be followed will enable an accession which has been well prepared .
The political decisions to allow these countries to accede has been taken once , twice , three times over and there is no way that the Budget Committee can put a spoke in the wheels just by not having decided how much it is going to cost .
Of course it will cost money , and if you are thinking of costs then I am sure that it will cost more the longer we fail to implement what we have decided .
I could not agree more with Mr Spencer .
There is a lot to be done in economic terms for the central and eastern European countries .
With a little help from the European Union they will be able to make it .
For this adaptation process they have no need of tons of White Papers but concrete aid .
Once the adaptation process has been completed they will be ready to accede .
This was a difficult report , on too big a subject , a good attempt but at all events nothing compared to the difficulties we shall encounter with the definitive accession .
Madam President , like the rapporteur , we are in principle in favour of enlargement to include the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , since we believe that a united Europe is inconceivable without their participation .
Nevertheless , widening must be accompanied by deepening - in order to prevent the European Union from becoming a mere free-trade area - and progress towards political union , with the introduction of the essential institutional reforms .
We believe that enlargement must be a gradual and considered process , at the end of which at least three things must be guaranteed : firstly , that it does not result in the creation of a multi-speed Europe ; secondly , that the goal of economic and social cohesion is maintained ; and , thirdly , that it has a minimum social impact in the applicant countries , for which integration into the internal market must not mean brutal deregulation .
If there is something which we must export to those countries , it is not all-out economic liberalism , but the European social model .
Consequently , there is a need to ensure the preservation of policies such as the CAP - albeit reformed - and the Structural Funds .
We do not wish to see agricultural policies returned to national control , or appropriations for the Structural Funds remaining unaltered , with the same amount of money being distributed between a greater number of countries .
Also , negotiations with the countries of Central and Eastern Europe must be conducted individually , taking into account their specific characteristics and providing for adequate transition periods , in order to safeguard important production sectors in the current Member States , such as agriculture , textiles and steel .
In the political field , we must support the deepening of democracy and the defence of human rights .
And as regards security , accession to the European Union must not be automatically linked to accession to NATO .
That is not the way to guarantee the security of the countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
The way to do that is to create a genuine European security and defence identity , based on new foundations and adapted to the current situation .
We are therefore in favour of enlargement .
This report represents a contribution - albeit an inadequate one - to that process .
We in the Green Group see eastward enlargement as the current political goal of the European Union .
Enormous historical importance attaches to it .
It could become one of the main prerequisites of a peaceful and democratic Europe .
The countries of eastern Europe in particular entertain high hopes of early accession .
For that reason it is unfair and irresponsible towards those countries to nurture their hopes of possible speedy accession on the occasion of every state visit while at the same time developing an accession strategy that is not conducive to rapid enlargement .
After all , it is not only the countries of central and eastern Europe that have to prepare to move in step with the European Union .
It would be wrong to try and solve the European Union 's own structural problems by extending its market eastwards .
How are these countries to develop the ecological and social aspects of their economies if the so-called conditions of accession are based on an export-orientated development process ?
This would resolve neither the social nor the democratic conflicts in those countries .
Expecting the countries of central and eastern Europe to embrace the principles of the common agricultural policy is a step in the wrong direction .
If they pursue such a policy , they will be faced with a huge employment crisis .
Those countries are neither prepared for such a crisis nor able to overcome it .
The European Union has no option but to prepare for this enlargement by reforming its structural and agricultural policies .
Such reform is essential if we are to shift our agricultural policy from export-orientation to integrated rural development and to a common agricultural policy that will guarantee economic and social cohesion for all Member States , including new ones .
I also believe it is wrong to seek to develop a common security policy without preventive mechanisms and without the OSCE .
This is a major flaw in the Oostlander report .
Madam President , the White Paper on which this report is based deals with a vast but well-defined subject : preparing the associated countries of Central and Eastern Europe for integration into the Union 's internal market .
Mr Oostlander , whom I congratulate on the quality of his work , has decided to extend the scope of his report .
He has presented us with an overall political picture of enlargement , the reasons behind it , its effects , and the conditions which have to be fulfilled in order for enlargement to be successful .
The 15 opinions of the specialist committees have enabled us to cover a wide spectrum of issues .
In general , I am in favour of Mr Oostlander 's report .
It is constructive , positive and does not discriminate between the associated countries of Central and Eastern Europe , all of whom are starting out from the same point .
However , it could perhaps have placed more emphasis on the considerable opportunity which enlargement represents for ourselves .
Admittedly , huge difficulties are involved , but there are also benefits to be gained . It is a breath of fresh air which could , if used wisely , revitalize the rest of Europe economically , socially , culturally and , of course , politically .
As regards the conditions which have to be met before we begin negotiations on accession , I appreciate the rapporteur 's insistence on a rapid and thorough reform of the Union , which is crucial if we are to avoid the system becoming paralysed .
But I would earnestly ask that mentioning pre-conditions should not make people think that we are , in fact , in no hurry to throw our doors open to new residents .
Hope is vital to the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , and while they are well aware that it would be rash to move too quickly , they still need to be given , as soon as possible , some clear and encouraging signals .
Only then will they be able to summon up the energy needed to justify the tremendous effort that is and will continue to be required from their people .
Just think of the progress already made : for example , a 7 % annual increase in GNP in both Poland and the Czech Republic .
Political action thrives on goals , hope , and even dreams .
For those of a more serious or technical turn of mind , there is the White Paper itself .
The Commission has carried out an excellent piece of work , which is already proving useful in planning the reforms that are being carried out in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
I was in Poland recently and can confirm this .
Naturally , this White Paper on the internal market will be supplemented by others .
For instance , there should be a White Paper to assess , realistically and without prejudice , the economic and financial implications of enlargement on the Community budget ; and another to tackle legal reform , aimed at creating systems based on the rule of law , and genuine democracies which respect human rights and freedoms .
This subsequent work will allow progress to be assessed , but above all it will encourage the efforts made by the applicant countries , as well as ourselves .
Nobody puts a question mark against the White Paper 's and the report 's principal political objective : peace and stability in Europe .
But the question is whether the means to achieve this are the right ones .
The critical point is that the idea is not to provide a basis for free dialogue and free economic relations between independent nations .
The plan is for our eastern neighbours to be subjected to the conditions laid down by the European Union .
The keyword is adaptation , which actually means , in practice , submission .
There are political conditions attached to our neighbours ' access to our markets , and these political conditions are based on the obsessive notion that social , political and legal problems are solved by means of strengthened supranational mechanisms .
It is a tragic mistake , not made any better by the report 's highflown language which includes an innovation called the social market economy .
I will admit that social market economy is linguistically creative , but unfortunately politically impossible .
Madam President , in the report on the accession of the countries of Central and Eastern Europe to the European Union , I was particularly struck by the constant references to democracy and human rights .
But what right have we - parliamentarians from Western Europe - to be giving lessons in democracy to our Eastern neighbours , when we well know that in our own countries , and particularly my own , Belgium , elections are systematically rigged for financial , media or political reasons , with the silent complicity of the various European authorities ?
I was also struck by the report 's obsession with economics , when what Europe needs is political will .
The Eastern European countries , which have only just emerged from 50 years of communism , are now being scourged by the full force of the rampant , Mafia-infested capitalism from which we Western Europeans have not yet managed to escape .
It is up to us , in company with our comrades in the East , to seek a third way , one far removed from socialism as well as capitalism , both of which generate poverty and social injustice .
Madam President , we should not lose sight of what the Oostlander report is all about : it is a response to the Commission 's White Paper and it is not Parliament 's definitive decision on enlargement .
We should make that clear to everyone .
The Committee on Budgets did not submit any amendments to the report for the simple reason that we are awaiting the outcome of a public hearing next month on the cost of enlargement .
We would have much preferred that the Oostlander report waited until after that hearing or , indeed , that the hearing be brought forward .
I think that is to some extent a condemnation of the timetabling of Parliament 's business .
But here we are , we are left with the report , and the fact that the Budgets Committee has not yet had its hearing .
I do not take exception to what Tom Spencer said : I take it as a compliment when I am criticized in this respect .
But Tom said something about the Budgets Committee wanting to spoil this report because it is involved in bean counting .
One of the questions we have to ask , quite frankly , is how many beans are the Member States prepared to pay for enlargement ?
Until we get an answer to that , we can pontificate as much as we want about enlargement and will be giving a false impression until we know the cost .
Parliament 's position on enlargement deserves something far better than a report of this kind .
At least it deserves a committee in its own right , as we had with East German accession .
I agree with Tom that we need to be honest with the applicant countries , but that means saying to them that whilst Parliament is full of good intentions , we cannot deliver a bean without the Member States being able to foot the bill .
We should not be giving those applicant countries false hope until we know the cost .
Madam President , the Council has decided that the European Union is to be enlarged to include the states of central and eastern Europe , and the European Parliament supports that decision .
It represents both a historic challenge and an opportunity for all concerned .
For the first time , the states within the boundaries of Europe can become a community devoted to peace .
The closer we come to this step , however , the more discussion there will be of the details of enlargement .
The White Paper is a compendium of rules governing the working of the European internal market , and in the event of accession the candidates will also have to base their policies on the White Paper .
So that proper preparation can take place and excessive expectations and misleading arguments can be avoided , this subject must be systematically and seriously discussed in all its aspects .
It is clear , and has often been said , that while the European Union has to move , so too must the candidate states .
This report by Mr Oostlander can only be the starting-point for a thorough discussion .
As a budget expert , I should like to add that the Committee on Budgets , as Barry Wynn pointed out , will contribute to a wide-ranging discussion of this matter .
On 7 May the committee will stage a hearing on the financial aspects of enlarging the European Union , which will culminate in the use of its right of initiative to table a report .
The purpose of this , however , is not to demonstrate that the whole thing is too expensive but on the contrary to seek ways of achieving our political objectives , in other words enlargement , while bearing in mind that such schemes depend on popular support in both the European Union and the applicant countries .
Both the Oostlander report and the Christodoulou report on the financial aspects of enlargement are intended as a signal to the Council to institute concrete measures at the IGC and thereafter with regard to the forthcoming enlargement .
They are also meant to demonstrate that Parliament has already begun its work towards this end and intends to pursue it resolutely .
Madam President , I would like to thank the rapporteur for his report which can at least be called comprehensive .
It tackles many aspects of enlargement of the Union , including the budget , education , social affairs , the second and third pillars .
But in my view the Commission 's White Paper is not about that .
The White Paper is about preparing the central and eastern European countries for their integration into the Union 's internal market .
The report pays scant attention to trade , the economy , subjects which are the very essence of the White Paper while the rapporteur ignores the opinion of the REX Committee , which does focus on the economy and which does make constructive proposals in this context .
But our proposals are important for the integration of applicant countries into the Union 's internal market .
Among other things they include the tremendous legislative task facing the countries of central and eastern Europe to adapt their national legislation to the internal market .
The central and eastern European countries must be encouraged and motivated into accepting the temporary high costs of this because this adaption is needed for the major panEuropean market of the future .
It goes without saying that we shall have to help them in this process .
The principles of competition must be respected in the central and eastern European countries and the criteria for granting public aid must be harmonised .
The common agricultural policy must be reviewed and the policy on structural funds will have to be adapted ; the context must be created for encouraging cooperation between businesses in central and eastern European countries and companies in the European Union and we must help them change their approach to the former planned economies ; we must have a more determined harmonisation policy towards external aspects of this market , especially within the context of the world trade organisation ; they must adapt their customs legislation to that of the Union bearing in mind fraud , smuggling , drugs , illegal transport , nuclear transport , etc .
We have made some proposals to that end .
But these are subjects which unfortunately are not touched upon in the report .
My conclusion is simple .
We are convinced that the gradual integration of central and eastern European countries into the internal market will benefit the quantity and quality of mutual trade and create a relationship of trust which will assist the process towards accession .
Madam President , there is no doubt that enlargement is being promoted by the dominant powers in the European Union , for ideological and geopolitical reasons .
I think today 's debate proves that the European Parliament too subscribes to that kind of thinking .
It is a policy that will have enormous consequences , both in connection with security , and of an economic , social and institutional nature for the functioning of the European Union , parameters which at the time of this debate are imponderable .
How are the Union 's citizens to support a policy when the problem of own resources remains unsolved , a problem which could rock the agricultural sector and have enormous consequences for the very participation of the EU 's Member States in the functioning of the European Union as a result of the changes brought about by the Intergovernmental Conference ? How can our peoples pretend to adopt that policy when its consequences for their countries and for themselves are unknown ?
I do not think that anyone gives us the right to teach democracy to any of Europe 's peoples .
Democracy and social integration are the concerns of all peoples , and from that point of view I think we ought to act with reserve and be careful about how we approach the countries of Eastern and Central Europe .
Madam President , the enlargement of the European Union towards the east is written in the stars , and is therefore as inevitable as it is inviolable .
This is a fact of life which no Member State can deny .
Nevertheless , the negotiations which will begin after the Intergovernmental Conference must concentrate on establishing the conditions that are required to make integration a politically constructive process .
However , according to present studies , it would not be in the interests of either the applicant countries or ourselves if accession were to take place before 2005 .
Hungary , Poland , the Czech Republic and Slovenia have all made tremendous efforts in order to join the Union .
We must not deceive them , and must therefore show , without resorting to either populism or paternalism , that we have the political will to include them among our number .
I am afraid that if accession takes place too quickly , and in particular without adequate preparation , we shall only be playing into the hands of those who would like to see the Union as a kind of economic free-trade area .
Quite simply , opening up towards the east is the wind of change that many liberal governments are hoping will flatten for good the still fragile house of cards of genuine political and social union .
That is the challenge which is facing us .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I too would like to commend Mr Oostlander on his excellent in-depth report .
However , I cannot conceal a slight feeling of dissatisfaction which it is beyond the power of Mr Oostlander alone to overcome .
The rapporteur has to take account of many different aspects : the wishes of the Commission , which would like to deal with integration in the internal market in its own way ; our own newly begun work ; considerable uncertainty about the cost of adapting the CAP , infrastructure policy and regional policy ; and the timescale for exposing the applicant countries to European competition .
In short , the difficulties facing us are so great that amid all the recommendations , which are so vague as to be frustrating , and the excessive detail on priority areas , the enormity of the task of integrating at least a dozen other countries is almost lost from view .
This is a great pity , since our work needs such a perspective .
We are taking part in a historic adventure .
The 15 present Member States of the Union have practically all waged war on each other during the course of the last seven or eight centuries .
The arrival on the scene of other nations provides a chance for reconciliation in a continent that has experienced more wars than almost any other .
Furthermore , history contains no case of a great power that has been forged other than by conquering its future vassal states .
It is a historic adventure without precedent , and should inspire us to hope and pray for a Union marked by increased cooperation as regards competition policy , macroeconomic strategy and social policy , as well as foreign policy and policies on legal and human rights issues .
But the countries in question are not applying for membership for purely economic reasons . They aspire to our standard of living , of course , but they are driven even more strongly by the twin desires for security and to carry more weight in world affairs .
In this respect , Commissioner , we are going to vote for this report because it says much that is useful , even though it might say too much , and in such cautious terms that one comes to doubt its aims and the will to attain them . I would , however , like to see the report accompanied by a Commission document restating what our final aims are in building Europe , and why the chance of counting among our ranks at least 12 nations that have experienced a tragic period of history is such an amazing challenge .
I would also stress that the final choice of dates does not lie with the European Parliament , but with the Intergovernmental Conference .
I do not think it would be wise to take any risks , however small , in this respect .
We ask you to heed our message , Commissioner .
Since we have listed figures , doubts , uncertainties , and conditions , we should also mention motives , which could turn out to be noble and generous .
We are embarking on the greatest political adventure that mankind has ever witnessed .
Madam President , as a long-time student of the enlargement question , I must confess to being slightly bemused by the debate going on about this particular round of enlargement .
We started off a couple of years ago with everybody saying ' Oh , we must enlarge ' , talking very glibly about it as if it was about members joining some sort of social club .
I found myself warning that it was not as simple as that .
But we have now got ourselves into a position where everybody is throwing up their arms in horror at the enormous difficulties , and that is before we have even started the negotiations .
I find myself having to play down those difficulties .
As the last speaker on behalf of Parliament I ought to reiterate some basic points .
Firstly , it is not a question of if we enlarge , it is a question of when we enlarge .
The European Union is open to any state which meets the basic criteria .
In addition , to the Central and Eastern European countries we have long said that if they threw off the yoke of dictatorship we would welcome them into our family .
If we reverse that message now we run the risk of undermining all the reforms which have taken place at great pain in Central and Eastern Europe .
We also run the risk of seeing a descent into the sort of ethnic tension we have been horrified by in Yugoslavia .
We also run the risk , as Mr Wiersma has said , of undermining the security of the continent .
That said , of course , we have to acknowledge that there are major difficulties which need to be addressed in the years to come , particularly in agriculture and the Regional Fund and in the decision-making structure .
To underestimate those difficulties would be ultimately to undermine the enlargement process .
An overhasty enlargement would actually do more harm than good .
We cannot pretend that these problems do not exist .
But in response to Mr Wynn who says we cannot enlarge until we know the cost , the answer is : until we start discussing enlargement properly , we do not know what the cost is and we cannot sit around waiting for someone to work it out .
We cannot constantly be operating under the tyranny of the Committee on Budgets in the European Parliament .
I welcome the White Paper because it is a start in addressing the practical issues in relation to enlargement .
At the end of the day enlargement is a political question , it is a question of political will by political leaders .
Do we want to make it happen ?
There is also a question of political acceptability to the citizens of the European Union and to the citizens of the Central and Eastern European countries .
Unless they are prepared to accept the conditions we negotiate , it will not happen .
We should bear that in mind in everything we say and do leading up to ultimate enlargement in the next century .
Madam President , I have listened with great interest and fascination this morning to the many Members who have spoken on this highly important subject of the enlargement of the European Union .
May I first of all congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Oostlander , on his comprehensive report and the great deal of work he has put into it .
In a fairly short space he has managed to cover in detail the varying political views in this House , and he has produced a motion for a resolution which covers not just the White Paper and its implementation but also the more general question of the future enlargement .
I know that he consulted many other parliamentary committees in order to product a well balanced text and we ourselves had the pleasure of discussing the subject with him on several occasions .
At the end of the day , Madam President , this is about the European Union facing one of the biggest challenges since its foundation : the expansion to the east and south which will produce a union of more than 25 countries .
It is a historic opportunity , a point which has been made several times this morning .
We ought to seize this opportunity , which is not easy at times , but the political decision taken at the European Council in Copenhagen in 1993 was clear .
The Member States decided to further in this way the political , economic and social development of all peoples in Europe .
In that decision security policy played a determining role .
A successful Intergovernmental Conference is in the view of the Commission essential for enlargement .
We in the Commission know that Parliament agrees with us here .
Mr Oostlander 's report also makes this quite clear .
You will recall the promise given to you by the Council during the last enlargement .
The European Council in Madrid in December proclaimed a new phase in the process of enlargement of the Union and was challenged to define the procedure and the timetable for its preparation .
The Commission was instructed to produce a report on certain aspects of enlargement .
It has to further evaluate the consequences of enlargement on community policy , with particular reference to agriculture and structural policy .
The European Council will resume its examination on the basis of these reports .
Good progress can be reported on the opinions requested in Madrid on the nine applications for accession to the Community from countries from central and eastern Europe , because as you are aware the applications from Cyprus and Malta had already received an opinion from the Commission .
In the next few days a series of technical questionnaires will be sent off to the applicant countries which we hope to receive back in the summer and then the Commission can get down to work on its opinions on these applications .
The Commission services continue to analyze the consequences of enlargement on the Union 's policy as well as the situation in each of the applicant countries .
As you know the Commission will present its opinions on the applications as quickly as possible after the closure of the Intergovernmental Conference , expected to be mid-1997 if the IGC does in fact conclude .
These opinions will be accompanied by a so-called synthesis document in which the main horizontal questions relevant to the enlargement and the prospect of accession negotiations will be addressed .
The Commission will then produce a statement on the financial framework , after 1999 , which takes account of the possible enlargement .
The Commission agrees with those who said this morning that this is not the time for detailed costing , nor would that indeed be possible since the most important cost aspects , such as the adaptation to the common agricultural policy or the regional policy , have yet to be examined in detail .
The Council will then decide on the start of accession negotiations in the light of all these reports .
With regard to Cyprus and Malta , as you know , the decision was taken to start negotiations six months after the conclusion of the IGC .
But in addition to that the European Council expressed the hope that the preparatory negotiations on the accession of the countries of central and eastern Europe would ' coincide with the start of the negotiations with Cyprus and Malta ' .
But definitive decisions have yet to be taken .
That is the situation at the moment and I intend , and the Commission intends , to involve the European Parliament as closely as possible in this process .
It is only by working in harmony with the other institutions that this ambitious task can be done .
We need your help and advice and this report from Mr Oostlander forms a good point of departure .
More specifically with regard to the implementation of the White Paper considerable progress has been made with preparing the associated countries to integrate into the internal market .
They have worked out new national strategies to adapt to the legislation of the internal market or are in the process of doing so in close cooperation with the Commission .
On 10 January the office for the exchange of information on technical assistance got off the ground ; this service provides information to the associated countries in the field of documentation , information on the implementation of the ' acquis ' on the internal market , study meetings and study visits .
This service will soon be expanded to include experts in the field of the internal market from national administrations and from private bodies in the Member States .
I shall now turn briefly to the specific paragraphs of the motion for a resolution .
We fully support the broad outlines of the motion for a resolution .
Paragraph 1 calls the enlargement of the European Union to include the countries of central and eastern Europe a momentous opportunity to contribute to peace , security and prosperity throughout Europe .
That is the Commission 's starting point for its future activities .
In paragraph 4 the Council and the Member States at the IGC are urged to do everything in their power to reform the institutions of the European Union to enable the EU to operate more effectively .
As I have already said , the Commission totally endorses that view .
In various paragraphs you call for more White Papers to be presented on various subjects .
I would , however , point out that pursuant to the European Council in Madrid the Commission has been instructed to present various reports .
In addition to the detailed opinions on the applications for accession the Commission will also produce a synthesis document on the enlargement .
I have already mentioned that .
The Commission has also to produce a detailed analysis of the financial system of the European Union as quickly as possible in order to present immediately after the IGC a communication on the financial framework of the Union after 31 December 1999 which takes account of a possible enlargement .
So the Commission has already a large number of reports to work on .
Finally , Madam President , paragraph 14 calls on the Commission to give the candidate countries the necessary assurances regarding their accession to the Union by drawing up minimum criteria which must be complied with .
I should point out that these criteria are already listed in the conclusions of the Copenhagen European Council , namely stable institutions which guarantee democracy , the rule of law , human rights and respect for the protection of minorities .
Secondly , the existence of a functioning market economy and thirdly the ability to withstand the pressure of competition and market forces within the Union .
We believe that clearly describes the criteria .
This important debate will undoubtedly be followed by many more .
May I conclude by thanking Parliament again most warmly for the great deal of work it has done ; I promise that we shall continue to keep Parliament informed of further preparations of the enlargement process and look forward to more debates both in committee and in the plenary .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place in a moment .
Votes
Before this roll-call vote is held , I should simply like to point out that the amendment relates only to the figures .
Rejecting it would therefore amount to contesting the figures , which at present are not in dispute .
After the vote on the amendments :
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen . Our group calls for this report to be referred back to committee , not because we do not believe a strong judgment should be made but because we believe that the signal which this sends out is such a tough one , namely refusal to grant discharge , and that it is unclear whether the consequences of this decision will be what we want .
What we therefore want is referral back to committee to have the strategic debate on it there because it has not been properly debated yet .
We believe it extremely important that Parliament give itself time to examine whether the consequences of this decision will be what we want , namely budgetisation , so that we create a clear structural situation .
We are afraid that this will , on the contrary , send out an unwelcome signal for development cooperation in general , and that at the start of the IGC this is not the best way to work for more say in the IGC ; we further believe that this cannot be done on a year by year basis , but that a structural answer should be sought .
We are calling for more time for a strategic debate and hence for referral back to committee .
I thank those Members who are applauding in advance what I am about to say .
I should like to say to Mrs Aelvoet that , despite the fact that we are on opposite sides of the House , I fully support her proposal for referral back to committee .
I do not agree with her when she calls for the European Development Fund to be integrated into the general budget , since that would mean that the ACP countries would receive less money .
I do agree with her , however , when she says that the debate was not conducted properly and that we are sending a bad signal to the ACP countries .
It is not the question of the integration of the EDF into the budget or otherwise which determines our rejection of this report , but the fact that we are sending a bad signal to the ACP countries .
To refuse the discharge would be to call into question our cooperation with those countries and our will to continue that cooperation .
It would be to exploit the issue of budgetizing the EDF , through an institutional ploy which we reject , to the detriment of our relations with the ACP countries .
I am therefore in favour of referring the report back to committee .
Mr President , the proposal to refer this back to committee is totally inappropriate , particularly for the reasons given .
First of all , for Mr Fabre-Aubrespy to say the debate was not conducted properly is , I think , offensive in the extreme to the chairmanship of Mrs Theato in the committee and to your predecessor in the chair in this House .
It was a perfectly proper debate .
In a roll-call vote on the crucial paragraphs the amendment from Mr FabreAubrespy was defeated by the votes of 365 Members , an absolute majority of this House , and paragraph 10 had 364 Members , an absolute majority of the Members of this House , voting in favour .
I can think of no circumstances less appropriate to refer a matter back to the committee .
It is a question of those who either did not properly participate in the debate , or those who , having participated , found their views rejected , now wanting to have a second bite of the cherry .
This House should reject this proposal .
( Applause )
( Parliament rejected the proposal to refer the matter back to committee )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , on a point of order , I should like to move an amendment to the order of voting .
In the voting list the amendment I am tabling on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party comes before the amendment tabled by the Green Group in the European Parliament .
The Greens ' amendment , however , goes further .
Both amendments concern research with foetal tissue .
The Greens reject such research outright .
Good reasons may be found for that , but it does not reflect the view expressed by Parliament in other resolutions .
That is why we should vote first on the more radical amendment proposed by the Green Group in the European Parliament and then on our amendment , which does not reject such research in principle but formulates very strict conditions for it .
I believe we can then carry this Amendment No 3 together , because Parliament has already adopted it once .
But let me add that some groups would like a separate vote on the passage concerning somatic gene therapy at the end of Amendment No 3 .
If it is still possible , I should like to ask for that to be arranged , but the more important point to me is the voting sequence .
Mr Liese , I cannot agree with you .
The order in which the secretariat has prepared the vote is the logical and correct order .
Mr President , you certainly answered my point very clearly and assuredly .
I should just like to know what makes you so sure that a total ban on research in a particular field is less far-reaching than the subjection of such research to certain safety regulations .
At any rate , I stand by my opinion and call for the vote to be taken first on the amendment tabled by the Green Group in the European Parliament and then on our amendment .
It is not for the Chair to judge these things .
All we are doing in terms of setting the structure for the vote is to follow the logical , chronological order of the amendments .
The House is sovereign in terms of the decisions it makes .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , this is a very minor amendment .
I understand it has fairly wide-spread support across the House .
I should just like to read the first line : ' Notes in this respect that measures to promote employment should ... ' .
After the word ' should ' we would like to insert the word ' also ' so that it would then read : ' ... should also be developed by the Member States , the regions and local communities and especially by the social partners .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Before we take the final vote I should like to thank the rapporteur for making my job in the Chair easier than it could have been .
It was a very complicated vote .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , I ask your indulgence to invite my colleagues who have not yet signed the declaration on autism to do so .
Over 100 colleagues have signed it in the last two days .
I wish to invite the rest to sign it as soon as possible .
Under the Rules , you cannot so inform the House but you have anyway .
With the granting of the European Parliament 's assent to the conclusion of the fisheries agreement between the Kingdom of Morocco and the European Union today , a new framework for cooperation has been established . This will be balanced cooperation between the two parties in a sensitive area : the conservation of fisheries resources and their economic exploitation , directly or after processing .
Parliament 's decision is fully in keeping with the conclusions of the Barcelona Conference .
It is time to restore balance to the European Union 's cooperation with its partners on the other shores of the Mediterranean .
Furthermore , with regard to the fisheries sector , we must welcome the financial protocol annexed to the agreement , which amounts to ECU 500 million over four years .
I personally support the breakdown between four actions : financial compensation , development programmes , scientific research and training programmes .
The aid granted must serve to promote employment and development .
The European Union is showing solidarity in an important sector of the Moroccan economy .
This solidarity must also be displayed in other sectors .
It is for this reason that I regret the fact that the European Parliament is not also - in tandem with its assent to the fisheries agreement - adopting a position today on the association agreement , which has a more general scope .
A vote in favour is virtually certain , but we shall have to wait a few months before giving a boost to renewed general cooperation .
We voted in favour , because this is a good agreement , which is the outcome of sound negotiations and an excellent result for relations between the European Union and Morocco .
The conclusion of this agreement was possible because , despite the difficulties involved , the fundamental aspect prevailed : the clear political will , that is , as associated countries , to reach an agreement which was satisfactory to both parties .
That has been achieved .
We always believed that it was possible to reach a balanced and long-term agreement such as this : a compromise between parties whose positions were initially poles apart , but which made great efforts to find common ground .
Other political forces adopted more variable and opportunistic stances : they preached doom and gloom , and ruled out any possibility of an agreement being reached during the Spanish election campaign , turning this important international accord into an instrument of petty domestic politics .
That was a serious mistake .
We therefore acknowledge the efforts of the Spanish Government and the Spanish presidency of the European Union , the Commission , the Moroccan Government and His Majesty King Hassan II of Morocco - all of which have made possible the conclusion of this 1996 Fisheries Agreement between the European Union and Morocco .
Despite the positive aspects included in it , namely giving the go-ahead for resuming fishing activity by the thousands of fishermen laid off , whom we have defended from the outset , our abstention in the vote on the Arias Cañete report and the overall terms of the fisheries agreement with Morocco is based on the following aspects :
1.The European Parliament is issuing this opinion a long time , around five months , after the Commission and Council negotiated and approved this agreement , not allowing an appropriate and timely intervention by the elected Members of this Chamber ; 2.The negotiation of this agreement is being processed after a unilateral decision by Morocco - which could and should be opposed - to consider as null and void the fisheries agreement which was in effect and whose duration should extend until April 1996 .
This decision is all the more unacceptable given that it is quite obvious that its sole objective was to impose the acceptance of benefits in the trade agreements negotiated alongside the fisheries agreement and not to preserve fish stocks in Moroccan waters ; 3.The agreement by the Commission and Council to offset measures in the trade agreement - referring to fisheries but also to agriculture and the preserving industry - imposed by Morocco on the European Union but not imposed by this North African country on the fleets of countries which are not Members of the European Union ; 4.The fact that some of these concessions agreed to in the trade agreement are unacceptable , in that they could even cancel out , in economic terms , the positive aspects of the fisheries agreement .
Giving away with one hand what is received on the other is certainly not beneficial to all of those productive sectors involved , in particular for two of the less developed countries of the European Union ; 5.Furthermore , there is the fact that the fisheries agreement is scheduled to last for four years with a more than doubtful renewal , whereas the trade agreement is set to last for ten years , at the end of which concessions made are irreversible.- Poggiolini report ( A4-0092 / 96 )
Who could possibly object to better coordination in health policy ?
Monitoring public health and exchanging relevant data seems at first sight a totally acceptable activity , especially if it is all done with a view to improving public health .
Yet we voted against the proposal and did so for the following reasons .
It is obvious that collecting data serves a wider purpose than merely evaluating the present community policy .
The background is the continuing harmonisation of the health systems themselves .
That goal is now just a step too far .
If these systems grow towards each other , then that is all very well .
But if Brussels deliberately dictates that path , then that is an undesirable development in our view .
Mr President , for some years now the European Union has had a number of public health programmes in an attempt to bring Europe closer to the man in the street .
Even European programmes to combat cancer , aids and smoking have difficulty resisting the test of subsidiarity .
Subsidising national programmes is basically nothing other than recycling money .
Money which is first of all transferred to the Union and then after a lengthy process of project selection is finally returned to base .
The value of a European approach is in serious doubt .
The problem facing a policy on public health in many countries is the inability to pay for care .
Costs have soared through the roof .
But the question of how much money should be paid for health care should be answered by the people involved .
It is a national affair .
Commissioners and Members of the European Parliament have no business saying anything here .
If the national authorities can hardly come to grips with it then nothing will be gained by tackling it on a wider scale .
Europe should not get over ambitious by trying to manage public health policy .
Even the very definition of a hospital bed creates problems .
A European monitoring system is out of the question .
In my opinion the development of a worthwhile European policy on public health is a dream .
Let Europe concentrate its forces on other affairs .
If there is something which is true of the industrialized countries as a whole - or , with regard to what interests us more specifically , the countries of the European Union as a whole - it is the need to make fundamental choices in the field of public health policy .
I shall not go back over the reasons which led us to raise these issues , but whatever options are chosen in the future by the governments of right and left , North and South , whatever economic constraints they are subjected to , it is clear that one of the fundamental measures to be adopted before taking any decision is to carry out , at European level , a programme of assessment of the current state of , and probable trends in , Europe 's health and health systems .
This is what is proposed in the Commission 's document , which the rapporteur has skilfully amended .
The fundamental choices which the Member States will be obliged to make are important and will have a bearing on the future of the European project itself .
The European Parliament had intended to propose the establishment of a genuine European Health Observatory , along the lines of those being set up in other fields .
However , the majority in the Council preferred to restrict the programme to one of simple coordination - exploiting , as usual , the different traditions and reservations of the health sector and the budgetary constraints in this area .
The outline of the health monitoring system proposed by the Commission is certainly somewhat blurred , but whatever form this new instrument takes , we wish it to be practicable and effective .
We need such a system - as health professionals , patients and governments - in order to be able to provide our decision-makers with as much useful information as possible concerning the current situation and foreseeable trends in the other Member States , it being understood that the assessments will focus not only on health , but also - so to speak - on the health of healthcare systems .
We also need such a system in order to be able to focus our efforts more rapidly on prevention rather than healthcare per se - and this , perhaps , should be the aim of medicine in the twenty-first century .
The European Parliament also wished , in general terms , health professionals , NGOs and the paramedical sector as a whole to be more closely associated with the definition of the broad outlines of health policy .
I am not entirely convinced that this wish was taken into account by the Commission .
It is time , therefore , to ensure the involvement of the citizens and health professionals in the taking of tomorrow 's major decisions .
In the Commission 's own terms , the proposed health monitoring system is designed to :
' analyse the state of health of Europe 's citizens and certain common factors such as nicotine and alcohol addiction , in the context of possible proposals for Community action ; -assess the impact of the Community action programmes in the fields of cancer , AIDS and other communicable diseases , as well as that of all other programmes in the sphere of health education ; -provide the Member States with health information as regards the health status of populations , lifestyles and health habits , living and working conditions , health protection , demographic and other social factors .
As long as the data provided is harmonized , this will make it easier to compare information and adjust national health policies . ' All this is fine , as long of course as this laudable project is underpinned , in full agreement and cooperation with the Member States , by a general philosophy which is far more ambitious than the simple collection of data : the philosophy of the absolute need to promote health protection .
I repeat : medicine in the twenty-first century must be more resolutely focused on prevention .
We have much to gain from this , and let us make no mistake : a well-managed prevention policy will enable us to safeguard the integrity of our endangered healthcare systems . By spending in advance , we spend less later on .
If operations were carried out as soon as the warning signs appeared , there would be fewer deaths and tragedies .
If people were trained in prevention , in paying greater attention to their bodies , if doctors were encouraged to educate their patients , if cancer screening and care for pre-menopausal women were better funded , there would undoubtedly be less expenditure later on and the death rate would also fall .
I hope that this Commission proposal - even if I do not believe that it is as accomplished as the House would have wished - will constitute a first step towards establishing this medicine of tomorrow .
Leopardi report ( A4-0091 / 96 )
In establishing the internal market and the free movement of goods and persons , the European Union must also promote compliance with Article 129 of the TEU , which states that the Community shall contribute towards ensuring a high level of human health protection .
The creation of a European health card , as repeatedly called for by the European Parliament , will represent a step in this direction , and we therefore wish to congratulate Mr Leopardi on his report .
Europe 's citizens are entitled to health protection , and the introduction of a European health card , as well as the right to the treatment required by a person 's state of health , are therefore inherent aspects of the free movement of persons and the concept of European citizenship laid down in the Maastricht Treaty . Consequently , we believe that this must be a Community initiative .
Once again , we add our voice to this positive request .
My grounds for voting against the report on a European health card are that it is an unnecessary measure of no particular benefit , in that national health cards can serve the same purpose .
Furthermore , the national health cards are subject to the standards and criteria governing information / registration applicable in the Member State in question , which restricts the scope for misusing information .
Moreover , the report is an example of the numerous own-initiative reports from the EP in the health sector , which have no overall strategic basis , and cut down the time available for actual legislative work .
Given current technological development , enabling the creation of a health card useable in all the countries of the European Union and with a possible extension , in the short term , to all other countries in which it would be possible to store all possible information about a given person , in particular chronic disease , serious infections or allergies , blood group , vaccinations , agreement or not to blood transfusions or the transfusion of blood derivatives and an indication of whether or not the person wishes to be an organ donor , the family doctor to be contacted in the case of an accident , inter alia , while maintaining respect for confidentiality of data and medical secrecy .
Such information would make it possible not only to avoid serious accidents or deaths as a result of the wrong treatment but could also speed up treatment and lead to savings , because unnecessary secondary examinations would not be necessary .
Portugal , with its insular ultra-peripheral regions , a country to which tourists flock in large numbers and a country also affected by migratory flows , many of them seasonal , has an important role to play , contributing to considerable mobility by the citizens within the European Union and throughout the world , and can only benefit from the widespread introduction of such a card on a voluntary and optional basis .
These are the reasons for which I voted in favour of this report .
The idea is simple : to enable European citizens travelling around Europe to have on their person , at all times , the information on their state of health allowing them to be treated properly , wherever they are .
This would represent a genuine step forward in making the daily lives of our citizens easier .
This idea has been on the table since 1981 , and Parliament has adopted a number of resolutions on the subject .
Now , pursuant to Article 138b of the EC Treaty , it can request the submission of a corresponding legislative proposal .
Mr Leopardi 's report indicates that the legal basis would be Article 129 on health policy , whereby the European Union may encourage and coordinate the Member States ' actions in the sphere of public health .
Two issues , in my view , are particularly important .
The first concerns respect for the confidentiality of the information contained on the cards , and the confidence that citizens can place in the competent authorities wherever they go .
And the second concerns acceptance of the card throughout Europe .
This will inevitably be a long-term enterprise , especially in that it involves an area where the Community 's competence is limited .
Furthermore , it will not be a question of legislating to impose the health card from on high and at a stroke , but of working together with the national authorities and the main health professionals concerned - especially doctors - to determine the means of ensuring the introduction of the health card within a reasonable period of time .
It is not the view of the Danish Social Democrats that the EU should pursue an actual health policy .
The drawing up of health policies should continue to be a task carried out as closely as possible to the citizen , with the public exercising the maximum influence .
There are widely differing views in the EU on the basic principles of health policy , and the best method of ensuring quality for the individual is therefore through a decentralised health policy .
Any EU policy concerning health should primarily confine itself to research , cooperation and statistics and should primarily comprise areas which are not already sufficiently covered nationally , or areas where international cooperation is especially appropriate .
Mr Leopardi 's report on a health card would require resources which cannot be justified by the card 's potential use .
The card would have to be used throughout the health system , which would require the procurement of electronic equipment and the electronic input of data .
A number of people would have this card issued individually , and there would have to be training on a massive scale in the use of cards and equipment .
In addition there are the running costs , altogether a very costly business .
The advantages are not so great as they appear to be at first sight .
Practical , security and ethical problems , together with the fact that only Europe is covered , restrict the scope for its use .
On the basis of a medical technology assessment , this report would inevitably be rejected .
The report should in other respects be viewed in the context of many MPs ' wish for a federal health policy , in which health costs are covered by the EU .
However , there are also very positive aspects to the proposal , including easier access to treatment abroad , but significantly better provision can be made for those aspects in other ways .
One of the aims of the Cabrol report on blood safety and self-sufficiency in blood is to create an internal market in blood and blood products .
This may conflict with the Danish wish for national self-sufficiency and the body of voluntary donors which we have .
The Popular Movement cannot vote in favour of this report , in that we consider it to be far too narrowly conceived .
If a form of health card is to be devised , then it should extend far further than the EU 's borders , and we would like to see something established at the WTO level for example .
We also see a danger in adopting an EU health card since we fear that it will be a step towards further integration and finally lead to a common EU health policy .
We do not want that .
The individual Member States should continue to be able to pursue an independent health policy .
We find that a health card containing information about sexual orientation , for example , is quite unacceptable .
And we also believe that it should be voluntary to have a health card or not .
In conclusion , we would add that experience should always be exchanged both within and outside the European Union , but we are opposed to monitoring systems of any kind , including any in the health sector .
Wynn report ( A4-0098 / 96 )
Mr President , our group did not vote in favour of Mr Wynn 's report granting the Commission discharge in respect of the implementation of the general budget for 1994 .
I should first like to make some remarks concerning the procedure .
As I pointed out yesterday in the general debate , eight separate reports were the subject of a joint debate .
Taking into account the breaks in the sitting , this debate lasted less than two hours .
There were very few contributors other than the main speakers from the Committee on Budgets .
Consequently , the debate received little input , and today very little time was devoted to the votes .
I note that no amendments were tabled .
Finally , if I am to believe what you have just said concerning the list of Members wishing to give an explanation of vote , Mr President , I shall be the only person to speak on the general budget for 1994 .
So there will be virtually no explanations of vote on this subject .
This is revealing , in my view , of a negative trend which I must condemn .
By increasing the number of Parliament 's positions on matters which do not strictly fall within its competence , we have arrived at a situation where Parliament is failing to fulfil the tasks assigned to it - in particular its budgetary tasks , whether as regards the vote on the budget , or budgetary control .
With regard to the Wynn report itself , I wish to say that although for the first time a statement of assurance was issued , pursuant to the Maastricht Treaty , which provides for this procedure , and although this statement of assurance was a negative one in respect of certain appropriations - payment appropriations - and the Court of Auditors estimated 4 % of the appropriations to be suspect , the discharge was not refused , just as it was not refused for 1992 , despite very serious irregularities , or for 1993 .
In view of the fact that the Committee on Budgets is failing to assume its responsibilities , therefore , we voted against the Wynn report .
Wynn report ( A4-0096 / 96 )
Mr President , I had the opportunity to express my views on the discharge yesterday , and once again , a little while ago , in connection with Mrs Aelvoet 's proposal for referral back to committee .
We tabled four amendments to this report , and I took the precaution of stressing - with your permission , for which I am grateful - that the purpose of Amendment No 2 was simply to specify the figures for the Cultural Foundation 's budget .
And I would point out that the Foundation 's spending - ECU 810 000 , or 0.04 % of the EDF - was the pretext used for refusing the discharge .
That is the only irregularity .
And I accept that it is an irregularity .
However , comparing this sum with the amounts involved in the general budget , for example , I believe that we should ask ourselves whether there are not grounds for qualifying the criticisms that could be made - and which should also have been made at the time of discharge decisions in previous years . I am thinking of the criticisms regarding the non-integration of the EDF into the general budget - criticisms which concern only the legal framework within which the funds are managed .
Are the disastrous political consequences of a negative decision on the EDF 's accounts not likely to undermine the ACP countries ' confidence in the Member States ' commitment towards them ?
The institutional ploy in which the majority of Members are engaging is unacceptable .
It discredits this Parliament .
We cannot use a report , regardless of its substance , as a pretext for engaging in deliberations on structural or institutional problems .
We did this with regard to loans to South Africa .
Now we are doing it again with regard to cooperation with the ACP countries .
Our group refuses to participate in this institutional ploy , this continuing squabble .
It is for this reason that it did not vote in favour of Mr Wynn 's report .
The conflict between the Commission and the European Parliament concerning Mr Wynn 's proposal to refuse the discharge in respect of the implementation of the European Development Fund for the 1994 financial year illustrates the absurd and anti-democratic situation created by the European Union 's all-out interventionism .
There is no real democratic control over the utilization of the European Development Fund , whilst in the Member States , development aid expenditure is controlled by the national parliaments .
This is an area in which the usefulness of pursuing policies jointly under a Community procedure has not been demonstrated .
Given that the principle of subsidiarity is now enshrined in the Treaties , abolishing the EDF and restoring the corresponding policies to the control of the Member States - which can manage them perfectly well on their own - would be a good example of a return to democracy .
This area could be the subject of an experiment in taking matters back out of the Community domain - something which could catch on - with a view to democratizing European policies and keeping only what is strictly necessary within the Community sphere .
The undersigned agree with the Court of Auditors ' criticisms of the shortcomings of the European Development Fund 's management and the minimal scrutiny to which the Fund 's payments are subject .
We are also critical of the lack of logic in the legal and juridical framework governing the EDF .
However , unlike the report we do not believe that Parliament should be given increased budgetary or legislative powers .
The EDF should continue to be managed by the Member States and audited by nationally appointed auditors .
Discharge should be granted by the national parliaments , which are the bodies with most democratic legitimacy .
For this reason we voted against the report .
The ARE Group 's decision to vote against granting the Commission discharge in respect of the implementation of the European Development Funds for the 1994 financial year is based on the following two reasons :
the annual report of the Court of Auditors and the detailed arguments of both the rapporteur and the draftsman of the opinion make it abundantly clear that the way in which the EDF appropriations were utilized does not correspond to any rule of sound management ; -furthermore , and this is the main reason , the European Parliament is called upon to grant discharge every year , even though it possesses neither the corresponding budgetary nor legislative powers : by supporting a discharge procedure of a purely accounting nature while not , at the same time , having the power of budgetary authorization , we are consenting to a confusion of powers which is prejudicial to Parliament 's political authority , in the sense that we are agreeing to carry out a legal exercise which is not in keeping with our mandate.It is for this reason that I and my colleagues are reiterating our call for the EDF to be incorporated into the general budget .
The discharge procedure has revealed the Community 's structural and institutional weaknesses . The Court of Auditors notes that 4 % of expenditure was the subject of ' serious ' errors of substance , and is unable to give an opinion regarding a further 14 % .
This is hardly reassuring . In fact , waste is inherent in a Community budgetary procedure that is characterized by irresponsibility .
Firstly , there is the irresponsibility due to the financial structure . Europe is a suction and force pump .
80 % of expenditure is managed by the Member States . In these circumstances , does it make sense for it to pass through Brussels ?
Should the subsidiarity principle not lead to part of Community expenditure being relinquished ?
Secondly , there is the irresponsibility due to the political structure .
The Cohesion Fund , the Structural Funds and certain internal policies are designed to create a support base for the European Community . But creating support bases and budgetary discipline are , by their very nature , mutually exclusive .
And thirdly , there is the irresponsibility due to the increase in crossfinancing . When a political , economic , social or administrative agent has the possibility of obtaining finance for an expenditure from five or six different administrative levels - the European Community , the national , regional or provincial , departmental and local authorities - this is more likely to encourage begging than budgetary discipline .
This should lead to a revision of the financial perspective : not upwards - towards ever increasing expenditure and taxation - but , on the contrary , downwards - towards a drastic reduction of expenditure and revenue .
Poggiolini report ( A4-0051 / 96 )
Firstly , I should like to pay tribute to the rapporteur for his efforts to explain and shed light on Alzheimer 's disease - a little-known illness which nevertheless represents a veritable health scourge which must be eradicated .
We are all aware that the population of the European Union is living longer and ageing .
We must welcome this phenomenon , which is proof of the constant improvement of living and hygiene conditions .
Nevertheless , we must also prepare for its many consequences .
The increase in lifespan is leading to a rise in the incidence of age-related diseases - in particular , Alzheimer 's disease .
We cannot ignore the fact that by the year 2000 , around 8 million European citizens will be affected .
The consequences of this irreversible degenerative disease are above all human .
The progressive alienation and physical decline of an elderly person cause immense suffering to both the patient and his or her family and carers .
Given the extent of Alzheimer 's disease , however , the amount of financial resources and medical staff devoted to tackling it are totally inadequate .
I unreservedly support the rapporteur 's call on the Commission to implement a programme of measures to combat this disease .
Similarly , I would urge the Commission to draw up , in collaboration with the Member States , a white paper on the different approaches to Alzheimer 's disease in the European Union .
Let us enrich our collective knowledge with the experiences of the different Member States .
Let us join our efforts to establish the specific causes of this disease .
Failing to spend sufficient money on research into the disease is bound to mean having to spend more money on dealing with its consequences .
In addition to this essential but futile humanitarian expenditure , therefore , let us make a positive investment in eradicating this scourge - God willing - once and for all .
Finally , I should like to say emphatically that the European Parliament - even if the ' elderly persons ' intergroup deals with this matter - must take the initiative and conduct a debate on the increase in lifespan and its human and economic consequences .
In view of the constant rise in the incidence of Alzheimer 's disease and the gradual ageing of the population , the European Union 's response to the serious problems raised by this disease has been somewhat timid - particularly since more than 5 % of people over the age of 60 suffer from it .
On the basis of Article 129 of the EC Treaty , the European Union must launch an action programme to combat this disease , with priority being given to research . This programme must include coherent policies aimed at coordinating measures which are currently dispersed , and act as a catalyst for private and public initiatives in this area .
Firstly , it must focus on early diagnosis ; secondly , it must serve as an information campaign aimed at increasing public awareness and improving the quality of care ; and , thirdly , it must promote research into the causes of Alzheimer 's disease .
Naturally , all this will require adequate financial resources to be provided , with a view to enabling coherent action to be taken to combat this disease .
I shall end by repeating that we can never emphasize enough the serious problems raised by this disease , in which the irreversible degeneration of the brain gradually reduces a human being to a purely vegetative state , with the resultant social consequences for the patient and his family .
In voting against the report on Alzheimer 's disease , I am expressing dissatisfaction with the lack of an overall strategy within the health sector for rare diseases and , with it , European cooperation on these illnesses .
The fact that an own-initiative report has been drawn up on Alzheimer 's disease is not wrong in itself , but why this disease in particular ?
What about all the other rare diseases where there is a need for greater research ?
It would have been a better idea in the first place to have devised a common strategy for rare diseases and , in that context , discuss the priorities for Community action .
The incidence of Alzheimer 's disease in advanced countries , where it is mainly concentrated , is already high .
The absolute number of victims is already considerable and comparable with that of other virus diseases , such as AIDS .
Despite this , however , neither information , nor scientific research , nor prevention and treatment , nor the care of those who fall victim to Alzheimer 's disease have benefited from the systematic , widespread social and collective efforts that its severity demands .
Could this be mainly because it is believed that Alzheimer 's disease affects mainly the aged ?
So far there have only been research programmes of limited scope , while the financing of those programmes falls far short of the associated scientific and social interest .
' Senile dementia ' , as it is known , is not the target of a single expenditure programme by the welfare organizations .
Following the decimation of pensions and social provisions for old people and those who have retired , in the name of profit and increased competitiveness , a new kind of racism is being cultivated by the state and social welfare against the elderly , imposed by unchecked free market forces which decree that death is ' allowable ' when it costs less than staying alive .
The Commission 's statement postpones consideration of the issue for the future , a future , however , that is very uncertain indeed for the thousands of elderly suffers whose present situation should concern us right now , with the adoption of support measures and the creation of infrastructure for therapeutic care , the organization of nursing centres , and the organization of training programmes for specialized staff who will tend the patients .
However , in the immediate future , finance must also be provided for research on the prevention , diagnosis and treatment of the disease .
A society which supposedly strives to prolong the average lifetime , indeed under the best possible conditions of survival , cannot possibly allow the spirit of old people and their personality , for the sake of voracious ' profit ' , to succumb to the effects of a disease so distressing and destructive , both for the patient and his or her family .
Cabrol report ( A4-0094 / 96 )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Cabrol 's report contains some excellent proposals which we endorse - with the exception of the call to set up a European Blood Safety Supervisory Body , of whose usefulness we are less convinced than the rapporteur .
Ladies and gentlemen , what a long way we have come !
We can finally dare to talk openly of selecting blood donors , whereas in the past , they were drawn from among the prison population , where unfortunately drug addiction , homosexuality and the rape of fellow inmates are commonplace .
We can finally dare to talk of carrying out tests and telling infected donors not to give any more blood - although you would think that was the least that should be done .
We can finally dare to talk about promoting the use of self-transfusion , something which until very recently was prohibited , for reasons which in fact were far more ideological than practical .
It is indeed the ideology of making mixing the norm - at least as much as incompetence and the love of money - which has been responsible for the spread of the AIDS epidemic , against which the National Front tried in vain to warn .
Our reasoned words were met with nothing but scorn .
Today , those who contradicted us stand accused of the infamous charge of contaminating the population .
I have already had an opportunity - yesterday evening , in plenary - to express my support for the Commission communication and Mr Cabrol 's report .
Today , I wish to reiterate the importance of ensuring the safety of blood products through the testing of donations and the application of stringent circulation and storage requirements .
I also wish to stress the need for a large-scale information and awareness campaign on blood and blood donation , with a view to achieving self-sufficiency in Europe .
Lastly , I wish to call for the promotion of voluntary , unpaid donation - especially in Europe - with the support of donors and their associations , which work from day to day for self-sufficiency , safety and clear moral rules in this vital but sensitive area .
May we never forget the tragedy of all those recipients of transfusions who were infected for want of adequate tests and safety measures - even if the information on AIDS available at the time was inadequate .
That must serve as a lesson for the future and prompt us to introduce even more stringent safety requirements .
I have chosen to vote against the report on safety in the blood sector and self-sufficiency in blood , because I see no special grounds why the Community should be self-sufficient in blood .
There is nothing to indicate that blood from the Member States is any better than that which we obtain from the USA for example , and I therefore see it as yet another example of the Union busying itself with areas which are not important for Europe or Europe 's development instead of concentrating on the important issues .
This debate on the safety of transfusions and self-sufficiency in blood and blood products raises an important social issue .
A choice must be made between the defence of moral principles and the pursuit of profit .
From this point of view , the directive of 14 June 1989 on blood derivatives was a dangerous one , in that it opened the way for the application of market laws to substances of human origin , with the resulting payments for blood donation and the growing penetration of the blood derivatives market by private companies .
The House was able to highlight these dangers during a special debate in September 1993 .
The Commission was required to take account of Parliament 's concerns in its communication of December 1994 , which is the subject of this report .
Our group 's position is based on an inviolable basic principle : that the human body is not a commodity .
We believe that the human body and any organs or substances obtained from it are inalienable and non-marketable .
On the basis of this principle , we are proposing to amend the 1989 directive in such a way as to free it from the application of market laws , by allowing Member States to insist on respect for the ethical principle of voluntary , unpaid donation before authorizing the placing on the market in their territory of a product derived from blood or plasma .
Similarly , we support all measures aimed at improving the Community 's selfsufficiency in blood and blood products by encouraging voluntary , unpaid , anonymous donation , in particular through the information , education and motivation of the public , support for voluntary blood donor associations , the promotion of cooperation between the Member States and the holding of a European blood donation day .
Our position coincides with that outlined in the report by the Committee on the Environment - a report which we are all the more happy to support now that it has been improved and strengthened by our amendments .
Voluntary blood donor associations have long been pressing the Commission to take action in this important area of public health .
These associations have always stressed the need for blood donations to be voluntary and unpaid . This , their basic principle , is designed to guarantee both self-sufficiency and absolute safety in the supply and use of blood and blood products .
It is the trade in blood and the pursuit of profit which threaten to introduce the risk of contamination , through inadequate or lax controls and failure to comply with rules and time limits throughout the transfusion chain .
I therefore support the rapporteur 's fundamental demands : the establishment of common standards throughout the European Union ; respect for the principle of voluntary , unpaid donation in all the Member States ; strict rules on the use of the blood collected , with particular attention being given to the selection of donors , the devising of uniform tests of the highest technical quality , the application of stringent storage requirements and the rational use of blood and blood derivatives .
Let me say that thanks to the effective action taken by the Luxembourg Red Cross and voluntary blood donor associations , Luxembourg has managed to ensure both self-sufficiency and absolute compliance with all safety and hygiene requirements .
In any event , if we are eventually to set up a common system , that system should be based on those existing in the Member States which have the most stringent requirements in this field , such as Luxembourg .
Blood , and the products obtained and extracted from it , are extremely important therapeutic substances by means of which medical science offers substantial help in both acute and chronic diseases .
Unfortunately , however , repeated revelations about defective control methods and the methods used to collect blood , which have resulted in the transmission and spread of serious diseases and in large numbers of deaths in the European Union , give rise to great and justified social disquiet and demand that the matter be given the greatest possible attention .
The methods used up till now must be re-examined as responsibly and sensitively as possible , as well as the rules relating to the system of blood donation and its safe therapeutic use in patients .
Current regulations involve omissions and inadequacies that are responsible for the results of the practices in force for the production and disposal of blood products .
The development of voluntary blood donation must be the most important contribution to covering the demand for blood used to cater for the therapeutic needs of patients .
However , that source must go together with reliable and responsible clinical and laboratory support .
A national blood donation service should be set up to direct and control , with reliability and responsibility , the process of collecting and using blood , as well as every factor related to donors , recipients and anything else that is relevant , including information exchange with all other competent services and agencies at national and European level .
Liaison and cooperation between the relevant services in the Member States must be facilitated , to guarantee coordinated action in the context of the therapeutic use of blood and the avoidance of disease transmission by biological factors .
Paid blood donation for the industrial production of pharmaceutical products must be carried out by specially organized medical and laboratory units working under the supervision of special scientific centres in the Member States , with the aim of selecting the donors in a controlled way and carrying out all the necessary laboratory examinations to detect biological factors responsible for the transmission and spread of serious diseases .
In the case of this kind of blood donation it has been ascertained that the attempt to keep production costs low has acted against scientific method , with the purchase of large quantities of blood from foreign countries with populations whose standard of living is low and whose hygienic standards are poor , without carrying out the essential scientific procedures , which were deemed too expensive for the company and whose omission proved devastating for human life .
We cannot legislate to ensure ethical conduct .
What is essential , however , is to establish all the prerequisites that will eliminate whatever conflicts with the personal and social right to health and life : sensitization of the public , insistence on scientific research of the highest quality , the supervision by national and scientific agencies of companies to ensure avoidance of the production of products that undermine public health , and the imposition of all measures necessary to exclude the use of contaminated blood for the production of pharmaceutical preparations or for direct therapeutic purposes .
Turin European Council
Mr President , the European Council 's dilemma at the Turin summit could be summarized as follows : in order to facilitate the Union 's enlargement to the east - which is our main priority - the moves towards federalist integration must be restricted . Such restriction is impossible , however , since the introduction of the single currency will require further transfers of sovereignty .
Widening must therefore be reconciled with deepening - but how will this be possible whilst respecting the fundamental principle of maintaining a single institutional framework ?
In these circumstances , we are not surprised to find , in the summary of the European Council 's conclusions , a lack of any clear vision of Europe 's future .
No clear choice is made , in particular , between a Europe that applies constraints , towards which the extension of qualified majority voting is implicitly directed , and a more flexible Europe , organized around what is delicately called the ' reinforced cooperation clause ' .
These two parallel proposals are , however , based on radically different philosophies : the system of qualified majority voting implies constraining the minority ; that of the reinforced cooperation clause , on the other hand , implies agreeing not to constrain it .
Will the Intergovernmental Conference succeed in reconciling these two conflicting demands ?
However , the IGC is burdened with an even more serious problem : that of the single currency .
Officially , the conference is not meant to be addressing this issue , since the decision has already been taken .
In reality , however , the preparations for the single currency are bringing to light a number of serious institutional problems which remain to be resolved .
Mr Hänsch himself drew attention to this in his speech at the Turin summit .
I shall quote him : ' Europe 's currencies will be brought within the Community domain .
Economic policy , however , will not .
It is not good for this situation to continue .
The Union needs global macroeconomic management . '
However , this was the same Mr Hänsch who said at the Cannes summit , as he has said here in the House , and I shall quote him once again : ' The Union does not need to be delegated more powers by the Member States .
It must simply be able to exercise better the competences which it already enjoys . '
The contradiction reflected by these two quotes is common to all the Union 's institutions .
One statement derives from the need to respect public opinion , the other from the need to support the single currency .
Following the IGC , one of the two - respect for public opinion , or support for the single currency - must prevail .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen - and ushers - we know very well that under the cover of what is assumed to be a federalist goal - organizing the deepening of the Union in preparation for its widening - the aim of the Intergovernmental Conference in Turin is to lay the foundations of a European super-state whose centralizing function will only increase .
We do not want such a state .
We want it all the less because , behind all the fine speeches about a people 's Europe , transparency , democracy , employment and prosperity , lies petty political manoeuvring .
At Maastricht , we paid dearly for the agreement of Portugal , Spain , Greece and Ireland , with the creation of the Cohesion Fund .
This year , it is the United Kingdom with which we shall have to compromise .
The spectre of mad cow disease hung over the Turin summit .
The Member States have agreed to pay 70 % of the cost of slaughtering old British cows at the end of their productive life .
This is a wasted effort , however , since the British Government is already contesting the legality of the ban on its beef exports at the European Court of Justice .
And , to cap it all , the conclusion of the Intergovernmental Conference will have to wait until after the general election is held in the United Kingdom !
Whatever next !
If the revision of the Treaties were to be the key issue in a democratic election enabling European citizens to express their views , that really would be something .
Once again , hidden behind the great plans and fine speeches lie quibbling , horse-trading , undeclared aims and financial designs .
No : whatever clothes you try to dress this monster in , we want nothing to do with such a Europe .
The Intergovernmental Conference , in its present form , is in danger of becoming a hotch-potch .
In the absence of a clear analysis of the world situation , there is no real principle underpinning the conference .
Let us take the case of the fight against unemployment and external policy .
In fact , these two areas are connected , since unemployment is provoked by international competition , immigration and the world monetary disorder - all things which concern both economic and foreign policy .
The reality which we are refusing to see and put a name to is the following .
Today , there is only one major power left in the world : the United States .
Having played a decisive role in the victory in the Second World War , in 1989 , the United States won the cold war with the Soviet Union .
The United States is in a position to lay down the law to the international community .
In economic terms , this is the law of unrestricted freedom of trade , from which , for historical reasons , the big American companies are able to profit most .
The free trade imposed by the United States calls into question the various social protection systems which exist in Europe .
It is at the root of both the relocations which are leading to the rise in unemployment in the Member States , and the increasing pressure to reduce wages and even the purchasing power of the mass of workers .
Because it will not call into question the ' leadership ' of the United States - which would not prevent friendship with the American people , however - the European Union is subject to this global law .
As a result , it cannot tackle unemployment at its root , and it is proposing no more than stop-gap measures and limited adjustments .
In political terms , Europe is obliged to support the establishing of the new world order as defined by the United States .
Whether the Member States retain their freedom or speak with a single voice , whether external policy decisions are taken unanimously , by majority or qualified majority , nothing will change this fundamental reality .
And what are Europe 's plans for the world order ?
They do not exist .
They would have to be defined on the basis of national realities , and we are a long way from that .
In these circumstances , the IGC will bring no improvement , other than in procedural details .
The European Union seems to be afflicted with the same disease as Byzantium at the time of its decline : a lack of self-assertion and a lack of courage .
On the subject of the Turin summit , and while emphasizing that the Italian presidency is not responsible , I wish to express my dissatisfaction firstly at the lack of a European will to combat unemployment , secondly at the institutional prospects , and thirdly at the disturbing lack of drive in Europe .
Europe today too often gives the sad impression of being an association of shopkeepers - prisoners of their own interests , incapable of either solving current problems collectively or mapping out a clear vision of the future .
It is in this light that I cast my vote on the joint motion for a resolution .
Despite the fact that the resolution focuses on promoting employment and citizens ' rights , which we of course support , we , the undersigned Members , cannot vote for the resolution , partly on account of its express support for ' a common foreign and security policy worthy of its position in the world ' , which in plain English probably means a common defence and the incorporation of the WEU in the Union , and partly because the resolution supports the idea of the Union having greater powers through ' more effective ' decision-making procedures and of more legal and home affairs issues being incorporated in Community law .
We want the EU to continue to be an organisation for civil cooperation between independent states .
We also believe that the Intergovernmental Conference should be urged by the European Parliament to take up the issue of the EMU convergence criteria and recognise the link between unemployment and those criteria .
Having regard to the national compromise and the Edinburgh agreement , the Danish Social Democrats are not able to support those aspects of the report regarding the common foreign and security policy and Union citizenship , which are contrary to the four Danish derogations .
For the French National Front , the debate on the work of the Intergovernmental Conference provides a further opportunity to condemn here in the House the anti-national , federalist , centralizing and bureaucratic logic of the present model of European integration .
The Europe of the Maastricht Treaty - with its rationale , its working methods and its policies - is a machine designed to crush peoples and nations in a kind of historic , cultural , social and economic revisionism , which seeks to impose on the real Europe - rich in the culture of its peoples and nations - a single , reductive and destructive model .
The National Front is committed to defending the identity of the peoples of Europe , their sovereignty and independence , and their inalienable right and freedom to choose their own destiny .
Clearly , these legitimate demands are in conflict with those of the postMaastricht European muddle which the IGC is preparing for us .
In any event , the National Front demands that the peoples of Europe should be directly consulted in a referendum to decide on the approval or rejection of Maastricht II .
Much less technocracy and much more direct democracy can only benefit Europe .
Increasing unemployment and poverty in Europe will not be solved by a further expansion of the EU 's political influence .
Increasing supranationalism within the Union will only remove political decision-makers still further from the people .
Democracy becomes difficult to discern when , because of ambiguous political structures , decision-makers at national or European level can blame the problems faced by society on one another .
It is my firm belief that the European Union should be a forum for cooperation between sovereign states in which ultimate accountability to the voters lies with the national parliaments .
I hope that the Intergovernmental Conference will produce a result which makes the European Union simpler and less bureaucratic .
A large majority of our group could not support the resolution because it falls far short of the reforms that are needed in the EU today .
Instead of addressing the burning issues that the EU is already facing and will face in the foreseeable future , the review conference provided for in the Maastricht Treaty is restricted to institutional reforms in the narrowest sense .
Instead of grasping this opportunity to press vigorously for the Intergovernmental Conference to tackle at long last the major tasks of overcoming mass unemployment and effecting the transition to a new development model based on solidarity and ecological responsibility , thereby refashioning the EU into an environmental and social union , and for the preparation of EMU and the formulation of decisions regarding the financial basis of the Union to be given the comprehensive attention they merit , Parliament has restricted itself to a few non-committal statements that are themselves confined to the institutional aspect .
In this way it has squandered another opportunity to make good its own claim to an active role in the development of the reform process .
Alongside that failure , any individual textual nuances over which we might quibble pale into insignificance .
The message to Parliament is the same one that Europe ought to take to heart in the global context : ask not what the world can do for you - ask what you can do for the world .
But a genuine process of democratic reform of the EU is obviously still a long way off !
Oostlander report ( A4-101 / 96 )
Mr President , everyone here is convinced that the European Union 's strategic priority in the coming years will be enlargement to include the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , which share our values and history , and which already have association agreements with the Union .
Nevertheless , the diversity of these countries and their differences - not least economic and social - from the Member States of the Union will make this process a difficult one .
How can we accomplish it quickly ?
What kind of institutions will enable us to assimilate these disparate nations ?
The Turin European Council gave the Intergovernmental Conference a mandate to seek solutions , but regrettably failed to provide guidelines for a specific vision of the future institutional architecture of an enlarged Europe .
The Oostlander report , which was presented to the House today , corresponds to an ultra-federalist concept of the future , which raises more problems than it solves , and which now appears to have minority support in Europe .
It assumes that the countries of Central and Eastern should accede to the Community en bloc , with institutional unity , and only some slight differences as regards their respective speeds .
Furthermore , it assumes that these countries should cooperate in the institutional development of the Union in the direction - and I quote - of ' Community decision-making procedures which will involve the transfer of part of national sovereignty to European level ' .
With these words , the Oostlander report aims in particular at the extension of qualified majority voting , which is meant to facilitate the functioning of an enlarged Europe .
We might well ask how .
Because if it is difficult to take decisions unanimously in an organization with 25 members , it is unacceptable to take decisions by majority in an organization with 25 disparate members .
In reality , the only solution is to abandon the dogma of institutional unity and accept variable geometry .
This also means that we must opt for a European partnership of nations , rather than a federal Europe .
This will enable us to welcome the countries of Central and Eastern Europe more effectively and more quickly .
In a European partnership of nations , for example , what would prevent these countries from acceding without delay to an intergovernmental organization such as Europol , with a view to combating more effectively large-scale international crime ?
Mr President , I subscribe entirely to the views expressed by my colleagues , and I shall therefore confine myself to making three specific points .
Firstly , the Community 's secondary legislation has drifted so off course , and its legislative texts burgeoned to such an extent - in their complexity and in the constant exceeding of powers - that it forms a body of law to which the countries of Central and Eastern Europe will not easily be able to accede .
Secondly , Mr Oostlander 's report makes frequent reference to democratic legitimacy , the rule of law , and democracy - I am thinking in particular of paragraph 18 .
Would we not do better to put our own house in order , when the elections to the Belgian senate were so marred by irregularities that one party was prevented from taking part , and when in my own country , France , public freedoms are still governed by a communist law - the Marchais-Gayssot law ?
Thirdly , and lastly , Mr Oostlander 's entire report is based on the premise set out in recital H that ' enlargement yields considerable gains for both old and new Member States ' .
I fear , Mr President , that this idea is more of a slogan than a proven fact .
The enthusiasm with which countries of central and eastern Europe were initially promised membership of the Union seems somewhat tempered ; not just because of the technical problems the enlargement will bring but also and especially because many people want first of all to secure the community nature of the Union before enlarging it .
This tendency is to be found in the Oostlander report on which I am making this explanation of vote together with my colleague Mr Van der Waal , on whose behalf I also speak .
In addition to the justified demands which the report makes of central and eastern European countries in terms of economic integration , the rule of law and democracy , it also expects a certain federal approach and complete acceptance of the ' acquis communautaire ' .
In practical terms this means putting a brake on a speedy expansion towards the east .
That is unacceptable to us on both moral and security policy grounds .
Furthermore we regret that the report pays no attention to the geographical and cultural confines of Europe .
That is necessary to prevent any arbitrary accession of new countries .
Any attempt at enlargement must be directed at countries which belong to the sphere of European culture and influence of western Christianity including the reformation .
Despite these criticisms we voted in favour of the Oostlander report because we believe that enlargement should be a priority goal of the Union and we can agree with the lines of development traced in the report on the economy and rule of law .
Good neighbourliness is important , especially in international relations , but before one invites the neighbours into one 's own house one should have a good think .
The iron curtain between West and East seems to be drawn back and even tucked away , but the economic gulf between the two Europes is still there .
The manner in which this gulf is closed and relations between the relevant countries improved can vary from an advanced form of development aid through a package of privileged trade relations and cooperation links to enlargement of the European Union to include central and eastern European countries .
Sooner or later this last option will be followed , but more important than the question of who and when will accede is the question of the conditions under which such an accession will take place .
Proponents of enlargement always assume that enlargement will benefit both the present and the future member states .
That is undoubtedly true .
Just think of our domestic and foreign security and of democratic stability .
But the fact that there is a price to be paid and that there may even be drawbacks is often passed over or even forgotten .
This is partly because the consequences of this kind of accession are not clear or are inadequately recognised .
What will happen to the existing agricultural , horticultural , forestry and fisheries policy , to the free movement of goods and services , persons , information and capital , to the single market and the single currency and to central community projects ?
What will happen to decision-taking , to the institutions , to the community budget in general and the budget headings for the cohesion funds and structural funds in particular ?
Until such times as these questions receive serious answers and even approximate estimates made of the cost of enlargement , enlargement will remain a step into the unknown , both for the present as well as future member states .
I am not prepared either as a politician or as a private citizen to write a blank cheque .
I want and I must know the costs of my decisions and the repercussions of my choices from all possible angles : budgetary , financial , monetary , fiscal , economic , industrial , commercial , social , ecological , diplomatic , etc .
We would also be wrong to raise hopes in the relevant countries which might not be fulfilled .
Despite the German wish to welcome Poland and the Czech Republic just now .
Despite the Swedish wish to allow the Baltic Sea countries to accede .
Self-interest is a poor adviser in this kind of negotiation .
This also applies to the reluctance of Portugal , Spain , Italy and Greece who are thinking of a drastic cut-back in aid from the European Union to the Mediterranean countries .
Such an all important political issue as accession , with its implications for the future and the very existence of the European Union , cannot be decided on reasons of preferences or prejudices .
In the final analysis we are talking about extending the European Union and not replacing it with a large free trade area with a dwindling community pillar and a dominant intergovernmental pillar .
We , the undersigned , have voted for the report .
We did so because we believe that the report gives consideration to many of the problems involved in the accession of the Eastern European states to the EU .
This is in marked contrast to much of the over-simplified propaganda which is being disseminated in the EU , not least in Sweden , concerning the advantages of the accession of the Eastern European states .
We believe , as does the report , that the Eastern Europe states should be able to accede to the EU but we would also stress how important it is for the people in each of those countries to be given the opportunity to express their views on membership .
It is also very important , as the report says , that those countries which elect not to join should be granted good conditions for trade and cooperation with the EU .
Despite our vote in favour , however , we would stress our criticism of the report 's talk of the unilateral adjustment of the Eastern European states to accommodate the EU rules and regulations and economic system , which would include the expressly mentioned requirement of market-oriented deregulation and privatisation .
The report also lacks a serious analysis of the security policy problems , not least as regards Russia , which may arise in connection with the EU 's planned development of an integrated defence and military dimension .
The authors of the report on the accession of the countries of Central and Eastern Europe consider that enlargement to the east will have ' major budgetary and financial consequences ' , and could also have ' major social , political and security consequences ' .
The Belgian National Front does not rule out these dangers , but is amazed at such caution on the part of parliamentarians who , for the most part , recently approved a customs union with a non-European country , Turkey .
The authors of the report consider that enlargement to the east is undoubtedly possible in theory , but will be far more difficult in practice .
It is to be regretted that the states of Central and Eastern Europe are today paying the price of 50 years of socialist economics and bureaucracy , and that because they are not members of NATO , they are not benefiting from the Union 's generosity in the same way as the Republic of Turkey .
In fact , it seems as if Europe is opening its borders to the south , but closing them to the east .
The purpose of this report , like that of the Commission white paper on the same subject , is to review the progress made by the associated countries in their transition towards accession to the European Union .
Given the uncertain prospects , and the indecisiveness - not to say positive lack of commitment - on the part of our countries , they appear to be making all the effort .
In this context , it is important to point out , firstly , that the principle of the accession of the countries of Central and Eastern Europe has been established and must remain so .
We must avoid breaking the camel 's back by imposing unrealistic preconditions on the applicant countries , or indulging in petty accounting .
The main obstacle to the smooth progress of a transition which should logically end in accession is , to my mind , the over-cautiousness of the Union Member States .
Enlargement has a price , that cannot be denied .
But the price of our indifference and selfishness will undoubtedly be far higher , because they threaten to deprive the countries of Central and Eastern Europe of political prospects which are essential to the success of their transition .
The report on the Central and Eastern European countries ' participation in cooperation in the internal market is very well thought out .
The rapporteur deserves praise for his excellent analysis of the problems to be solved as part of the preparations for the forthcoming enlargement of the EU .
I am thus able to give my full support to the rapporteur 's invitation to the Central and Eastern European countries and their minorities communities to settle any conflicts via political dialogue and with due consideration for the minorities ' right to maintain their cultural identity .
I would also like to highlight the rapporteur 's recommendations on education , information and the media and those on cross-border cooperation between the Central and Eastern European countries themselves , and between those countries and their geographical neighbours among the EU countries and the CIS states .
If we wish to create a better understanding of other peoples ' living conditions , break down prejudices and emphasise the common European cultural heritage , we must strengthen the cultural dimension of European cooperation and international cooperation , respecting diversity and individual countries ' cultural identity .
And - as the rapporteur so rightly stresses in his concluding remarks - all the countries have their own particular history and cultural identity , which they naturally want and will be able to preserve within the European Union .
With regard to the arrangements for the accession negotiations with the new Member States , I would also agree with the rapporteur when he stresses , at the beginning of his report , that the negotiations with the associated countries should start at the same time .
It does not automatically mean that the new Member States should , or will be able , to accede to the EU en bloc .
The applicant countries are very different , which can duly be taken into account only by conducting accession negotiations with each country separately .
For the same reason , the duration of these negotiations as well as the timing of the individual applicant country 's accession to the EU , may well vary considerably .
It is vital , however , that the EU countries are not , from the very start , guilty of politically influenced discrimination towards the new Member States , as this would be seen by public opinion in Central and Eastern Europe as being an indication that some applicant countries were ' more welcome in the EU ' than others .
Should this - false - impression spread , we should immediately have failed to achieve the objective of the forthcoming enlargement to further the process of political and economic reform in the applicant countries and recreate a whole , undivided Europe without prejudice and political tension .
In the light of these highly sensible and realistic considerations , I find it surprising that the rapporteur concludes that a tenable European legal system cannot be achieved by developing EU cooperation in a pragmatic fashion , but that the EU must be structured as a federal organization - here and now .
It is my impression that throughout the whole post-war period - to a very great extent - we have been able to develop and strengthen European co-operation by taking a pragmatic approach .
It is absolutely essential if such cooperation is to be developed further that it is not stepped up without popular consent , but remains based on careful analysis and demonstration of the need for practical cooperation .
I have voted for the report because I consider it to be more important to enlarge the EU so that it becomes an organisation of truly pan-European cooperation than to develop a deeper Union .
It is important that the negotiations with the countries of Eastern and Central Europe which have applied for membership should begin simultaneously .
Countries with a stable democracy , openness and a functioning market economy should have priority , while countries which have not yet achieved these goals should have to wait for membership .
It is extremely important that the process leading to possible membership is conducted democratically and openly , preferably concluding with a referendum .
Each country should of course decide for itself how it wishes to cooperate with the EU .
The future enlargement of the European Union , be it to the countries of central and eastern Europe or to include Malta and Cyprus , is a fact of enormous political importance which deserves our support in principle , for which it is fundamental that the will freely expressed by the peoples of the applicant countries should be manifested and respected .
Since this is a question of principle it is equally fundamental that the accession processes should be painstakingly studied and that there should be a thorough explanation of all of the ramifications of these accessions , both on the European Union and all its Member States as well as the applicant countries themselves .
On the other hand , a European Union with 20 or 25 countries requires and demands far-reaching consideration as to the future Community budget , which means having at our disposal the bases and perspectives enabling us to respond effectively to needs arising from enlargement , without calling into question the legitimate aspirations of the peoples of the existing Member States , in particular in respect of the common agricultural policy , the structural funds and other Community policies .
That is why we must plan for pre-accession periods and sufficiently tailor-made transitional periods which take into account the complexity of all of the aspects involved in the different enlargement processes , always paying attention to the conditions of existing Member States .
As far as institutional affairs are concerned , it is necessary , for the sake of the principles of sustainable development and economic and social cohesion , which underpin the European Union , that enlargement cannot be a pretext for imposing hard cores or directories of countries , for the institutionalisation of groupings of countries at different rates or speeds , just as it is inadmissible to use enlargement as an argument for breaking the current rules of appointing commissioners , the rotation of Council presidencies , full equality in the treatment of languages , as well as safeguarding and fully and totally respecting proportionality when determining the number of Members of the European Parliament .
Just one last comment to say that we do not think it admissible that we should make acceptance of new countries in the Union depend on their prior accession to NATO or any other international military organisation , nor that this should even be hinted at as a condition for accession , especially since this could well give rise to political and military instability in eastern Europe , in particular in relation to Russia .
Since the Oostlander report does not satisfy our preconditions in the slightest we are unable to vote in favour of it .
Tackling the problems and challenges faced by modern society requires the development of exchanges and cooperation in every sphere .
In this context , I am in favour of the enlargement of the Union to include the countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
This must provide an opportunity to encourage the development of a democratic Europe , based on economic and social progress and forming part of a common vision of international relations .
The establishment of economic and political cooperation undoubtedly requires efforts on everyone 's part , but we cannot oblige the applicant countries to adjust their structures and legislation to comply with the Maastricht Treaty without taking into account the possible economic and social consequences , and without allowing them express their views .
Furthermore , in just a few years , the economic shock therapy experienced by these countries has given rise to considerable social inequalities .
It would be useful , therefore , to carry out a detailed analysis , on a case-by-case basis , of the political , economic and social implications of enlargement for the applicant countries .
I support an approach which is quite different from that of placing workers and economies in competition with each other .
Such an approach must be based on the aspirations of the peoples concerned , and on the promotion of human potential , employment , democracy , peace and security .
The campaign for disarmament and demilitarization is thus an essential aspect of our security on the European continent .
The bloc mentality and military designs of organizations such as NATO or the Western European Union will have no place in the Europe of the future .
The report contains advances - regarding in particular the defence of human and minority rights , and the intention not to encourage privatization in the fields of culture , education and health , in the interests of social cohesion .
Nevertheless , it does also contain dangers .
For all these reasons , I have abstained from voting on the report .
Our group abstained from this vote .
The reason for our abstention is not that we were in any way unappreciative of the work of Mr Oostlander and the Members who supported him .
Wherever he took a stance against the new manifestations of western European isolationism , which mainly lurk behind financial issues , he deserved and he had our support .
However , this constant rearguard action against narrow ' little European ' thinking evidently tends to diminish the scale and importance ascribed to the task of planning , in the context of the enlargement process , a European development strategy that is sustainable and that will work throughout Europe .
The economic challenge , especially in terms of regional , industrial , social and employment policies , is inexcusably underestimated once again in the present report , and there are even instances of the aim of a demilitarized pan-European home being actively obscured , for example by uncritical endorsement of the common agricultural policy , by detachment of the problems of ' illegal immigration ' or ' organized crime ' from their proper contexts and hypostatizing them or by implying that there are military solutions to pan-European problems .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.35 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Welcome
I wish to announce that our Parliament is honoured to welcome in the official gallery a parliamentary delegation from the Ukrainian Parliament .
On the occasion of the 10th anniversary of the Chernobyl accident , the Ukrainian Parliament 's delegation will hear the statements by the Council and the Commission and , ladies and gentlemen , it will observe our sitting and listen to our debate .
This delegation , which is led by Mr Andrei Mostytsky , will have working meetings today and tomorrow with our Parliament 's Delegation on Relations with the Ukraine .
I address our greetings to the Ukrainian delegation and wish it every success in its contacts and meetings with our Parliament .
Welcome to you .
Chernobyl , prospects for EU involvement
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission , on the occasion of the 10th anniversary of the Chernobyl accident , on the impact and prospects for European Union involvement .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , allow me to make it quite clear from the start .
Chernobyl must and shall be closed down .
It is a monumental affront to human civilization and totally unacceptable that the plant is still in operation .
This is my policy , and the Commission 's , and that is how it has been pursued in all fora .
It is now 10 years since the Chernobyl accident occurred .
The memory of this tragedy remains as clear as if it had happened yesterday .
It will , unfortunately , remain with us for many generations to come .
Chernobyl has become yet another symbol of the unthinkable on a par with very few other human catastrophes .
The shock was so great because this accident not only affected the immediate vicinity , but also areas thousands of kilometres from the scene .
It affected , and continues to affect , all of us directly .
Various organizations have analysed the effects on health , the environment and the economy .
Sometimes the findings of these investigations are fairly similar , while in other instances , assessments of the consequences of the disaster are quite different .
For example , the WHO , the Commission and other international organizations estimate the number of deaths definitely attributable to the direct effects of radiation at about 30 .
Other assessments put the number of deaths resulting from the accident far higher .
But let us not discuss the number of victims at this juncture .
Every individual person who dies , or suffers as a result of the accident , is one too many .
Ladies and gentlemen , our common position must be that such an accident must never happen again .
This is also the purpose of the various recent and forthcoming international conferences in which the Commission and the Member States play an important and active role , such as the conferences in Geneva , held in November 1995 , Minsk in March this year and Vienna last week .
The main objectives of these conferences were to take stock of the effects of the Chernobyl accident , to discuss the lessons to be drawn and to provide support for the people of Ukraine , Belarus and Russia who were directly affected .
The conditions for world-wide cooperation have never been as good as at present .
In contrast with 1986 the world is no longer divided by the Cold War .
In place of earlier confrontation , we have now established a network of cooperation with the countries of the former Soviet Union .
Some of us will undoubtedly be impatient at the pace of cooperation , but we must not forget to respect our partner countries ' sovereignty as independent states , and progress will hopefully come .
I can illustrate this by means of two examples .
At the end of this week the G7 countries are to hold a summit on nuclear safety with President Yeltsin in Moscow , which President Kuchma will also attend .
Such a meeting , which is to deal exclusively with co-operation in these areas , would have been quite unthinkable 10 years ago .
The Commission is convinced that it will be able to contribute towards the promotion and spread of a highly developed safety culture at an international level .
The second example is the Commission 's satisfaction at President Kuchma 's decision to close down Chernobyl by the year 2000 .
Together with the G7 countries we will continue to work with Ukraine and the international financial institutions for complete implementation of the memorandum signed in Ottawa in 1995 with that objective .
Let me now go into somewhat more detail with some examples of how we , in the EU , have drawn some practical lessons from this accident , and how we support the communities directly affected .
First of all a brief word about the support .
Since the beginning of the political and economic reforms in the former Soviet Union , the European Union has provided support via a number of different measures , including disaster programmes and humanitarian aid programmes as well as economic and technical aid and co-operation .
As regards the health situation in general , the European Commission assists via its humanitarian office ECHO with medical resources and the monitoring of the rural population .
The Commission also supplies special equipment for the treatment of thyroid gland cancer in children in Kiev and Minsk , and is helping to rehabilitate a children 's hospital in Minsk .
A programme has been set up to educate and train medical specialists , and facilities for the production of iodized salt and medicine for the treatment of cancer of the thyroid gland are about to be installed .
Such measures meet a very specific need , and we should , of course , continue with them .
Some of the support measures were , and continue to be , aimed at assisting the countries of Central and Eastern Europe and the newly independent countries with the modernization of their nuclear reactors and improvement of their safety culture .
This applies to programmes such as those in PHARE and TACIS .
An important step forward - as I have already stressed - is the signing of the G7Ukraine memorandum on the closure of the Chernobyl nuclear power station .
It covers the restructuring of the energy supply sector , an energy investment programme , nuclear safety planning of the social repercussions , economic resources and implementation surveys .
The European Commission is particularly involved in implementing the following projects , which relate directly to Chernobyl , and are identified in the memorandum as priority projects : the definitive closure of units 1 and 3 ; the Chernobyl sarcophagus with a view to finding the best solutions for safety for unit No 4 in the short and long term , and the planning of the social repercussions .
There are about 4 000 people working at the Chernobyl plant at present .
In addition , the plant provides income for the town of Slavuchid .
A joint initiative between the European Union , the USA and Ukraine is now under way to develop a specific plan of action , which is to address the social consequences of the closure of Chernobyl and that , of course , is a matter of the greatest importance to Ukraine .
In addition to solving the problem of the actual Chernobyl plant , there is also the problem of dealing with the contaminated waste from the surrounding area .
Immediately after the accident in 1986 , the radioactive waste was collected and deposited at between 600-800 different sites , some temporary and some permanent .
In some of the places where waste has been deposited and stored , the ground water has been contaminated , and there is a need for isolating it or carrying out a clean-up operation .
In connection with the TACIS programme , the European Union supports a project for dealing with this problem and is in the process of working out a programme which will encompass the following three areas : firstly , to establish where the waste is located , its condition and level of radiation risk , both in the medium and long term .
Secondly , to specify the necessary equipment for the treatment and conditioning of this waste with a view to secure storage , and thirdly , to design and specify the kind of plant which is to be used for this purpose .
The European Commission has also launched an investigation into the various options for the rehabilitation of the regions contaminated by the fallout from the accident .
What have we learnt from this accident ?
Well , with regard to nuclear safety there has been considerable progress since 1986 , especially in alleviating the effects of possible accidents , reactor safety and the prevention of the occurrence of future accidents and a better understanding of the effects of radiation on humans and their treatment , and mechanisms for radionuclide movements in soil and biota .
Then there was the question of reactor safety and the prevention of future accidents .
Reactors of the Chernobyl type , the so-called RBMK reactors , have never been constructed outside the Soviet Union .
In 1986 , the nuclear safety authorities and operators of nuclear power stations in the Community had learned from the Three Mile Island accident in the USA in 1979 .
This accident highlighted the need to pay greater attention to the human factor , the interface between man and machine , the reliability of the control instruments and to operating instructions .
The Chernobyl accident confirmed the importance of these aspects and emphasised further the need for a well prepared disaster plan outside the actual nuclear power station .
The competent authorities in the Member States take account of all these aspects when authorizing the operation of nuclear plants .
For its part , the European Commission supports the development of these aspects of nuclear safety through numerous groups of experts and study activities .
By means of the second and subsequent framework programmes for research and technological development , and through the activities of the Joint Research Centre , the Community is making a major contribution towards the prevention of serious accidents .
Together , these activities contribute towards the further strengthening of safety consciousness and the safety of all bodies involved in the safe operation of nuclear plants .
This safety culture results , in turn , in an ongoing improvement of the level of safety in existing and planned plants .
The Nuclear Safety Convention drawn up under the auspices of The International Atomic Energy Organisation in 1994 will make a contribution towards global nuclear safety .
It has been signed by more than 50 states , including the 15 Member States of the Union , and the former Soviet Union .
The aim of the convention is to promote a high level of safety in nuclear power plants , to prevent accidents and to minimize their repercussions .
The convention is expected to come into force in 1997 or , possibly , this year .
May I finish by saying that , with all the reservations I made at the beginning which prevent anyone from feeling totally confident about safety , I would conclude that within the European Union all the bodies concerned are contributing towards an acceptable level of nuclear safety on the basis of the existing scientific knowledge and technological development .
Suppliers of equipment , operators , safety agencies , the relevant national authorities and the European Union 's institutions , are each playing their role as laid down in the treaties and national legislation .
In the former Soviet Union and the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , a considerable effort has already been made and much has been achieved in assisting those who were worst affected by the Chernobyl accident , and to avoid a repetition of such disasters .
But there is still a great deal to be done .
The European Commission will , of course , analyse the most important conclusions drawn at the Vienna conference last week by eminent figures from throughout the world .
It will focus particularly on the physical industrial and economic damage caused in the short term and the long-term consequences in the form of socioeconomic disorder and stress-related psychological phenomena .
Over and above all this , the European Commission will continue to strive for effective co-operation within the relevant areas with the states concerned , as well as in many other areas in the conviction that peace and democracy are the most important conditions for a stable society which is itself the most important contribution towards the safe use of nuclear energy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am sorry to have arrived a little late , but I would like to explain the reasons for that .
It was not just because of the length of the trialogue meeting , but also because at that moment I was telephoned by the Ukrainian ambassador to Rome .
I wanted to organize a ceremony with him next week in Rome , precisely in remembrance of the Chernobyl tragedy and , for the record , I was discussing with him how and where best to give this ceremony all the significance due to it .
That is the reason I was late .
As you see , this was actually connected with the desire - not the presidency 's but Italy 's - to commemorate the tragedy of Chernobyl in a way that also involves the public and not just in this seat , august though it be , of Parliament .
So I apologize wholeheartedly and I hope that those who kindly applauded my entrance will recognize that my lateness was dictated by the best intentions and not because I regarded the speech on the tragedy of Chernobyl as unimportant or undeserving of my punctuality .
Commissioner Bjerregaard has very exhaustively set out everything that has been done by the Union , so there is no need for me to exceed my speaking time .
But I would like to say , on behalf of the Council and thus on behalf of all the Member States , that what happened at the Chernobyl nuclear power station ten years ago was a warning for us all : a warning about using science badly , when science should instead be used for the benefit of mankind above all , about the way science can work against mankind when it is not directed to the right ends or indeed when it is not properly controlled and handled with precisely that caution Commissioner Bjerregaard has discussed with extraordinary wealth of detail .
When the Council had to deal with this question of nuclear accidents , it sought - beyond the measures which had to be taken immediately , in the weeks and months immediately following the accident at Chernobyl - to give support to the Ukraine , Byelorussia and Russia , and to look ahead in order to put in place every measure which might prevent the repetition of such accidents .
At the horizontal level , a specific chapter has been devoted to nuclear safety and radiation protection , the fifth action programme on the environment and sustainable development , which covered all aspects of the problem - again Commissioner Bjerregaard has already mentioned this - including improvements in safety measures , preparation for radiation protection , management of radioactive waste , public information and awareness .
This set of measures , this chapter of the action programme on the environment , also includes and develops a series of legislative documents , directives and regulations which have gradually been adopted over the last ten years .
In the second place , the Council has been concerned to extend the content of these measures to the countries of central and eastern Europe as well as the CIS , primarily to protect the citizens of the Union from the consequences of a nuclear accident and to prevent another such accident occurring somewhere else , and has done this through the PHARE and TACIS programmes , both of which include a nuclear safety aspect . But as I say , Commissioner Bjerregaard has already covered all these points in detail .
The measures are part of a policy framework defining Union relations with all these countries and dealing with association agreements or partnership and cooperation agreements , Euratom cooperation agreements or structured dialogue .
As regards structured dialogue on the environment , the ministers of the Union and the associated countries recognized , at the Luxembourg meeting of 1994 , that the reduction of accident risk at nuclear power stations is a priority area for cooperation and , in October 1995 , in the wider context of the Pan-European Conference on the Environment , the ministers of the associated countries strongly confirmed their commitment to proceed , as soon as possible , to the closure of dangerous nuclear plant .
The Council dealt specifically with a number of individual situations relating to reactors in operation .
I will not dwell on this point any further as , once again , Commissioner Bjerregaard has discussed it in great detail .
This is a brief illustration of the policy lines which the Council has proposed and which I think it has followed with great consistency .
Of course a measure targeted on Chernobyl was also necessary , and this was facilitated in June 1994 by a partnership and cooperation agreement with the Ukraine after the Corfu European Council , starting a major initiative to close the Chernobyl power station as quickly as possible .
Closure and cooperation are written into relations between the European Union and the Ukraine .
These measures have led to the closure - over various periods , but always very quickly - of three reactors , specifically unit 4 , with a compensation commitment , including financial compensation , from the Union so that nuclear power stations which were still in building were not completed .
All this - as Commissioner Bjerregaard made very clear , so I shall not go over it again - has naturally raised the problem of structural reform in the energy supply sector .
Immediately afterwards , at the Naples Summit of the G7 in July 1994 , there was a highly satisfactory consensus of aims and convergence of effort as the Heads of State and of Government of the G7 endorsed the action plan drawn up at Corfu and announced an initial contribution of 200 million dollars , which is the equivalent of the package provided by the Union .
In April 1995 by Mr Kudjman , the President of the Ukraine , committed himself to put maximum effort into closing the Chernobyl power station by the year 2000 . Since then negotiations with the Ukrainian government have been stepped up and even though the negotiating context was not always easy the G7 has in fact finally achieved a memorandum of understanding with the Ukraine .
This understanding sets out a series of measures for restructuring the energy sector , investment in energy , nuclear safety , and dealing with the social aspects .
These form a really organic programme appropriately geared to sustaining the decision of the Ukrainian government to close the Chernobyl power station by the year 2000 .
The problem of the so-called sarcophagus enclosing reactor no 4 , the source of the explosion , is regarded as a priority .
It is certainly in the interests of the whole international community that this memorandum of understanding with the Ukraine be fully implemented within the set deadlines , applying the measures and methods as planned .
The current presidency is also ready , if necessary , to make its contribution , jointly with the Member States and naturally with the Commission , to strengthening , supporting and accelerating the procedures which have been initiated , especially a prompt distribution of the Euratom loans .
I would like to conclude by observing that , in the end , the Chernobyl tragedy has introduced a new stage into the nuclear safety culture .
It remains a warning , a call to us all , because that kind of accident , science sweeping away human life through an uncontrolled pride in technology and science , must never be repeated .
The Summit of the Heads of State and of Government to be held in Moscow at the end of this week , also has the issue of safety of nuclear power stations and management of nuclear materials on its agenda .
I say this only to demonstrate that the Member States , like the Council representatives , are fully aware of the responsibilities science and history imposes on them , and are conscious of the fact that international cooperation must be strengthened so that the victims can receive assistance and everyone can be certain that science will remain at the service of mankind .
Commissioner , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , ten years of effort - little to show .
That , sadly , is the stark summary of developments since the Chernobyl reactor accident , for the RBMK-type reactors , fifteen in number , which are universally acknowledged to be unsafe , are still operating , in particular No 1 Reactor and No 3 Reactor at Chernobyl .
Secondly , the concrete casing of the entombed reactor is unsafe and unstable .
It urgently requires an additional shell , all the more so since the No 3 Reactor is right beside it .
Thirdly , the human misery goes on .
The environment is contaminated by caesium ; skin diseases , cancers and depopulation are the typical long-term effects .
To reiterate the point in plain terms , the nuclear risk has not lessened since 1986 but has remained exactly the same .
That is why we must all work together in order to take a step forward .
No-one can master this mammoth task alone - neither the Ukrainians , nor the EU , nor the industrialized nations .
We must operate hand in hand .
The European Union has already invested many million ECUs .
The Commissioner has kindly given us a very comprehensive account of this effort .
We shall do even more .
We want to provide more help .
It is not easy for Ukraine to decommission the Chernobyl plant .
Chernobyl covers six to seven per cent of national energy requirements .
Decommissioning costs a lot of money .
That is why those responsible need assistance .
But we also know that the Ukraine is one of the most energy-intensive countries in the world .
The Ukrainians consume most energy per head of population .
We are also aware , on the other hand , that energy demand has fallen rapidly since 1990 and that there is no reliable least-cost planning analysis of the situation or an in-depth analysis of the actual energy demand and an efficient strategy for meeting it .
So when it comes to assistance in the domain of energy supply , Parliament and the Group of the Party of European Socialists will ensure that top priority is given to mechanisms for efficient supply .
Additional means of meeting the demand for energy , such as combined gas and steam turbine plants , can also be discussed , of course .
There is a realistic prospect of supplying energy without Chernobyl , without power stations .
We shall not let ourselves be pressurized into immediate unbridled construction of new power stations , as was suggested in one of today 's newspapers .
The year 2000 is the agreed target date for abandonment , and that is the target for which we must all continue to aim .
Mr President , once again , we are discussing Chernobyl .
For ten years , there has been nothing but talk , talk , talk .
It was disappointing , Commissioner , to hear your statement ; and it was very disappointing , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , to hear more empty words .
If we are simply going to come here and make vague statements , perhaps we should turn our attention to something else .
I do not forget that - as you both rightly said - we are talking about an independent and sovereign country .
And I should like to address the representatives of the people of Ukraine who are in the gallery this afternoon : I am sure that it is the Ukrainian people who have the greatest interest in shutting down Chernobyl .
And it is the Ukrainian Government too , since all governments respond to the demands of their people .
So why is it not shut down ?
Why do we simply talk and hold countless conferences , and it is not shut down ?
For purely economic reasons .
Commissioner , I would ask you - and I know that it will not be easy , because resources are scarce - to put pressure on the Commission to make available the USD 3000 or 4000 million that are required .
The European Union has not contributed USD 4000 million , which I believe is what Mr Lange said .
It has contributed scarcely ECU 300 million : a pittance .
And so we shall go on speaking in platitudes and making vague statements , like this afternoon , and we shall all continue to despair .
Everyone here , everyone in Europe , wishes all the Chernobyl reactors to be shut down - and as soon as possible .
However , we all wish the people of Ukraine to have the improved standard of living which they desperately need .
They are going through hard economic times , although things have improved a little recently .
They have vast energy needs .
It is true that they could save a large amount of energy : however , Mr Lange , if you have worked in this sector , you will know that saving energy requires large-scale investment .
Let us help them to make that investment .
Furthermore , Commissioner , I think that it would be a good thing if the Commission submitted to us a report containing some genuine data .
You said that some reports refer to 30 deaths .
Clearly , there have been many more .
Those were just the 30 direct deaths at the time the fire was extinguished .
Another report refers to hundred of thousands of deaths , hundred of thousands of cases of thyroid cancer .
Obviously , one death or one case of thyroid cancer is one too many , but if we do not wish to go on talking for ever , it would be a good thing if the Commission genuinely submitted some plans to us : firstly , there is a need for information which is as accurate as possible , and with which the Ukrainian Government agrees , on the real numbers of deaths and illnesses and the current situation of the population ; and secondly , there is a need for a genuine effort to finance the shutdown of Chernobyl .
And do not come back to us next year and repeat that safety is threatened , that democracy ... no , no , no !
We want solutions .
And we want rapid solutions , because absolutely nothing has been done for the last ten years .
For example , you could begin by financing the siting , environmental impact assessment and initial construction of a vast 2000 megawatt combined-cycle power plant to replace Chernobyl 's blocks 1 and 3 .
Provide all the money .
It will be worth it , for what we are doing now is far more costly .
Does the money exist ?
In theory , no : but you can find it if you want to .
You will have Parliament 's full support , and I am sure that you will also have the support of the 15 Member States .
Furthermore , we shall be investigating ways to collaborate in building a new sarcophagus , and shutting down and dismantling the entire Chernobyl plant - which may cost a further USD 2300 million .
Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office , this will be your data - the G7 's - at the meeting in Moscow at the end of the year .
In any event , you can count on Parliament 's full support for whatever you do : but please do something serious .
We do not want simply words .
Mr President , I am expressing the feeling of my group , and at the same time the generally shared feeling of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy which I have the honour to chair .
Ten years on from the tragic accident , everyone is aware of the desolation it caused and despite the fact that false information was supplied to us and also to the Congress of Vienna , we know that in the immediate neighbourhood of the explosion there were hundreds , possibly thousands , of victims , and the figure has increased over the last ten years , perhaps beyond a hundred thousand , which truly makes us shudder .
Today we have to count the cost of the damage caused by that catastrophe , but above all we must face up to the damage that will probably continue to derive from it , not only in the area immediately adjacent to the explosion but tragically in every part of Europe that was affected through atmospheric activity .
I would merely remind you that in countries as far away as Germany thyroid cancers continue to increase cyclically as a function of the biological cycle , linked in turn to plants , animals and rain .
As we heard in Mrs Estevan Bolea 's impassioned speech , we can no longer tolerate a situation where we do not have solutions to this kind of catastrophe and especially faced with what awaits us in the future .
Certainly an important step was taken with the memorandum of understanding signed at Ottawa by the G7 countries .
Clearly our intervention in the Ukraine must proceed with caution so as not to deprive that country of 6 % of the energy it needs .
During the second part of the hearing organized by our committee , when the representatives of the Ukrainian government and the energy agency spoke to us very frankly , we learned the devastating news that , in addition to the tragedy of cancer and leukaemia caused by the explosion , there has also been the tragedy of people dying of cold , because last winter temperatures of minus 14-15 degrees were reached in buildings probably only open to foreigners on holidays .
We must not be hasty but we absolutely must intervene and our committee is sounding the alarm with all its strength because Chernobyl is not an isolated case .
Mr Lange has already mentioned the other power stations and in fact we are in a situation of extreme risk involving a whole series of other power stations in other eastern European countries .
Mr President , I am anxious to reaffirm our commitment to put every effort into pursuing a policy that we may be able to call an energy policy in the near future , a policy which will be efficient and safe .
That will be the aim of our committee .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , ten years have gone by and not a single Chernobyl-type nuclear power-station has been shut down and yet the sarcophagus of group 4 at the Chernobyl nuclear power station is cracked on all sides .
The situation has never been so bad and never been so dangerous .

Instead of applying the programme which has been mentioned here by Mr Lange , or by Mrs Estevan Bolea and others , and which is published today in the ' Financial Times ' , we now see a request by the G7 to finance a billion dollar project for two new nuclear power stations in Ukraine by rebuilding the reactors shut down ten years ago , in other words hazardous Soviet-type nuclear power-stations .
What we are going to have in this Chamber and what is going to happen in Europe in the coming months will not unfortunately be a discussion of the programme for Ukraine : making a new sarcophagus , closing down Chernobyl , throwing our weight behind energy efficiency as Mr Langer said , carrying out environmental studies in order to create a new gas-cooled nuclear reactor , to quote Mrs Estevan - in other words , using the gas saved through the energy efficiency programme ; not forgetting support for the victims .

But we shall not be doing any of this !
We are going to spend 18 months discussing the ' list cost planning ' for new nuclear power-stations .
We are going to spend 18 months during which the French nuclear lobby - let us call a spade a spade - in which the French nuclear lobby is going to spend European taxpayers ' money and we are not going to solve the problem of Chernobyl but we are just going to win markets in eastern Europe , we are going to win markets in Ukraine , because we cannot win them in any other OECD country , in order to finish off two Soviet nuclear power-stations without any guarantee of proper safety conditions .
After all , the French nuclear lobby , which has its representatives in the Commission , G7 and EURATOM , is going to try and defend its position in this Chamber .
The European Parliament must not be in cahoots with this measure and Parliament must ask for what Mrs Estevan and Mr Langer called for !

Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioner for the information she has given us , and the President-in-Office of the Council for the information he did not give us , and because I have little time at my disposal I will only ask the following questions :
First question : how often will it be necessary to keep adding new layers to the Chernobyl sarcophagus ?
How much does that cost , and how many times is it foreseen that this will have to be done in the future ?
Every ten years , and for how many centuries will that have to happen in the future ?
What is the estimated cost of each new layer on the sarcophagus and what are the risks involved ?
Second question : which are the other nuclear stations that represent imminent hazards ?
You spoke about those in the former Soviet Union and in Eastern Europe .
Yet you too , Mr President-in-Office , are pressing for the completion of the Khmelnisky II and Rovno stations to be financed with one-billion ECU .
Why ?
On what reasoning , if there is more generally any reasoning behind your action ?
Which other stations are dangerous in the long term ?
Have you anything to tell us about the Kosloduy station in Bulgaria , where accidents have already happened ?
Perhaps you are waiting for a more serious accident to take place before turning your attention towards it ?
Are there any prospects of an agreement with Bulgaria for Kosloduy to close , or are we going to wait for victims there too and only then turn up to treat the cancers ?
Finally : are the most modern technologies in the rest of Europe free from risk ?
Do they not cost ?
Mr President-in-Office and Madam Commissioner , I think it has been proved that cheap nuclear energy has already proved very expensive in terms of its research and application costs , but you did take that into account owing to the military dimension of the situation and it is now proving expensive in terms of its consequences .
Is there any thought , at European level and as a long-term prospect , of closing down all the nuclear energy stations and turning to other forms of energy in the long term ?
Because otherwise , I think we are debating here without any essential meaning .
Mr President , many roads lead to the MCA - the maximum credible accident .
For all our dealings with accidents and disaster , is it perhaps the case that , despite the misery they have caused , we have yet to learn our lesson from them ?
Thousands , indeed hundreds of thousands , of children are ill or have been born handicapped , and the rate is increasing .
Although areas of land the size of the Netherlands are contaminated , we have allowed time to elapse without taking action .
The RBMK and VVER reactors are scrap heaps and will remain so , and retrofits will do nothing to alter that !
They have no emergency cooling systems and no fire-prevention mechanisms , and it is of very little use , for instance , when the operators say that they have good firefighting teams .
There is a lack of instruction manuals .
Safety precautions on site are absolutely minimal .
The sum of ECU 550 million has already been pumped in from the PHARE and TACIS programmes .
What do we have to show for it ? First of all , 90 % of the funds have been disbursed in western Europe on safety studies .
Strictly speaking , the object of the exercise has been to open the door to new markets .
We have not achieved any more security at these sites .
There can surely be no question of that .
What has occurred is not a reduction but rather a prolongation of the risk .
That has to be acknowledged once and for all .
We are categorically opposed to the completion of two reactors which are already in an absolutely desolate condition and cannot be properly completed .
For six billion dollars we could have new cogeneration plants , generating both heat and power , with an output of 10 000 megawatts .
Instead of that , money is being squandered so that some companies can earn more profits .
It is scandalous , unacceptable and a disgrace to the European Union .
Let me say one more thing . In western Europe we have many reactors that are no better than those .
If we continue to pursue the same policies here , the next MCA will come along as swiftly and surely as night follows day !
Mr President , I welcome the representatives from Ukraine to whom all our hearts go out .
Could I ask everyone a question who may be listening to this : will the next nuclear disaster following Chernobyl be in Chernobyl ?
That is a chilling but a real question .
Poor Ukraine - they have been told that they have not lost 125 , 000 people but that they have only lost a few hundred people .
But on the BBC we saw a film recently showing the deformed children and animals and the worried elderly people who have decided to go back because that was their home , even though there is a risk .
Poor Ukraine - 29 % of their budget spent on clean-up .
Yet as my colleague here said , the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development is going to spend our money on two other reactors as a price for the agreement of closure .
With the lack of proper arrangements in many other reactors - because Chernobyl was only the fifth worst - we are going to have another disaster and the EU will have a great deal of responsibility .
We must decide that the time for talking has really ended and really put our hands in our pockets and give the money that is necessary to clean up this situation .
We know that Ukraine is heavily dependent on this type of energy , so we have to face up to this .
We know the cost of nuclear decommissioning and we should take a hard look at nuclear energy .
I happen to belong to an anti-nuclear party , I am President of it in Scotland .
I sit with colleagues who are pro-nuclear because France has a different attitude to that .
I can understand that .
Sweden was the most heavily nuclear-dependent country , and yet they have taken a different attitude .
Perhaps we have to look at the whole question of our energy policy .
If we do not know how to destroy the monster we create , have we any right to create any more monsters ?
That is really the question .
Sitting up there are brave people who have come to see us today and I hope I have the chance to meet them .
We have to pledge our solidarity , not just with words , but with finance .
Mr President , Chernobyl has gone down in history as the biggest nuclear disaster of all times .
The disaster is imprinted on the minds of many residents of Ukraine .
And not just there .
The consequences are imprinted on the bodies of people and on their descendants .
It happened only ten years ago .
How many tens of thousands of people are still facing day in day out the gruesome consequences of over-radiation ?
We do not even have accurate numbers .
That is why it is right that the international community should continue to remember them .
A tenth anniversary such as this serves the purpose of focusing public attention .
It is particularly sad that even today there is no satisfactory answer to the question of how the accident could happen , nor even to the question of what should be done with the remaining section of the power station .
Have we really no idea ?
Closure is the only answer .
I fervently hope that the Ukrainian government will give its cooperation .
If the rich countries come up with sufficient money then nothing will stand in their way .
But we have not reached that stage yet .
Has the time not come to decide to close down the remaining fifteen power stations of the Chernobyl type ?
Everyone knows that this will be extremely costly , both for the dismantling of the installations and for the provision of alternative energy supplies .
But the international community must recognise that this is a problem that is far too great for an individual country or group of countries to tackle alone .
In financial terms the former Soviet Union is not up to it .
It would be a demonstration of international solidarity if not only the G7 but all affluent countries were to agree on a plan to make these dangerous power stations disappear from the face of the earth .
The collapse of the Iron Curtain has created a number of new responsibilities for the countries of the West .
Now that we can afford to spend gradually less on defence the money saved should at least be used to improve the situation in the former East bloc .
And that includes closing down these power stations .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it was the Chernobyl disaster which made public opinion aware of the dangers of nuclear technology .
But that was ten years ago .
At the time , the Greens certainly expressed concern at these problems , but being bound by political friendships and dependence , they were silent on the subject of the building of nuclear power stations in the East .
The National Front , for its part , has been making its views on this subject clear since 1978 .
It has always been cautious as regards the whole dogma of nuclear technology .
Moreover , this was the subject of one of our first pamphlets .
In 1980 , we campaigned in favour of civil protection , insisting on the need to build nuclear shelters .
And , in 1986 , the disaster which we had been fearing for nearly ten years occurred .
On 30 April of that year , my husband , Jean-Pierre Stirbois , spoke in the French National Assembly to draw attention to the weakness of France 's civil protection system with regard to nuclear , civil or military threats .
At the same time , he called for the implementation of a responsible and effective security policy for times of both peace and conflict .
By way of example , only seven radioactive fallout warning systems had been commissioned at that time .
Naturally , none of them was yet in operation .
As for the budget allocated to civil safety in the nuclear sector , it was simply ridiculous .
Totally unaware of the magnitude of the problem , the Interior Minister , Charles Pasqua , told my husband that rather than throwing the population into panic for populist reasons , he would do better to go and observe the excellent work of the fire service in the area of civil protection against nuclear accidents .
It was unbelievable !
Regrettably , in this context too , we were right - just as we were right with regard to the tragedies of AIDS and ' mad cow ' disease , a situation which my colleague Mr Martinez has been condemning since 1990 .
We have consistently warned in advance of the disasters that have occurred in these closing decades of the twentieth century .
At the time of the Chernobyl disaster , we were not told that the radioactive cloud would pass over France : the effects were played down , it was said that there was no real danger , and so on .
Nuclear energy seemed to be a taboo subject .
Furthermore , information was withheld , on the pretext of not causing panic .
This is arbitrary and dangerous behaviour which gives cause for concern .
The majority of the élite were wrong .
Insanity prevailed over reason . Our leaders were blinded by the dogma - condemned by certain colleagues - of progress , mass consumerism and free trade .
Why should we be surprised if cows go mad when , sadly , they have been turned into carnivorous cannibals ?
Why should we question nuclear technology ?
Clearly , nuclear disasters would have ceased long ago if moderation had prevailed over the excitement of all the sorcerer 's apprentices .
Ultimately , it is the choice of our form of society which is at fault .
Today , the tenth anniversary of the Chernobyl disaster leads us to debate this issue - but it is no longer simply a question of Chernobyl .
There are dozens of Chernobyls .
We should like to know , moreover , as my colleague said earlier , more or less where things stand .
Finally , we also wish to know what plans have been drawn up in Western Europe for decommissioning nuclear power stations which come to the end of their life , since there is considerable cause for concern in this respect and we should like awareness of this problem to be genuinely raised today .
Mr President , I am sure we all remember on this day the fear that gripped us 10 years ago .
When we heard the news of the nuclear disaster at Chernobyl and followed the trail of nuclear radiation as it crossed Europe we felt real fear .
It gripped us deeply .
However , it has diminished ; it has gradually ebbed away .
Now we do not have sufficient concern to take the actions necessary to remedy the ecological , economic and social consequences which each year become more and more apparent to us and could hit us again at any moment .
Whilst some actions have been taken , they have proved to be insufficient .
More clearly needs to be done .
The sarcophagus of the Chernobyl 4 nuclear reactor could be much better and more effective .
The original clean-up from the original disaster could have been done much better and more effectively .
Indeed , as regards the effects upon human health that have occurred in terms of cancer and other sicknesses , much more could and should have been done .
Most of all , what should have been done is that we should have stopped the possibility of such a disaster again .
That sadly , is our biggest problem .
That sadly , is our biggest unachieved task .
Many reactors of exactly the same kind as Chernobyl - in some cases in worse condition than Chernobyl - still exist and are in operation in Russia and other parts of the CIS .
Worse still , there remains a foolish determination to proceed with this uneconomic and unstable production of nuclear energy by construction of nuclear plants that could be more economically and safely replaced by the introduction of programmes of energy saving and power production from other sources .
I am sure the Commission would agree that this alternative approach to solving the power needs of East and Central Europe , as opposed to a nuclear programme , is the one that we should pursue .
Unfortunately , as Mr Pimenta has already pointed out , this morning 's news demonstrates that other organizations like the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development do not seem willing to investigate in any serious form through these cost option studies other possible ways of solving East and Central Europe 's energy problems .
On this tenth anniversary of the Chernobyl disaster we must rekindle our fears and our concerns to ensure that we have the determination to take the action necessary to stop this ever happening again .
We must take hold of the initial agreement in the form of the memorandum of understanding and develop it further at the G7 .
We must close dangerous reactors - not just Chernobyl , but elsewhere also - and we must resolve ways in which to find the funding to do so .
We must provide that funding no matter how much it costs .
We must also offer to East and Central Europe , through forms of European assistance , Commission programmes , through the European Bank of Reconstruction and Development and other bodies , solutions that will solve their energy needs and ensure that in future their energy will be supplied on the basis of energy saving and sustainable environmentally-acceptable energy generation .
Mr President , 10 years have now passed since the Chernobyl nuclear power station disaster .
This accident brought to light that there are numerous power stations in the former Soviet Union built with the same technology and with a highly unreliable safety record .
Some of these are very close to Finland , in Karelia and other neighbouring areas .
In Finland we currently have four nuclear power stations which have worked impeccably and meet Western European safety criteria .
The Finnish energy supply authorities consider that we need to build a fifth nuclear power station .
The abovementioned Chernobyl nuclear power station accident opened people 's eyes to the dangers of nuclear power and increased the Finns ' opposition to nuclear power to such an extent that the Finnish parliament has halted all new nuclear power station projects for the time being .
There is thus no chance of building new nuclear power stations until people are certain that they are safe .
It is therefore particularly important that the European Parliament debate this issue and appeal to the Commission and Council , and that every possible means be used to try and minimize the threat from Chernobyl-type nuclear power stations .
At the same time we must endeavour to close down these dangerous power stations as soon as possible .
Secondly , we must concentrate on improving the safety of more modern nuclear power stations and develop programmes to save energy , to improve the cost-effectiveness of energy use and to promote safer forms of energy such as hydro-electric power , peat and natural gas .
As I have said , there is a great deal of opposition in Finland at present to nuclear power , which in practice prevents any further nuclear power stations from being built .
Consequently , attention has turned to natural gas .
Here , in the European Parliament , too , there has been debate about European natural gas networks , and in this connection we Finns have proposed the inclusion among these networks of the ' Northern Gas Network ' which integrates the networks of the Northern Member States by linking gas resources from Russia and Norway .
This would increase the security of gas supply throughout the whole of Northern Europe , the Baltic States and other Member States of the European Union , and would accordingly reduce the need for nuclear power .
In my opinion this Northern Gas Network should be added to the EU 's Europe-wide gas networks .
The matter is being discussed today at the Visby conference .
Marjatta SteniusKaukonen has tabled an amendment to the opinion on the abovementioned gas network .
I would ask you , Members of the European Parliament present here , to support this amendment by Mrs Stenius-Kaukonen which all members of the Finnish parliament across party boundaries support .
When natural gas networks and safety are increased throughout Europe , this will tend to reduce fear of nuclear power stations as well .
Mr President , Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz , Mrs Ewing and Mr Pimenta have said it all today .
It is hard to believe ten years after the Chernobyl disaster which , as has already been said , left 125 , 000 dead and a further 3.5 million ill , that the plant in the Ukraine is still open even though it only produces about 6 % of the electricity there .
This is hard to credit .
Although the Ukraine authorities have pledged to dismantle the plant by the year 2000 in exchange for international aid for the harnessing of alternative sources of energy , closure cannot come quick enough .
In November last year at the Chernobyl second reactor three workmen were exposed to massive doses of radiation and we still have not learned the lesson .
It is vital that the European Union plays a central and constructive role in ensuring the practical provision of resources under programmes such as TACIS .
This programme is aimed at supporting nuclear safety in the former Soviet Union .
Given the condition of many nuclear power plants there one cannot underestimate the importance of the programme .
However , this programme cannot work unless the European Union makes sure that sufficient resources and grants are available for TACIS to carry out its task .
Finally , as has been said by Mrs Ewing , Chernobyl is not a unique plant .
They exist all over Europe .
Where will the next nuclear disaster be ?
As an Irish Member I must refer to the Sellafield plant in the UK .
For many years the Irish people have lived under a cloud of unease as the Sellafield plant has stumbled from one safety misdemeanour to another .
We have had enough of this .
Nuclear accidents do not respect borders and no Member State can act on its own .
Mr President , Chernobyl was the accident that could not happen .
It is quite insane to imagine pollution on that scale .
Just think , they really said that back in the 1970 's .
The technology could not go wrong .
That is why some people had some problems explaining themselves 10 years ago .
The answer was , of course , that it was because the Soviet Union was undemocratic .
It is not that simple .
With all technology of that type there is probably a danger - albeit slight - of an accident . But if the accident does occur , then the risk is great .
There is only one answer to Chernobyl : it must be closed down .
It is the only answer decent people can give to using technology which was anything but harmless .
The truth is , of course , that we in the West also bear a responsibility for promoting this technology .
It is extremely disappointing if the EU 's answer is that we want to build a democratic nuclear power station , and we will only invest in extinguishing fires started by communists , but not in stoves built by democrats .
That is not the answer .
Energy savings and the use of other forms of energy is the answer .
Mr President , ten years ago over two million children were exposed to the fall-out from Chernobyl .
It was an accident that appalled the world and released 300 times more radioactivity than fell on Hiroshima .
Until now there has been a conspiracy to deny that any damage to the health of those people and children is a result of radiation .
The International Atomic Energy Agency nuclear safety division has been at the forefront of this cover-up .
In 1990 the IAEA published a health report which stated that there was no evidence of disease linked to fall-out and that the ill health was a result of psychological stress .
This was in spite of mounting evidence of thyroid cancers in children at the time .
Because those children were not screened and not treated , some of them died , and the IAEA is responsible for those deaths .
In 1995 over 400 cases of thyroid cancers were documented in children .
This was not finally accepted until the WHO Conference in Geneva last year when the findings of the thyroid project , based in Minsk , were adopted .
The WHO radiation expert has gone on record about the opposition to this project encountered at all stages of its development .
I say to you today that one slow , lingering death of one child from radiation is one too many !
Beyond the visible and immediate effects on children , the World Health Organization 's scientists concluded that radioactivity has a range of effects on health , including higher rates of cancers and heart disease .
But the IAEA are now trying to do the same thing to others as they did to the children with thyroid cancer : they are effectively denying these people screening and treatment .
In the Russian Federation , they have collected data discussed at the Minsk Conference showing significant rates of cancer and leukaemia are dose-related - which means radiation-induced .
The IAEA at their conference in Vienna last week still deny these findings , although the Ukrainian , Russian and Belarussian delegations dispute their figures .
Commissioner , I would say that the IAEA are not competent to make judgements and pronouncements on health and I ask you to state that the World Health Organization is ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , the Commissioner mentioned the conference convened last week in Vienna by the International Atomic Energy Agency . This organization should really be called the ' International Agency for the Promotion of Nuclear Energy ' , and in my view it is unacceptable that it should attempt to play down the effects of the Chernobyl disaster on the health of the population of Ukraine .
I call on you , Commissioner - and this appeal is also addressed to the President of the Commission , Mr Santer - to make available to the Ukrainian authorities all the financial resources necessary to ensure that the people of that country receive adequate health care .
Another subject touched on by the Commissioner was that of the culture of nuclear safety .
In my view , this is no more than a smoke-screen put up by the nuclear lobby - of which Electricité de France , Framatome and Siemens form part - which wishes to sell reactors to Russia and other former Soviet republics .
An accident at a nuclear power station , in the East or the West , is simply a question of a greater or lesser probability .
Please , do not finance the construction of any new nuclear reactors in the former Soviet Union !
I know what I am talking about , because I come from a region which is threatened by the Cattenom reactors built by EDF .
I am convinced that an accident with the same radiological consequences as Chernobyl could happen there at any moment , and in my view , it is unacceptable that these reactors should still continue to operate , even if a European licence allows them to do so .
Mr President , ten years on from the explosion in the fourth reactor of the Chernobyl power station the emergency continues , above all in Belarus and the Ukraine .
In Belarus in 1994 and 1995 over 100 , 000 people died from causes ascribable to the accident at Chernobyl and in the most affected regions ( Gomel and Mogilev ) the birth rate has collapsed from 17 to 10 per thousand since 1986 , while the death rate has risen from 9-10 per thousand to 12-13 per thousand , a rise of over 33 % .
In 1995 , according to the Belarussian health ministry , 400 out of 500 babies with pathologies had cancer .
The incidence of cancer in the infant population is 50 times higher than 10 years ago .
Official sources put deaths in the Ukraine at 180 , 000 and birth rate , death rate and cancer statistics are similar to those described earlier .
Furthermore , taking account of the fact that there could be an explosion with catastrophic consequences at the Chernobyl nuclear plant at any moment , as pointed out in a recent report commissioned by the European Union on the possibility of collapse of old pillars supporting the sarcophagus which was built around reactor no 4 after it exploded in 1986 , the European Union simply must put pressure on the Ukrainian government to close the Chernobyl nuclear power station , and in the meantime it must provide the aid necessary to make up the electricity that the Ukraine would lose .
The European Union must also intervene through the TACIS and PHARE programmes with the countries of eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union , so that they gradually abandon or convert the at-risk nuclear power stations .
Mr President , I should like to begin by expressing my disappointment to the Commissioner and the President-in-Office of the Council .
I had not really expected you simply to declare your support for something on which , as far as I know , we all agree , but rather to tell us where the money is to come from to implement this memorandum of understanding or , for example , what sort of timetable is likely to be necessary so that the two Chernobyl reactors can be decommissioned .
This debate , regrettably , has reaffirmed something we have observed over the past ten years , namely that the Chernobyl debate is marked by a mixture of strong words and weak actions , by loudly applauded declarations that remain fruitless .
The other RBMK reactors , a total of 15 , are still on line , after all .
We know a lot about the sarcophagus , but we are far from knowing how to deal with it .
The only thing we know about the whole business is that we actually know nothing .
Proposals - for which we have paid dearly , I might add - unfortunately abound .
There are risks elsewhere too , as we know , for instance with the more modern VVER reactors that have been mentioned and of which there are a total of 45 different types with varying risk levels ; none of them , however , would qualify for an operating licence in our countries .
There are also risks in the irradiated areas of the Urals or in the former nuclear weapons test site in what is now the Republic of Kazakhstan , etc .
It is true that we have provided money ; I make it a total of some 600 million dollars given by the West to the former Soviet republics .
However , it is estimated that we should need around 15 to 20 billion dollars to do everything the experts have proposed .
Here too , I can only come to the sad conclusion that the most important lessons of the Chernobyl disaster are that we are hungry for sensations but reluctant to offer solutions and that horror does not translate into help .
This makes it all the more important , to my mind , that at the present time of this tenth anniversary we should not be thinking of some ceremony or other but rather of how this memorandum of understanding can at least be implemented .
It is a package - and let me say this to my honourable colleagues too - it is a package that includes the completion of two VVER reactors .
Anyone seeking to drop this condition is putting a match to the entire package .
We have to be quite clear about that .
( Heckling by Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz ) No , no , we must be aware that the removal of this condition means dismantling and destroying the whole thing .
That is just how it is .
I did not negotiate it , nor am I the Ukrainian Government , but anyone who seeks to tamper with it must know that he is giving others an excuse to make the whole thing fail .
That would be extremely regrettable .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , allow me to use this debate to express my bewilderment at the fact that at last week 's conference in Vienna , ten years after the reactor accident in Chernobyl , there was neither any new evidence presented on the overall extent of the disaster nor agreement on the immediate closure of the reactor complex in question .
In Russia , Ukraine and Lithuania , there are still 15 reactors of the same design as Chernobyl in operation .
The long-term effects of the disaster on man and the environment have still not been researched .
There are still the most enormous difficulties involved in providing proper medical care for the victims .
That is why I am highly sceptical about the special meeting of the G7 in Moscow on 19 and 20 April devoted exclusively to nuclear safety .
I appeal to the four G7 members that also belong to the European Union not to deviate at the meeting from the line laid down in the memorandum of understanding and to be even more vehement than hitherto in demanding the closure of these reactors .
Unfortunately , as in the case of the resumption of work on the Mochovce plant in Slovakia , which is of special concern to me as an Austrian , we see that the nuclear industry is not interested in seeking realistic alternatives but prefers to carry on the unprofitable and hazardous construction of the nuclear plant in order to complete a showpiece project for nuclear power stations in eastern Europe and to earn itself kudos .
There is a conclusive and authoritative study which demonstrates that upgrading the Mochovce reactor to western safety standards is not only shortsighted but downright impossible .
The aim of this interest group does not seem to be the prevention of further accidents on the scale of Chernobyl but rather the creation of new nuclear risk factors and sheer profiteering .
I call on the Commission to reexamine the Mochovce project in terms of its danger to Europe and , if need be , to take the necessary steps to halt it .
Mr President , the problem of outdated energy production stations in the countries of the former Eastern Block is one of the most serious in Europe , and we all know that .
Ten years after Chernobyl the danger is ever-present , and despite the thousands of deaths the station continues to operate .
On the 19th and 20th of this month in Moscow , at a new meeting between the Seven and the Ukraine , as has already been said , the question of finance is to be discussed .
Within the scope of the TACIS programme , the European Union has committed itself to provide 110 million ECU by the end of 1996 towards improving the safety of nuclear stations in Central and Eastern Europe , and about 200 million more are to be provided by the European Reconstruction Bank .
However , money alone cannot solve the problem , other things are needed as well , most of all a change in our thinking .
Because Chernobyl is not the only place with problems .
In Bulgaria , very close to us , the Kosloduy station is considered the next most dangerous after Chernobyl since last October when it resumed operation .
Despite all the pressures by the European Union the date for its operation to cease is constantly being postponed .
The nuclear station of Metzamor in Armenia is also regarded as problematic and others too have been mentioned here , while many more still are likely to emerge in the future .
It is in our immediate interests to help those countries convert to new , less costly and safer sources of energy , and to audit and monitor the implementation of the programmes and the utilization of the aid provided .
Mr President , have we not learned anything in the last ten years ?
Scientific evidence shows that 60 000 deaths were directly caused by the after-effects of the Chernobyl accident and not 30 .
Perhaps they were the ones who died immediately .
Innumerable people became ill .
Six hundred thousand people had to be evacuated .
The EBRD now wants to make one billion dollars available for the completion of two reactors in Ukraine .
That is the price for the closure of Chernobyl .
How long shall we continue to support this extremely hazardous technology with its frighteningly inadequate safeguards ?
Two days ago we learned that Mochovce is to be built with Russian and Czech money .
I just marvel at all the things for which Russia has money .
French and German companies such as Siemens will help to build this dangerous nuclear centre .
That is scandalous !
In Germany the same sort of reactor did not receive an operating licence .
It is truly scandalous !
Mochovce is a nightmare !
It endangers the whole of central Europe .
Vienna is almost within sight of it .
How many million deaths does the EU need before it will agree to change its energy policy ?
We need different solutions in Ukraine , and we need different solutions throughout central Europe .
I do not want membership of the EU to be conferred on any country that jeopardizes the health and safety of the people of another country .
I now ask the Council whether its policy on Slovakia is changing as regards the talks on Union membership .
Mr President , on 20 December 1995 , a memorandum of understanding was signed in Ottawa by the representatives of the G7 , the European Commission and Ukraine .
This memorandum of understanding contains something good : the decision to shut down Chernobyl by the year 2000 .
It also contains something very bad , however : the decision to complete work on the two nuclear power stations at Khmelnisky and Rovno .
For the House 's information , the work of completing these two nuclear sites will be carried out by European firms : Electrabel of Belgium and Iveo of Finland , under the supervision of Electricité de France .
This decision is undoubtedly good for Western Europe 's industries , which have run out of markets . However , it is clearly unacceptable , since these reactors will not conform to Western European standards , and because the decision was not based on a comparative analysis , for example to assess the impact on supply and demand .
Madam President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , when we speak today about what lessons we have learned from the Chernobyl disaster - the full extent of which we are , of course , as yet unaware , since we do not know what consequences will be suffered by unborn generations or how the contaminated landscape will develop in years to come - I have to conclude that we have not learned the necessary lessons and that many years have passed without anyone taking the action that really ought to have been taken in the wake of the Chernobyl disaster .
How else could we speak today of the sarcophagus having so many cracks that repairs are necessary , and how else could we be saying today that it will take several years before the other Chernobyl reactors are decommissioned ?
Commissioner , when you speak of reactor safety , it strikes me that safety cannot only mean better knowledge of the effects of radioactivity , but that reactor safety can be achieved when unsafe reactors are closed and when we in the European Union provide the countries of eastern and central Europe with appropriate financial and other resources , and by ' other resources ' I mean energy-supply programmes , development programmes for different sources of energy .
Nuclear safety is indispensable , not only to the countries of central and eastern Europe but also to all the countries of the Union and the whole of Europe .
As an Austrian , I also wish to take this opportunity to express my total incomprehension of the decision reached by the Slovakian Government to press on with a technologically dubious plan to complete the construction of an unsafe reactor with funds that could have been put to better use a year ago to build a gas-turbine plant with which the energy demand of the population could have been met .
Madam President , let me just say this in conclusion : I understand the fascination that nuclear energy holds for scientists , but I believe we have become bogged down and that the lesson of Chernobyl would be to make an orderly retreat from this nuclear quagmire .
Madam President , I was here in Parliament when the Chernobyl explosion took place .
One of the clearest memories I have of that time is the rush with which many of our European governments ran to press to claim that in some mysterious way the contamination had wondrously blown away from their countries and not polluted their countries , so that they could sell their radishes , lettuces and cabbages without anyone assuming - horror of horrors - that they had also been affected by the disaster of Chernobyl .
Perhaps it was the appalling vista of the potential effects of that explosion that caused so many governments and individuals to run for cover ; because they simply could not contemplate it .
The explosion and its aftermath were surrounded by a wall of secrecy - and indeed , in many cases , they continue to be surrounded by that wall of secrecy - and were largely ignored by the international scientific community , while a few heroic Russian scientists did all they could to contain the aftermath of that explosion .
It is now largely through the efforts of some highly motivated NGOs and some journalists that the full extent of the genetic time-bomb which was released in Chernobyl that day is revealed in its full horror .
The full impact of the radioactive fall-out on human health is still being assessed , and I do not believe adequately assessed .
Already we have seen a generation of children with grotesque and life-threatening malformations .
We have got a new word in our vocabulary now : the ' Belarus necklace ' , applicable to a generation of children have had their throats slit from ear to ear to deal with their thyroid cancer .
We have done too little to alleviate the pain and distress of these children and their families .
Many generous families and medical specialists in my own country are doing splendid work , but the scale of the disaster requires a concentrated and coordinated world-wide response .
We must provide more medical help for these victims .
I fear that the potential consequences , should the downside of the nuclear industry become more widely evident , are probably too much for some of our Member States to bear .
Madam President , Madam Commissioner , ten years on from the disaster at Chernobyl we are beginning to understand its breadth and gravity .
We know the technical reasons for it today , we know that the RMVK reactor had an intrinsic design defect .
We know that at the time of the disaster the operators of Chernobyl acted too rashly and we know that the reactor did not have a containment housing to retain the radioactive material in the eventuality of an accident . The responsibility lies with the operators then , but also with the scientists , consultants and politicians , and with the government for its handling of the emergency .
Today the Ukrainian government has massive problems to cope with involving incurable radiation sickness with unknown prognosis . The terrible psychological stress on the people , largely linked to lack of information about the real risk , the forced exodus , the loss of the building stock , together represent an exorbitant economic and social cost .
Certain problems of a strictly nuclear nature remain open , and the fuel still in the reactor , the sites where highly radio-active waste is buried , and the actual sarcophagus , do not instil confidence .
All these problems are our concern , naturally they are the concern of the Ukraine first and foremost , but they are also our concern .
The Ukrainian government must respect the commitment to shut down the plant that is still operating , but the European Union has the duty to intervene with the breadth of measures necessary to remove the risk and take care of the casualties as far as possible .
Unsafe power stations must be closed , wherever they are , and a sensible energy policy encouraged , particularly in the eastern European countries .
That is the thrust of the joint resolution we have presented with other parliamentary colleagues and which we naturally support .
Madam President , the tenth anniversary of Chernobyl is full of flowery statements and costly conferences , but when it comes to discussing concrete international aid , we are fed with lies , sweet talk and duplicity .
What has happened to international responsibility when the IAEA in Vienna presents an international Chernobyl project based on the assumption that the health of the inhabitants of that region is not seriously endangered by the reactive contamination of Chernobyl ?
And this is done despite the fact that 200 reputable scientists from Belarus , the Russian Federation and Ukraine have already identified an increase in cancer , leukaemia and organic brain damage .
For Belarus , the hardest-hit country , the equivalent of 31 annual budgets would be needed to establish some degree of control over the impact on man and nature .
That country cannot possibly afford to take such action .
That is why Belarus is pursuing a policy of rehabilitation , has cut social welfare and has legalized resettlement , and the whole thing is supported by TACIS aid , which is promoting economic development in highly irradiated areas .
As far as financial accountability is concerned , the nuclear operators could be made to bear responsibility for the risks by means of an international aid fund stocked by a risk levy on those operators .
Madam President , Commissioner , Mr President-inOffice of the Council , at this stage of the debate , I should like to begin by saying that today , the Chernobyl sarcophagus is an impossible symbol . That is because no matter how many layers the sarcophagus has , there is something which will keep the reactor alive : the victims of the Chernobyl disaster .
I should therefore like the European Parliament 's key message to the victims of the Chernobyl disaster today to be one of solidarity - solidarity which must translate into practical aid for the people of Ukraine .
I agree with Mr Desama that the memorandum of understanding is a positive initiative , which Parliament must in no way try to play down .
However , the issue of nuclear energy is a never-ending debate : on the one hand , there is the question of energy supply ; and on the other , there are the questions of the increased consumption of nuclear energy and the large number of nuclear power stations existing in the world .
Consequently , there is a need for a substantial increase in both investment and the political will to take the necessary measures in the area of nuclear safety .
It is time to call for the opening of a new phase of nuclear safety , as regards both control of the dangers and treatment of the waste from nuclear power stations .
Commissioner , I would urge you to respond to the pressure from Parliament by bringing forward the economic proposals that it is calling for this afternoon , with a view to tackling the problem firmly .
Madam President , all the motions for resolutions call for the closure of Chernobyl-type reactors .
That is what has prompted me to speak today .
As chairman of the Delegation for Relations with Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania , I have visited the Ignalina plant on several occasions .
Today , I would like to describe the situation in Lithuania with regard to this plant .
It is Europe 's largest power plant .
The carbon rods which control the cooling system have a remaining lifespan of possibly 8 years .
They are silting up .
There are problems with the spent fuel rods .
There are no plans for how they are to be regenerated or stored .
The government in Lithuania cannot come to a decision , because it is good economic business to operate this plant .
The plant management even talk about continuing , about expanding , about creating a Unit 3 .
There is therefore a discrepancy between the policy agreed with Lithuania on this plant , and the plant 's management .
Here , in fact , we have a problem not only with financial agreements , but also a political problem , because supplying energy in these areas is very difficult , and the alternative is expensive .
The Union has a clear task , and that is to help build up these alternatives , to provide support for the reorganization of energy systems and distribution , but it requires a totally different and firm set of agreements .
Perhaps that is where the problem lies .
It also requires a great deal of money .
I welcome the G7 memorandum , but in my view this should be a subject for more in-depth consideration by the Intergovernmental Conference .
It is , in fact , one of the biggest problems associated with the enlargement , etc .
I also support those colleagues who regard this as a global commitment .
Madam President , I had the opportunity at the beginning of the debate to put forward some very comprehensive observations about events which have happened , and so I would like to conclude with some comments to summarize the excellent debate which has taken place .
A common feature was everyone 's very great concern about the past 10 years and whether a similar situation could arise , and I do not think that any of us today could rule out that possibility .
That is why , over the last 10 years , we have been very concerned to find out whether we could have managed things better than we managed the events surrounding Chernobyl .
There have been quite a lot of different figures put forward regarding the nature of the accident and the number of victims .
It is often the way that there are different measurements of this kind of thing .
I have based my information on WHO data , but it is not so much the numbers which should concern us , but rather the will to help the victims which we know there have been .
It seems to me that there has been too little acknowledgement of the work undertaken jointly by the Union , whether in regard to the necessary aid to the victims or medical preparedness and tighter safety measures to guard against future accidents .
I personally regard that as a very important effort over the 10 years .
I share the view that there is a need for a common energy policy , a need to find alternatives , and there have been many proposals mentioned in the debate in this respect , which I hope will be developed in the same way as I have noted a general interest in strengthening safety .
Also the last comments from Mr Sindal regarding the situation in Lithuania were instructive .
I do not , therefore , think that we have merely been talking .
I think that there has been international co-operation .
I believe , also , that considerable efforts have been made .
One may justifiably ask whether they are sufficient , and there I am in agreement with those who say , no , of course they are not , until the plant is closed down and new solutions found .
Both for Ukraine and the people of Ukraine , of course , not enough effort has been made , and until then there is a major task ahead of us .
Thank you for the debate .
Madam President , on behalf of the Council I have listened with great interest to what has been said , and I must say that I have learned a great deal : I have learned that this is an immensely complex and complicated problem in medical , social , technical and finally , energy terms .
A lot has been said , but I think many of the speeches have been a little unfair - I am particularly sorry that Mrs Estevan Bolea is no longer here - in claiming that neither Commissioner Bjerregaard nor the Council has produced anything other than words and nothing concrete has been done .
I do not think that is true and I do not think it is fair to say so , because the Commission has done everything possible : when it comes down to it , 4 billion dollars have been allocated in one way or another .
So it cannot be said that nothing has been done .
Certainly we must do far more , that seems obvious : we must do far more now and we will have to do far more in the future .
Let me say quite frankly that far more needs to be done in many respects , but I do not think it is possible to do everything for everyone in every case .
I would like to remind you that the other day , Saturday , in Brussels , the Pledging Conference on Bosnia was held and the States that took part committed 1 , 230 million dollars for the rest of 1996 .
So it cannot be said that the States are doing nothing and it certainly cannot be said that the European Union is doing nothing .
I would also like to make some detailed comments .
A lot has been said about the Ukraine , and we naturally extend our solidarity to the Ukrainian delegation here today .
But we also need to talk about Belarus , which is suffering equally serious pollution and human and social damage .
I must tell Mr Linkohr in particular that it is not true that we do not know when Chernobyl is going to be closed , because a date is set in the memorandum of understanding : the year 2000 .
I also want to say that Mrs Stirbois is right - she is not in the Chamber at the moment - that there are also power stations in the west which may present risks .
I think we must be objective about this problem and it is also necessary to think about the amount that would be needed and would have to be demanded not only of the Commission , which has large but limited resources , but also of the States .
The States are trying to fight unemployment and help Chernobyl and Bosnia and the Rwandan and Liberian refugees all at the same time , and in the end I do not think the poor European Union States can do everything .
What I think the Council should say , in human terms and in terms of the sensitivity the States of the Union have always shown , is that what happened at Chernobyl should make us think carefully and increase our commitment , and , as a small aside , I hope Parliament will finally approve the TACIS regulation the day after tomorrow ; it has been mentioned more than once but the Commission is currently applying it without the regulation because Parliament has not yet approved it .
I hope it will be approved as a further demonstration that Parliament is also determined to help on the Chernobyl issue .
I have received seven motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Situation in the Middle East
The issue we now have to deal with is a very delicate , very complex and very difficult one .
The recent events in Lebanon are additional confirmation that the Middle East is still a volatile area , and it is no accident that the presidency , which I have the honour to represent here , has placed the Middle East and the Mediterranean in general amongst the priority areas in the interest of the Union .
The Union has done everything possible and has spared no effort to try to reach , or at least facilitate , a solution to the troubles in the Middle East .
Certainly Parliament has been informed of these efforts ; certainly these efforts have always been deployed in close coordination with the United States ; certainly there has been a common vision behind their development : security for everyone in the area , recognition of the existence and the right to exist of all the peoples of the area .
But the vision has not always coincided ; sometimes it has been complementary . The President-in-Office of the Council , Mrs Agnelli , spoke in this Chamber on 12 March to report on the deliberations which took place at the extraordinary Council of Palermo , the results of which were then confirmed at the extraordinary Conference of Sharm-el-Sheikh .
As you know , many steps have been taken subsequently in the midst of great difficulty , difficulty that certainly did not result from lack of determination on the part of the presidency , the Council and the Commission .
The troika was able to visit certain Middle Eastern capitals ; in fact if I am not mistaken it is in Beirut or Damascus or Amman or Tel Aviv at this very moment .
It is making a four-day visit to the zone to try to achieve action on what was agreed in Palermo and decided in Sharm-el-sheikh , as well as to provide a useful point of contact at this delicate , difficult and dramatic time .
There have been some results , fewer than we would have hoped , it is true , but account has to be taken of the objective situation .
I would like to mention one as a reminder to us all : the visibility of the Union at the Palestinian elections last January .
I think that the European electoral unit which oversaw and monitored that election had considerable influence on ensuring an orderly course of events , as did some visits that the President-in-Office of the Council carried out during that period .
The Union has also made a significant commitment to the peace process , and not just this year , with support to Palestine and the Palestinian national government .
I think the European Union , strengthened by this record , has been in a position to express its concern about what is happening in Lebanon today .
The recommendation and the hope , all too obvious , is that violence will not breed violence , that chain reactions will not be triggered off and endanger the peace process .
The Member States of the Union regard the peace process as important because of the concrete results already achieved , and everyone is determined to do everything possible to prevent those achievements being compromised .
In summary , the objectives proposed by the Council and the Union are to implement United Nations Security Council Resolution 425 , urging all to exercise moderation , and above all to end military action .
All the countries involved are being asked to contribute , as far as possible , to a reduction in the level of tension and above all - I repeat - to abstain from the use of force .
The Union will also continue its efforts through direct contacts and visits at the political level to the countries of the area , to emphasize the commitments undertaken by the informal Council of Palermo of 10 March , that is , cooperation to combat terrorism but also the opportunity , the need and the duty to consider civilian and unarmed populations .
Ladies and gentlemen , the union - as I said at the start - reaffirms Israel 's right to its own security and condemns the violence of Hizbollah which has caused a reaction by Israel .
But at the same time , the Union expresses its concern about the effects the Israeli reaction has had on the unarmed civilian population , and an emergency plan to assist the populations directly affected is being implemented .
In the last few days - let me repeat - the European Union has stepped up its action with the visit of the troika and through this diplomacy we hope to bring about or facilitate in any way we can the resumption of negotiations and ensure that the 1993 agreement between Israel and the Hizbollah constitutes a useful starting point .
I think this action is strengthened by what has been done over the last few years .
Certainly the European Union cannot do everything , nor is it alone in being able to do something , but it is certainly the most committed and it has long been committed , as it was in 1980 , for example . It has now been committed to reestablishing justice in the area for 16 years .
The Italian presidency is maintaining that policy , especially by coordinating its own action with the countries of the area on the one hand , and with the United States and with Egypt on the other .
There is an American delegation in Rome at this very moment for that purpose .
Ladies and gentlemen , I am sorry to say I do not know what results the troika has achieved in the last few days in its contacts with Beirut , Amman , Damascus and Tel Aviv , or what conclusions it has been able to reach .
It hardly needs sating that the attention of the Council and of all the Member States represented by the Council is concentrated on this issue .
Next Monday 's General Affairs Council in Luxembourg will definitely go further into the situation in the light of any information it has been possible to obtain .
Naturally , the presidency will not fail to keep Parliament informed , and the suggestions , advice and opinions expressed by this Assembly today will be especially valued by the presidency and the Council .
The problem is close to all our hearts and has dramatically worsened in the last few days and hours .
If I may add a personal comment , our task is not to pass judgement on who is wrong and who is right , but to save the civilians and save the peace .
Madam President , I would like to thank the President-in-Office for his report and we were particularly pleased to hear that the Troika are at this moment active in the region .
It is important that the European Council is seen to act through the Troika rather than just leaving actions to individual Member States of the Union , no matter how worthy and welcome those individual actions may be .
It is the action of the European Union that my group believes is crucial at this moment .
Those of us who have vested much hope and expectation in the Middle East process are today sad and despairing .
In this House we have paid fulsome tribute to our friends in this Israeli Labour Government who , by acting with courage and vision , began the process to lead the tormented Middle East out of conflict and towards a long-term peaceful solution .
On behalf of the Socialist Group today we extend our undiluted support for that peace process .
We offer our support as well to the Israeli Labour Government and those of their Arab neighbours who have met the challenge of peace and have become bigger men because of it .
Let us also not underestimate the immense provocation to which the Israeli people have been subjected and to which their Labour Government has steadfastly over months urged understanding and tolerance .
What were they supposed to do in the face of unprecedented murders , terrorism and sustained attack ?
While our intellect may tell us that this current action against Lebanon is not the right approach , our hearts , which have bled with the Israeli people for their dead and injured , have considerable sympathy with their predicament .
It is always more difficult to tell your friends and those you respect that you believe they are wrong .
Yet today my group urges Israel to stop the bombing and action in Lebanon which we believe cannot be right and cannot aid a long-term solution .
Rather it perpetuates hate , encourages yet more young Arabs to take up arms against Israel and it destabilizes Israel 's friendly Arab neighbours .
We condemn utterly those in Lebanon who have permitted the attacks against Israel to continue from Lebanese territory .
We deplore the hand of Iran in this and look to Syria to exercise leverage in Lebanon if it truly seeks peace as its leaders so recently assured a delegation from my group that it did .
The European Union has a growing responsibility to support those seeking peace on its borders .
We owe it to Israel and to the Palestinians .
We owe it to the memory of Yitzhak Rabin and we owe it as well to Shimon Peres and to Yasser Arafat .
Of course we want Israel to stop the bombing that is causing such human misery to the civilian population in Lebanon .
But we also demand solidarity and real political commitment to support Israeli civilians against the terror of the extremists .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the situation in the Middle East is now extremely grave and there is a long list of victims on all sides .
In the face of this reality , sad as it is for the prospect of peace , I wish the European Union had done much more than it already has .
This is not the right time to be critical , because the gravity of the situation and the rapid development of the facts demand that , even after the event , we must put forward a system of measures to deal with the crisis , despite the fact - and I cannot avoid saying this - that especially in this case we should have acted along preventive lines .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , given the situation that has developed today , the solution to the Middle East problem lies in the implementation of a system that includes , on the one hand , immediate measures to built trust , and on the other hand , long-term policies .
The immediate measures have four ingredients : on the one hand , an end to terrorist acts against Israel and provision of the security guarantees which that demands .
On the other hand , immediate cessation of bombardments by Israel and the withdrawal of Israeli forces from the security zone in South Lebanon .
Long-term policy amounts in essence to just one thing - the continuation and support of the peace process already started .
So far as the immediate measures are concerned there are already , as you have mentioned , Mr President-in-Office , two initiatives : the French , and an American plan about which I , at least , only heard yesterday evening .
I am glad to hear you say that the Troika is there on the spot , and I would like to believe that this visit by the Troika will lead to a presentation by the European Union of a plan of its own .
So far as long-term policy is concerned , in other words the peace process , there is no doubt that to continue and support this process is the only guarantee of peace in the area .
However , this depends not only on developments inside Israel , not only on developments concerning the Palestinians , but also on positive intervention by the European Union towards other countries in the area which have a powerful influence on the developments I have mentioned .
In that sector we do in fact see substantial intervention and help , at least from the Commission .
Yet , still more initiatives are needed and must be undertaken by the Union .
I have already spoken about putting forward a range of trust-building measures to guarantee the continuation and support of the peace process .
No doubt there are other specific activities that could take place to make the most of such channels as the Union has already opened , but also - and why not - to open fresh ones as well .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , a motion has been tabled which expresses the anxiety of all the political groups in this House .
On behalf of the European People 's Party , I call for a vote in favour of that motion .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , our fear is that the escalation of violence in South Lebanon and northern Israel will undermine the Middle East peace process initiated by Yitzhak Rabin and Yasser Arafat .
The first has already paid for his courageous commitment to peace with his life , and the position of the second is now being weakened by the new situation in the region .
The European Union and its Member States must do everything possible to prevent the logic of peace from being replaced by a logic of war , through a deadly sequence of events which no one is able to stop .
Firstly , we must forcefully reiterate our condemnation of all extremists : the Jewish extremists and their accomplices , who murdered Yitzhak Rabin ; and the fanatics of Hamas and Hizbollah and their foreign sponsors - notably Iran - who have already committed , or are ready to commit , appalling attacks against innocent civilians .
We must reaffirm unequivocally the right of the Israeli people to live in peace and security within their internationally recognized and guaranteed borders .
At the same time , however , we must recognize , with equal formality and commitment , the right of the Palestinian and Lebanese peoples to live in peace within states whose territorial integrity and sovereignty must be recognized .
We must call on all the warring parties to show the spirit of conciliation that is needed for the continuation of the peace process .
It is hard to accept without comment the statement by the Israeli Prime Minister that it is too early to negotiate .
It is never too early to negotiate to stop a war : to say otherwise would be to admit that a war can be justified and to exclude any kind of preventive diplomacy .
No one doubts the ability of the Israeli army to destroy Hizbollah - but at the cost of how many ' martyrs ' whose successors will demand vengeance ?
Furthermore , there is nothing to say that this is the Israeli Government 's objective - for is it not Syria , through poor Lebanon , which is its target ?
Is it therefore reasonable to call on the head of the Lebanese Government to disarm Hizbollah , whilst continuing to occupy part of that country 's territory ?
Evacuation and disarmament must go hand in hand .
Today , it is the rebuilding of Lebanon which is being called into question .
How many years will it take to erase from the collective mind of the peoples of the region the painful memories of the present conflict and those which have preceded it ?
The solution to the conflict will not be military , but diplomatic .
The countries of Europe - notably Europe 's Mediterranean states - which do not have a military presence in the region , but which have age-old ties of friendship with the peoples of the Middle East , all have a duty to offer their services as mediators , as France has done already .
Similarly , we are entitled to call on our American partner , the United States Government - whose opinion , we know , counts for a great deal with the Israeli Government - to play a mediating role .
We welcome the ceasefire plan proposed by the United States Government , but the ceasefire must be implemented without delay .
In particular , the Israeli air force 's bombing raids on civilian targets in Lebanon must end immediately , because as the French Prime Minister said yesterday , they are unacceptable .
Naturally , the same goes for Hizbollah 's rocket attacks on northern Israel .
We can only deplore the large numbers of civilian victims of the conflict and the misery of the displaced populations .
Diplomacy must now prevail over bombs and rockets .
We must pray that the peace process will be resumed and continued .
We all hoped that the murder of Yitzhak Rabin would not be in vain , but would serve the cause of peace and not that of war , as his assassins wished .
Now is the time to remember this , whilst imploring all those responsible for the current escalation of violence to rejoin the path of negotiation and peace , for tomorrow may be too late .
Madam President , Israel 's current actions in South Lebanon do not constitute an attack , but a response to an attack .
This is the conviction which determines the Liberal Group 's position , and which underlies its motion for a resolution and the fact that it does not subscribe to the joint motion for a resolution .
Indeed , we believe that , leaving aside the balanced and reasonable statement by the President-in-Office of the Council , the joint motion for a resolution considerably underestimates the pressure that Hizbollah has been exerting on northern Israel for several weeks , and the suffering of the inhabitants of Kyriat Shmona and the surrounding region .
Over and above the latest incidents , it should be observed that there is no territorial dispute between Lebanon and Israel , and that the conditions for peace will be met as soon as a free , sovereign and democratic Lebanon is reestablished .
In the present century , democracies have not waged war with one another .
Wars have always broken out between democracies and totalitarian or fanatical states , and that is what we are witnessing today .
It is for this reason that , whilst deploring the human tragedy currently being played out in the Middle East , we retain the hope that the peace process will not only be resumed , but extended .
In particular , we hope that a peace treaty between Israel and Lebanon - the Lebanon that we love - can also be signed .
Madam President , the Israeli bombing of Lebanon provokes our condemnation and concern .
It is plunging the defenceless Lebanese people into all the horrors of war - dead and wounded civilians , the destruction of property , and mass exodus .
And it is jeopardizing the entire peace process in the region , which gave rise to such hope .
Clearly , we can only condemn Hizbollah 's blind attacks on the Israeli population .
Far from contributing to its security , however , Israel 's bombing can only fan the flames of fundamentalism and encourage terrorism and its monstrous outrages .
In this region , as elsewhere , the escalation of violence is a dead end .
Such a chain of events exposes the civilian population , which has such need of peace , to all the dangers of war .
We are calling for the immediate cessation of the Israeli bombing - which is endorsed by the Americans - and an immediate halt to all military action , as well as the granting of emergency humanitarian aid to the Lebanese refugees .
Everything possible must be done to save the peace process and build a lasting peace in the region .
This implies , first and foremost , respect for the sovereignty of peoples : with regard to Lebanon , through the implementation of UN Security Council Resolution 425 ; and with regard to the Palestinians , through the return of the occupied territories and respect for the right to selfdetermination , the end of the sealing-off of the territories , and the implementation - finally - of the promised aid for reconstruction .
The European Union and each of its Member States must act to bring an end to Israel 's military actions and bombing in Lebanon .
It must bring its full weight to bear to help the resumption of the peace process and the building of a lasting peace which guarantees the security of all the peoples of the region .
Madam President , the Greens condemn the Hizbollah attacks on northern Israel but at the same time we believe that Israel has gone far beyond what might be considered legitimate self-defence in its deliberate attacks which are forcing the mass flight of the civilian population and which , among other things , hit an ambulance the other day .
We believe that the peace process is now at risk - it must be continued .
We are happy to agree with the liberals that the peace process must be expanded to include Lebanon and Syria .
We demand that Israel stop the bombing immediately and enter into negotiations .
The Israelis must also show clearly that they are prepared to withdraw from Lebanon completely as part of an agreed peaceful settlement of the conflict .
Syria must use its influence to put an end to the Hizbollah action .
We condemn the attitude of the Iranian government and we urge the Commission to draw up a comprehensive plan for humanitarian aid for those who have suffered in the Israeli attacks .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , the events of the last few days in Lebanon fill us with dismay , since they are threatening the peace process which we have welcomed from the start .
Certainly , we can and must understand the reaction of the Israeli Government , which cannot stand back and watch while terrorist attacks increase and its citizens are killed .
We can also understand the difficulties of Prime Minister Peres , who is facing elections and is obliged to demonstrate his firmness .
On the other hand , however , we can and must question the scale of Israel 's military operations in Galilee and Lebanon , as well as the acts of violence committed against the civilian population , which is being forced to flee in appalling conditions .
And we can express our concern that Israel 's response is a disproportionate one , all the more so in that it is impossible to see how the crisis can be resolved by force .
Ultimately , the outcome of Hamas and Hizbollah 's appalling attacks and Israel 's ' Grapes of wrath ' retaliatory operation is a spiral of violence which is in danger of becoming out of control .
As for the international diplomatic initiatives , they are hardly likely to reassure us .
Firstly , I would comment on the almost total absence of the European Union , which once again has been overtaken by events .
Certainly , as you have just said , Mr President-in-Office , the Troika , represented by the political directors of the three foreign ministries , is paying a visit to the region , but in a very low-key way and without tangible results .
Furthermore , Israel will only talk to the United States , and seems to think that it is the only possible mediator .
The United States ' peace plan has finally been examined by the opposing governments .
France , for its part , has attempted a number of measures , but without consulting the other Member States beforehand - which is hardly in keeping with the European spirit .
Also , the initiative which it was emphatically announced was intended to secure a ceasefire has progressively been downgraded to a modest fact-finding trip by the French Foreign Minister , Mr de Charrette - a trip based on the strange assumption , moreover , that Lebanon is a sovereign , independent state , whereas unfortunately we know that it is nothing of the kind , and that it is Syria which plays the decisive role in the region , whilst not forgetting the influence of Iran .
Neither Israel nor the United States make this mistaken assumption .
In the face of this mess , however , let us hope that the meeting next Friday between Shimon Peres and Yasser Arafat will enable the region to emerge from this nightmare .
Madam President , after the suicide attacks by the Hamas the rocket assaults on Northern Israel by the Shiite Hizbollah movement show clearly how fragile the peace process is in the Middle East .
The freedom that Syria and in its wake Lebanon are giving to the actions of the Hizbollah is a major obstacle to reaching a definitive peace settlement .
It is unacceptable that this movement is allowed to wage such acts of aggression from Lebanese soil .
One basic principle of international law is that no country may make its territory available for enemy activities against another country .
The Israeli government is justified in its military actions of the last few days to do everything possible to protect its citizens on the border with Lebanon against the cowardly rocket attacks .
As diplomatic means had no chance of success they had no option other than this to defend themselves .
In the meantime Israel 's actions are a clear warning to Syria and Lebanon to put a complete stop to the Hizbollah 's activities on Lebanese territory .
They have sufficient means if only they have the political determination to do so .
I would therefore urge both the Council and the Commission to stress action against the Hizbollah in their contacts with both countries .
The independence of the Lebanese state must also be re-established by Syria and Iran ending their interference in Lebanon .
Finally developments in Lebanon form an additional reason to exert diplomatic pressure on Iran .
Iran is an important source of support and inspiration for the Hizbollah movement .
A signal from the European Union , as well as one from Israel , would not be out of place to show Iran clearly that sabotaging the peace process is not worthwhile .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , once again , Lebanon is being battered and bruised in a war which the two rival powers in the region are waging on its territory .
Lebanon is occupied by Syria , which has set up a puppet government - the government of the multi-millionaire Ariri , the former friend and financier of Jacques Chirac , whose inane comments and promises to the Lebanese people can now be seen for what they are .
Syria arms the Hizbollah militias in their war - which it firmly controls - against Israel .
Hizbollah was created by and for Syria .
Given that the Israelis know and declare that the Syrian authorities are behind Hizbollah , therefore , why do they not hit Damascus - for that is where the movement 's leaders live ?
Its arms dumps , barracks and training camps are all in Syria .
The truth is plain to see .
Israel and Syria have a cynical , immoral and dishonourable pact to keep the war in Lebanon , and the latest incidents are just an episode in this situation .
It is to Syria 's advantage .
The war legitimizes its police and military regime and its occupation of Lebanon .
And it is to Israel 's advantage .
An economically prosperous Lebanon would mean the return of Beirut as a strong financial centre , at the expense of Haifa and Tel Aviv .
So Israel 's army destroys the power stations and the painstakingly rebuilt infrastructure in Christian territory in Lebanon .
Consequently , this pact suits both the Israeli Government - which is backed unconditionally by the United States - and , since the Gulf War , Syria 's dictators .
Meanwhile , no one cares if little children in Iraq and Lebanon are dying .
For them , there are no human rights !
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should not like to miss this opportunity to thank the presidency for their kind and helpful comments .
It was particularly valuable to learn that the Union had sent observers to the elections in Palestine .
From time to time you tell us , Mr President-in-Office , what the troika has been doing and what has been happening with the American delegation in Rome .
Now , in the light of your comments , I can better understand why the French Government chose to go it alone .
I wish to begin with the common ground that has characterized the Middle East policy of the European Parliament for many years .
First of all , the European Parliament has unequivocally and emphatically condemned every act of terrorism , including today 's Katyusha rocket attacks on northern Israel by the Hizbollah .
Secondly , irrespective of party and national allegiance , we in the European Parliament have welcomed and supported the peace process between Israel and the PLO .
Let me repeat the gist of what the late Israeli Prime Minister , Yitzhak Rabin , said at the peace rally to explain his belief in the peace process and his commitment to it only a few minutes before he was assassinated . ' For many years ' , he told the rally , ' I fought for my country on various fronts and gave everything to enforce a military solution for the sake of Israel 's security and her right to live within secure borders .
Today I know that only the peace process , not military action , can achieve this . ' Mr Rabin , as a former hawk , was more able than anyone to convince people that there is only one way to solve the Israel-Palestine problem .
His conviction and his commitment to peace cost him his life .
Deaths , misery , expulsion and suffering are on our agenda today .
That is why this Parliament , which has spoken such clear words in the past , must turn to Israel today and tell it to stop the bombing and the expulsions in Lebanon right now !
Mr President , I can be brief because Mr Dimitrakopoulos has made many of the points that I would have wished to have made , and I welcome his reception of this statement and support for the joint resolution which will come before Parliament .
We were pleased and delighted when the peace process started and the agreement was reached .
Today I have heard talk from many people on the floor of this House about war .
I hope it is not war .
I hope it is an act of terrorism that we are seeing and that we can actually get back to the peace process and the continuation of the agreement .
Terrorism stops the peace process and I believe that some people have a lot to answer for at the present time , namely Hamas and Hizbollah .
Of course Syria is involved , and , of course , Syria must be a key player in the eventual solution .
We as a Community must act together and I am delighted to hear the President-inOffice say that the Troika is currently looking at the situation .
I hope that just looking at the situation actually produces some results , because we must get a solution !
We cannot , as a Community , keep depending on the United States to solve all the problems in the world , and that is what it currently looks like .
We must get up a little bit earlier , as President Clinton has advised us .
But we must also understand the Israeli response to the current situation .
I am convinced , having been to Israel a couple of times recently , that they seek and desire peace .
In the negotiations and in the agreement they have already given up a lot .
They have given much towards the peace process and yet we are not seeing the peace process being delivered from the other side .
I do not myself feel inclined , therefore , to condemn outright the Israeli response to what is happening at the present time .
When they were under attack , when their citizens were being killed , it was not easy for them .
We must look at the whole situation .
There is one government in the Middle East which is guilty of crimes within its own country as well as within the Middle East generally and that , of course , is Iran .
We need concerted action from the Community , we need coordinated action , and I hope that the Troika can deliver it .
Mr President , this Parliament has expressed on numerous occasions its unequivocal support for the Middle East peace process initiated by the Oslo Agreements .
With equal firmness , it has condemned the terrorist attacks which directly threaten that process by sustaining a familiar strategy of raising tension .
It has also said , though , that combating terrorism effectively means bringing an end to the conditions which provide its breedingground .
The terrorists of Hamas , for example , will not be eliminated by sealing off the West Bank and Gaza Strip , or by keeping thousands of Palestinians in prison - measures which are causing an increase in unemployment , and a deterioration in the living conditions of the people in those territories .
Rather , they will be eliminated by strictly complying with the commitments made to the Palestinian National Authority .
Similarly , the Israeli army 's disproportionate attacks against Lebanon will not succeed in stopping Hizbollah 's bombardment of Israeli civilians .
Moreover , those attacks are causing numerous civilian casualties , including children .
And , above all , they are seriously undermining the stability which the region desperately needs , as well as the peace process as a whole .
Israel must cease its military actions against Lebanon and comply with the relevant international resolutions , in particular UN Security Council Resolutions 425 , 508 and 509 , which call for its withdrawal from South Lebanon .
It is not possible for such serious action to be taken purely on the basis of electoral considerations - unless the fact is that the hawks in the Israeli army are daily gaining ground in Tel Aviv .
If Israel complies with those international resolutions , Hizbollah and its sponsors will be isolated and deprived of all justification for their actions .
The European Union must take action along these lines - collectively , and not in the form of isolated initiatives - if it does not wish to continue merely financing the strategies of powers outside the region , and if it wishes to play a part in restoring peace to the region , something which is vital to the success of projects such as the Euro-Mediterranean Agreement .
Association agreements , Mr President , must be made conditional on compliance with international resolutions and the non-use of military means to resolve problems .
Mr President , all reasonable people know that no problem can ever be solved by war , in the Middle East or anywhere else .
And no one can remain indifferent to the suffering of civilian populations , in Lebanon or elsewhere .
Nevertheless , the State of Israel , which has demonstrated its desire for peace , and which has already paid a very high price , cannot allow terrorist movements to strike at its very heart by launching rocket attacks on its towns and villages .
The terrorist movements responsible for these actions , these murders , have been clearly identified .
They have the backing and financial support of a terrorist state - Iran - and operate from Lebanon , a country which is largely under the military control of Syria .
These terrorist movements must therefore be eradicated once and for all . To this end , Iran must be ostracized by Europe , and Syria must be forced to the negotiating table .
On this basis , peace - a genuine peace - can be restored , and poor Lebanon , rid at last of war and all its consequences , can begin to enjoy the normal life of an independent state .
The European Parliament must take action along these lines , thereby assisting the peace process and its architects on the ground .
It must unequivocally demand the ending of all negotiations and all contact with Iran , until that country condemns terrorism .
Similarly , it must obtain an undertaking from Syria - with which the European Union has ties - to join in the peace process and stop giving the impression of a country that is playing a double game .
Peace in the Middle East depends on this far more than on resolutions .
In this respect , in our words and deeds , we must all be resolute , determined and specific .
Mr President , once again , the Middle East has been the scene of tragic events .
Should we really be surprised ?
The considerable progress on the road to peace made over the last few years led us to believe that the conditions for a stable and lasting solution had finally been met .
In reality , fundamental problems , providing the implacable enemies of peace with forceful arguments , still remain .
Israel 's occupation of South Lebanon and the inability of the Lebanese Government to guarantee the region 's security are fundamental obstacles to achieving peace .
Now that , sadly , the conflict has flared up again , we cannot be content to seek a return to the previous fragile status quo , but must seize this tragic opportunity to resolve the fundamental problems , and in accordance with the UN resolutions .
There can be no successful solution without the intervention of mediating powers .
France was the first to take diplomatic and humanitarian action .
The United States has involved itself by tabling a plan for settling the conflict , which unfortunately - if my information is correct - has just been rejected by Hizbollah .
We must not pay heed to a simplistic view of competition between the United States and France , or the idea that the intervention of two states will complicate rather than facilitate the settlement of the problem .
Strictly speaking , France and the United States do not have the same position on the Middle East .
Their approach to the individual states in the region is different .
For this very reason , their respective actions , if coordinated , could greatly help to bring about a permanent solution .
With regard to Europe - or , more precisely , European political cooperation - as ever , it has been somewhat slow off the mark .
After the war in Yugoslavia , after the conflict between Greece and Turkey , now the situation in the Middle East is once again demonstrating that the world 's foremost commercial power counts for little on the world political scene .
Europe 's institutions are more at issue here than the men and women who run them .
Will the negotiators at the Intergovernmental Conference remember this , in the pale light of dawn that always surrounds the final hours of Treaty negotiations ?
Mr President , I also want to address my remarks directly to the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Ferraris , to call for a more visible initiative by the European Union .
You have already heard colleagues in my group , the European United Left , firmly condemn the Hizbollah movement 's terrorist attacks against Israel .
Our group has always spoken out against the use of religious fundamentalism for political ends and even worse , as in this case , for terrorist ends .
But today we equally firmly condemn the grave decision of Shimon Peres ' Israeli government to plunge the whole region into violence , with indiscriminate bombing of Lebanon 's civilian population , and hundreds of thousands of refugees and evacuees in Beirut .
We consider the Israeli response indiscriminate and disproportionate , decided on only to reassure public opinion on the eve of the parliamentary elections .
Israel cannot inflict the weight of its response to the Hizbollah attacks on the whole Lebanese people .
Furthermore , we consider that the attack against the whole of Lebanon is seriously endangering the Middle East peace process .
We therefore call for the immediate cessation of hostilities and the resumption of negotiations between Lebanon , Syria and Israel , with a view to lasting peace between these countries .
My group believes , and this has already been said , that United Nations Security Council Resolution 425 must be implemented and respected , and I would remind you that the resolution provides for the withdrawal of the Israeli occupation forces and respect for the territorial integrity of Lebanon .
It is useless to disguise the truth : unless Israel decides to withdraw from the Golan Heights and from southern Lebanon in parallel with a decision by Syria and Lebanon to expel the terrorist forces that threaten the existence of Israel , there will never be peace .
To conclude I want to tell you this , Mr Ferraris : you must understand that merely studying the situation is not enough , it is necessary to take action .
I think the Member States must take the initiative immediately on the basis of a decision of the Council of the European Union to secure a ceasefire and the resumption of negotiations .
Guaranteeing impunity to anyone , in any region of the world , can only lead to disaster .
Mr President , I should firstly like to say that I agree with many of the major points that Mrs Green and Mr Sakellariou have made about this conflict .
I shall therefore take this opportunity to make a number of other points , which may be minor ones , but which I believe need to be highlighted .
First and foremost , I wish to say that here in the House , we have absolutely no doubts about the need for Israel 's security , and we have condemned and deplored the terrorist attacks of which the Israeli people have been victims .
I had the opportunity to attend the Palestinian elections as an observer for the European Parliament .
On the one hand , I saw a happy and hopeful Palestinian population which was enjoying a new-found dignity , and I believe that all of us there had that impression .
On the other hand , a number of the Palestinians to whom we spoke - not all of whom lived in the territories - did not share this happiness ; they were not always able to give us comprehensible reasons for this , and we sometimes had the feeling that their reasons were inexplicable .
Today , Yasser Arafat 's government and people are fighting terrorism .
And I heard a short while ago , at a meeting held in this very building , that the Israeli ambassador recognizes and welcomes this fact .
And I think it is clear that no one in this Chamber wishes to see a return to the logic of violence either .
Today , at a time when we are greatly mourning the loss of Yitzhak Rabin , we fear that the escalation of violence - as is always the case - may take on a logic beyond all reason and control .
The European Union has established , albeit timidly , a framework for dialogue .
It persuaded the Syrians and Israelis to sit down at the same table at the Barcelona Conference .
It played a fundamental role in the Palestinian elections .
I therefore call on the European Union to use all its powers - which are not always visible , or as great as we would wish - to ensure the cessation of the attacks and to bring the parties back within the still shaky framework for dialogue which it has established .
Mr President , we all sympathized with the Israeli government , and very rightly so , when it was facing the problem of attacks by Hamas which brought great loss of life , and when the Prime Minister of Israel , Mr Yitzhak Rabin , was assassinated .
I am afraid , however , that those who put arms into the hand of the Israeli Prime Minister 's assassin are in the end starting to influence and determine Israel 's policy and the dynamics of its position .
Because everyone recognizes the right to self defence , but it is a right that must be exercised with complete and strict self restraint .
Here , we now have aggressive action on the part of the Israeli government , we have barbarous , foolish and dangerous acts .
And from that standpoint I think those acts should be condemned by the European Union , the United States , and by every international agency .
At this time , the important efforts made by the European Union at the Barcelona Conference , with an open Mediterranean policy which presupposed the furtherance of the Middle East peace process , is literally at risk of being blasted to bits .
I believe that to a large extent this can be attributed to an inadequate presence of the Council of Ministers in the Middle East crisis , perhaps related to the internal problems of the country exercising the presidency , while in fact Italy , owing to its position , its geographical position , and its historical ties , could have played a very important role .
I think it is very important that we should now demand that Israel must stop its activities immediately and that the stage should be set for a dialogue between Syria , Lebanon and Israel , leading on the one hand to a total cessation of terrorist acts by Hizbollah from Lebanese soil and on the other hand to the complete withdrawal of Israel from Lebanese territory .
With this opportunity , however , Mr President , I want to express my concern about the recent defence cooperation agreement between Israel and Turkey , which has resulted in a link between two great crises , the Middle East crisis and the Greece-Turkey crisis , and which could lead to more general and more widespread problems in the area .
I was in Beirut last week on the day that the Israeli actions started .
It struck me in the airport that every hall had a portrait of the Syrian President Hafez al-Assad and his dead son .
It is quite clear that Syria is calling the shots in Lebanon .
Mr President , the Hizbollah 's actions from Lebanon can only , and I really mean only , be carried out with the approval and collaboration of Syria .
But our man in Damascus is still quietly waiting to see how the balance of power develops , with only one thought in mind , that of clinching a huge economic deal which can hold the dictatorship in place in Damascus .
During my stay in Beirut , Mr President , I realised how hard the Lebanese had been working on trying to control the catastrophe in their city , Beirut , and various political circles told me that if they managed to hold free elections in Lebanon they would like us to send observers .
The peace process in the Middle East , Mr President , and the opportunity for Lebanon to enjoy its own sovereignty in freedom partly depends on ending the terrorism which is supported by Syria and Iran .
Then there would be no reason for Israel to take action outside its own frontiers .
Mr President , I am pleased that the European Union has a delegation in the Middle East , but I would like to ask you what the Council intends to do in the much quoted but unfortunately empty critical dialogue with Iran ?
Has the time not come for a real EU policy , for example on arms supplies ?
Finally , Mr President , did France take action after EU consultation or did they go it alone ?
And what do they hope to achieve in view of the American efforts ?
Mr President , in the path of justice is life , says the Bible in chapter 12 of the Book of Proverbs .
That is the motto of next year 's congress of the Protestant Church in Germany .
Without justice there is no life and no peace .
It is in three different capacities that I address the following requests to the Middle East , to its competent representatives : first of all as Europeans we have to agree that we too are responsible for stability and peace in the region ; secondly , as German Europeans we have a special responsibility to ensure that peace reigns in Israel and that the State of Israel can live within secure borders ; thirdly , as chairman of the Delegation for relations with the Mashreq countries and the Gulf States , I shall be in the region next month with colleagues from the European Parliament , visiting Syria , Jordan and Lebanon ; our official parliamentary delegation will convey the clear message that we want peace in the Middle East and that anyone who destroys peace there through acts of terrorism will thereby become an adversary and an enemy of Europe .
I urge the Hizbollah and their backers to stop firing on northern Israel , to call a halt to terrorism and to accept the offer of negotiations .
We want to amend point 5 of the resolution , which I believe would make it acceptable .
Our aim as Europeans is not only to secure peace in Europe but to secure stability and peace all around us , not only for Christian reasons but because it is better for all concerned that peace should prevail in this and other regions of the world .
We Europeans believe in the peace process that Mr Rabin initiated , and we shall do everything in our power to ensure the success of that process .
Mr President , following on from what the President-in-Office of the Council said in his introduction I would just repeat that the Commission also shares the concern at the current escalation of events in the Middle East and is more than willing to study where humanitarian aid is needed so that we can contribute in that action .
Mr President , at the same time the Commission is convinced that first of all an end must be put to terrorism .
But even in a mediating role , such as presidency , troika , United States , France , one cannot be blind to the truth of cause and effect and the Commission can at all events agree with those who say that one may wonder how much account Israel has taken of proportionality , but the fact that the Israeli action was an answer to Hizbollah provocations cannot be denied , because that would not bring a solution any closer .
We also believe that Syria and Iran should also be approached about the role of Hizbollah in Lebanon .
The Commission is also of the opinion that Resolutions 425 and 508 of the Security Council must be respected .
It also believed that Israel has shown willingness to make sacrifices for peace in the past year , and has also done so , as has been mentioned today ; until such time as a peace settlement has been reached with Syria there is little realistic chance of insisting on the implementation of Resolution 425 as we all know that when a peace settlement is reached with Syria it will have to include a settlement for the integrity and independence of Lebanon ; then Lebanon will really be able to guarantee , possibly with aid from neighbouring countries , that there will be no attacks on Israel from its territory .
Mr President , I agree with the feeling in this House that does not wish to polemicise .
This is about maintaining the peace process and the peace process is today at stake .
But there is a difference between taking action precisely to save the peace process or taking terrorist action to torpedo it .
I feel that this distinction must be clearly made .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Council has listened to a debate of high moral tone , if I may say so , and also of great political support for action the European Union , the Council , the Commission and all the Member States may take at an objectively difficult time .
Without seeking to reply to individual Members who have spoken , I would like to make two or three comments .
One is also about method : I must tell you frankly - and I say this more on my own behalf than on behalf of the Council - that European Union foreign policy measures cannot always be taken at the speed that may be required .
There is a necessary and objective process of joint planning which can be an advantage but may also , as in this case , be a disadvantage of the European Union .
The crisis broke last week , and as Commissioner Van den Broek put it , very well I think , it involves an evaluation of degree , which is difficult and needs to weighed with great wisdom because no-one can deny - and this has been the attitude of all the Member States of the European Union , at Palermo and then in a wider spectrum of nations at Sharm-el-Sheikh - that terrorism must be condemned and countries supporting terrorism or even suspected of it must be given some kind of warning .
In fact the troika went to Teheran on 2 April , that is , after Sharm-el-Sheikh and before the current crisis .
Nevertheless there was terrorist aggression by Hizbollah and the Israelis reacted , and we now have to weigh that not in a pharmacist 's scales - where human suffering is involved we cannot pick over who did the most and who is at fault - but politically , to save the peace process as far as possible .
Various comments have been made about Syria and its attitude , about Lebanon which is suffering from the violence of others , but also about Israel 's patience and determination to achieve peace as demonstrated over all these months , about the terrorist attacks inside the country , and about the sacrifice of Yitzhak Rabin , and I would say in homage to him that it was an almost classical sacrifice to the peace process .
All this must be considered when intervention is described as too slow - although that is true , there is no denying it .
I would like to say that the presidency , all of us , were already doing everything possible last week to try to find suitable ways of ending this process , through contacts which are not always public - Mr Pettinari will forgive me - because of the delicacy and caution required not to break the threads of the fabric , the sometimes very delicate weave of a peace process which in itself is extremely fragile because it depends not just on governments but also on zealous or fanatical splinter groups .
I would like to make two or three more points .
I think the initiatives of individual countries , appreciable and noble and important though they may be , and that is how they are described in a communication to the President of 15 April , but the efforts of each country to contribute to the extent of its influence , weight and tradition certainly need to be coordinated with the Community 's general measures .
In this case France certainly took a very noble initiative and the presidency was in fact informed and it was implemented in a way that made it part of a collective plan , a common design .
This is , I repeat , an extremely delicate issue , and if it is to be handled successfully I do not think everything can be made public . Sometimes matters have to be discussed with extreme caution .
The objective is to involve everyone in a peace process , every zone in the area , every country and every effort they can make towards it .
Today , at this very moment , American Under-Secretary Peltow is in Rome to try to coordinate joint action with the presidency in the hope that this can have some effect .
And here I would like to remind you that on the 29th the follow-up to Sharm-el-Sheikh will be held in Luxembourg in a Community setting .
To demonstrate that the presidency of the Council intends to keep Parliament informed of these important events , I will tell you what has been communicated to me at this time . The troika is also going to Tel Aviv , a stage which was not planned for the first tour , and through the contacts made in the two day tour of Amman , Beirut , Cairo and Tel Aviv , it is seeking to restore vitality to the 1993 understanding between the Hizbollah and Israel , which I mentioned earlier , and put an end to the crisis .
In addition to this , other ideas have been outlined and the American Under-Secretary is examining them today in Rome .
This delegation is not just at the level of policy directors , Mr Lalumière , but involves Under-Secretaries of State , and that is precisely to give the troika 's mission not only a functional value but a higher political profile to increase its importance and , as far as possible , send a political signal from the European Union .
At the moment the troika delegation is in Cairo , tomorrow it will be in Damascus , and the day after tomorrow in Tel Aviv .
In addition to this , it is necessary to think about a new form of involvement in this plan of ours and about the forces in Lebanon , Syria , Israel , Egypt , and throughout the area which can restore the peace .
Some things are still in the pipeline so I cannot go into as much detail as I would like .
But I want to assure Parliament and honourable Members that all of us , the Council , the presidency , the Member States , quite clearly regard this as an issue of the greatest importance .
Mr Alavanos is right that it is in fact of special interest to Italy , for obvious reasons it seems to me , but unfortunately Italy is not acting alone and there are many things to be considered .
The point is very simple : we have to do everything possible , but not pass judgement , which is very difficult to do at the moment , faced with the suffering of the Israeli people and , of course , of the people of Lebanon .
It does not help to pass judgement on who is in the wrong and who is in the right at a time like this : what will help is doing everything we can to prevent a very difficult and fragile peace process from breaking down because of irresponsible acts of terrorism and , as one honourable Member said , this Parliament should not talk only of peace when it is still to be achieved .
I have received six motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at 12 noon tomorrow .
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is Question Time to the Council ( B4-0431 / 96 ) .
I regret that we are down to one hour rather than the usual one and a half hours .
Therefore , I shall allow a supplementary question from the original questioner plus one other rather than the usual two .
Mr President , you have said the we have just one hour .
It is scandalous that it is reduced that way .
In fact we have only 48 minutes .
I beg you to present something to the presidency .
It is intolerable that one of the major rights of Parliament - to ask questions - is not being fulfilled .
It really is intolerable , what is happening now .
Mr von Habsburg , I am totally in agreement with you .
I constantly bring this matter up both in writing to the President and to the heads of the political groups .
I do not seem to be making much progress but perhaps together we can have another go .
I intend to have one hour of questions even though this goes beyond 7 p.m.
I hope that the interpreters will be agreeable to this because it always depends on their cooperation .
If I am not mistaken , this question comes from Mr Bertens . Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it would be almost a platitude to reiterate how deeply all of us in the Council cherish the freedom of the press and how determined we all are that the freedom of journalists should be assured , even in crisis areas .
But I think it would be difficult to give journalists the support Mr Bertens would like to them to have .
I assume that when Mr Bertens refers to crisis areas he means areas in a state of civil war , with a real war in progress .
I imagine that is what he is referring to . However it does not seem to me that these crisis areas are located , except in an extremely limited way , inside the territory of the Member States of the Union and therefore , if I have understood correctly , he means journalists operating outside Europe , in third countries .
In that case , I think it may be very difficult for the Union and the Council to intervene in a coordinated way on behalf of people whose job is to provide us with information , as none of us are in a position to guarantee the safety we would certainly like to afford them .
The Union provides all possible moral and political support , but I am fully aware that such support is symbolic rather than actual .
I think it is right to put on record that we owe our journalists a great deal for their commitment in going into these areas . But apart from any action the individual States may be able to take through the usual diplomatic channels , frankly I do not see how the Union can help journalists in difficulty apart from giving them moral support which is admittedly not very much .
But we simply do not have the means to take more concrete action .
Mr Ferraris , thank you very much for your answer which proves yet once more that Italians may perhaps think more in symbols and Dutch probably more in effective measures .
This question was tabled on the basis of a report in my name which was unanimously adopted on 6 December 1993 and which dealt with the protection of journalists on dangerous missions and in which - and I shall not dwell in the realms of philosophy - we called for practical aid to be given to journalists in trouble by setting up a ' coordination centre to collect information and grant specific aid ' .
This coordination centre was to have a direct link with the European institutions to facilitate adequate political action .
I did this in conjunction with all international and national journalists ' organisations , and I am now asking you why I have not to date even received an acknowledgment of receipt .
I trust you will do something about that .
Thank you for that clarification , Mr Bertens , which is very useful indeed and I can only reply in all honesty that I take note of your request .
I believe it is up to the Member States to provide journalists with the normal consular or diplomatic protection and I support them in that commitment , however I take note of your suggestion and if I may I will get back to you on this as soon as possible .
Question No 2 by Concepció Ferrer ( H-0211 / 96 )
Subject : Plan for joint action to combat racism and xenophobia
Given the fundamental differences between the UK and the other Member States regarding the plan for joint action to strengthen judicial cooperation in the area of combating racism ,
Does the Council intend to maintain the broad thrust of the initial plan ?
Does it not believe that the objectives of the proposed action would be difficult to achieve if the British position were to prevail ?
At the Council session of 19 and 20 March 1996 , the Member States supported a proposal from the Italian presidency to amend the text of a joint action plan , which had in fact already been presented by the Italian presidency .
Account was taken of certain reservations of Dutch MEPs , and others of a linguistic nature .
The text we proposed takes account of certain comments made by the United Kingdom delegation in particular and is broadly based on the plan examined by the Council in November 1995 .
This text is intended to establish legal cooperation on the instructions for drafting the leaflet on conduct that can be described as racist or xenophobic .
The purpose of this cooperation is to ensure that such conduct is subject to criminal sanctions or covered by exemptions under the principle of double jeopardy .
In addition to better legal cooperation , the plan provides for the adoption of appropriate measures in specific sectors , for example the seizure and confiscation of texts , pictures , or other documents which incite to racist or xenophobic conduct , in the course of enquiries or legal action relating to matters liable to be criminally listed as indicative of racism or xenophobia .
For its part , the Italian presidency will do everything possible to ensure that this plan can be approved before our presidency ends .
It goes without saying that we consider it the duty of every free citizen to condemn racism and xenophobia .
Thank you , Mr President-in-Office , for your answer to my question , which was in fact tabled before the Council adopted its decision .
I was moved to ask it by my concern at the apparent impossibility - given the doubts and reservations of the British Government - of a text of this kind , which is so necessary and important , being adopted in due course .
Let us not forget that racism and xenophobia are a great problem , which requires action on the scale of that which the Council and , more specifically , the Italian presidency are in favour of taking .
Consequently , I simply wish to thank you for your answer and welcome the proposed action .
I would like to congratulate the Italian presidency on the way it has promoted this issue of taking action to combat racism and xenophobia at the European level as well as at local and national level .
I am dismayed at the negative attitude of my own government .
Will the Council make every effort to try and persuade the British Government that we need to take action at the European level as well as anything else we do ?
Could I also ask the President-in-Office if the final decision on action in this area will be taken by unanimity or by a qualified majority ?
This time the honourable Member has me in difficulties , because I do not know the answer .
I say that sincerely .
I venture to suggest that a decision like this , condemning racism and xenophobia , would be unanimous .
It would be surprising if the fifteen were not unanimous on this subject .
I want to say that the presidency and the Council are aware that this decision alone cannot reduce racism and xenophobia .
It needs to be translated into action in prevention , in youth exchanges , in the Euro-Mediterranean project , and so on .
Ladies and gentlemen , our condemnation of racism and xenophobia cannot be limited to legislation to prevent it .
There is a need to promote moral action , because if the European Parliament and the European Union are not in a position to combat racism and xenophobia , they will be failing in one of their duties .
Question No 3 by Alexandros Alavanos ( H-0213 / 96 )
Subject : Position of the Council regarding the crisis between Greece and Turkey
In a resolution of 15 February 1996 the European Parliament deplored ' the failure of the European Union and its Member States in this crisis to take effective action within the framework of the common foreign and security policy ' .
At its meeting of 26 February 1996 the Council was also unable to adopt a position because the United Kingdom exercised its right of veto .
Will the Council say how it intends to express its solidarity towards the Member State in respect of which Turkey has threatened the use of force ( casus belli ) , should it choose to exercise its legal rights , such as its right of sovereignty over its own territory , and how it will oblige Turkey to maintain good-neighbourly relations with this country , in accordance with the terms of Customs Union ?
Does the Council consider that such a position is conducive to the idea of a common foreign and security policy ?
I thank Mr Ferraris and in every way echo the wishes he has expressed .
Nevertheless , I would like to reiterate what my question says , namely that the European Parliament and not the Greek MEPs , the Plenary of the European Parliament deplored the failure of the European Union and the Council to take effective action within the framework of the CFSP so far as the GreeceTurkey crisis is concerned .
And I now want to make my question completely specific on the basis of recent developments , namely the failure to convene the Council of Association .
Is the presidency of the Council prepared to submit any constructive proposals for the Council of Association to be convened again , including a commitment to reject the use of force between Greece and Turkey and a commitment by all sides that in the specific crisis relating to the islet of Imia the path followed will be that of international methods for the peaceful solution of crises , such as recourse to the International Court of the Hague ?
I ask for a specific answer from the President-in-Office .
Mr Alavanos is right in a sense , but if it were possible to give a more definite reply , the problem would already have been solved .
The difficulty actually lies in trying to identify the possibility of genuine terms for a solution between the two parties involved .
Mr Alavanos , you are aware of the significance of the statement made by Mr Jimas , the President of the Turkish Council , a few days ago in Brussels at the last General Affairs Council and the efforts made by the presidency to reach an understanding with the other members of the General Affairs Council , so that the meeting of the Association Council with Turkey , which should have taken place on 26 March , should not be cancelled but only postponed .

This is a very delicate issue , as Mr Alavanos knows , but I ask you to trust in the presidency 's very active commitment and , if I may say so , very personal commitment as well , to trying to achieve what Mr Alavanos is calling for and what it is in our interests to achieve .
Question No 4 by Carmen Fraga Estévez ( H-0225 / 96 )
Subject : Decision by the US Court of International Trade
In February 1996 the US Court of International Trade recognized that there was clear evidence that Italy was infringing UN resolutions on the use of driftnets limiting their maximum length to 2.5 km .
If the situation is not rectified within three months the United States will ban the import into its territory of fish and fish products originating in Italy ; given the existence of the single market , this could affect the rest of the European Union as well .
Does the Council not agree that there is a need to ban the use of such fisheries equipment in the Mediterranean as soon as possible , in order to avoid a trade war with the United States ?
Thank you , Mr President . In the first place I want to point out that the Council is not in the habit of evaluating or commenting on decisions , acts or statements made outside its own meetings by persons or organizations external to the Council .
I do not think that would be correct .
In general we believe that our Community legislation conforms to United Nations resolutions .
As to the implementation of Community legislation , it is obvious that it is up to the Commission to ensure that the provisions in force as regards management and conservation of fisheries resources are respected , in this case Council regulation 345 / 92 which prohibits any Community fishing vessel from using driftnets exceeding 2.5 km , irrespective of which waters it is fishing , with the single exception of the Baltic Sea which is subject to a special regulation .
I would also like to draw Mrs Fraga Estévez ' attention to the fact that the Council is currently examining a Commission proposal for a total ban on driftnets , in the light of the opinion expressed by the European Parliament .
This proposal will be discussed at the next meeting of the Fisheries Council on 22 April 1996 , as I have already stated in replying to other questions three weeks ago .
In fact the Council has never had occasion up to now to discuss the specific facts mentioned in the question , so I do not think there is any more I can say in answer to Mrs Fraga Estévez .
I am grateful to the President-in-Office for his explanation , but I am obliged to say that the Council has been examining the Commission proposal and Parliament 's report for almost two years now .
It is therefore taking its time .
I hope that it reaches a successful conclusion .
Furthermore , I should like to ask the President-in-Office a question .
The decision by the United States Court of International Trade is following an unstoppable course .
In principle , there was a deadline of 8 April , by which date the US Government was required to ask the Italian Government to submit an action plan for controlling the use of driftnets in the Mediterranean .
Given that the Italian Government has 30 days in which to reply , therefore , is the Italian Government prepared to submit such an action plan ?
And if so , what guideline measures will it contain ?
I would like to make two comments .
The first is a general one on your complaint about the delays , Mrs Fraga Estévez .
Unless I am misinformed , there are difficulties within the Fisheries Council because opinions differ on this issue and it is therefore hard to achieve unanimity and reach a decision on the lines you indicate .
The second comment is that , in our opinion , our standards are in line with those of the United Nations and therefore I must infer that the attitude of the United States is wrong .
Finally as regards your specific question as to whether Italy intends to react within 30 days of a certain date not known to me , I will find out and if you are interested I will let you know .
That question is put to me as an Italian and not as the representative of the presidency , so I will find out and make a point of giving you the details .
I was very surprised by the reply from the Presidentin-Office .
He said that the Council was not in the habit of commenting on the decisions of organizations other than itself .
The fact is , however , that this is a decision by the Court of International Trade of a foreign power - the United States - which may have the effect of restricting the Community 's exports , and the Council can do one of two things : either it can take no action , or it can take action .
If it decides to take no action , that will mean that it accepts the accusations .
In that case , it must resolve to put the Community 's house in order .
If it decides to take action , because it believes that the United States has violated world trade rules , then it will have to take the matter to the World Trade Organization .
My question is : does the Council intend to defend the Community 's fisheries exports by lodging a complaint against the United States with the World Trade Organization ?
Or does it , on the contrary , intend to accept the export ban ?
If that is the case , it will have to draw up a policy to ensure compliance with United Nations rules in the fisheries sector .
You are right in a sense , Mr Arias Cañete , but first I would like to make one thing clear . If I understood your comment correctly , it was not a decision of an international court , but a United States court , so with all due respect to the United States , it is a court of a third country .
Secondly , the actions of a United States court cannot have extra-territorial effect , they cannot have effect outside the United States .
In the third place it seems to us that these provisions , as they have been described , are incompatible with the decisions of the Uruguay Round on free trade .
In the fourth and last place , I can assure you , and this should give you some satisfaction , that in our view the question should obviously be put to the World Trade Organization authorities , which are not yet fully established unfortunately and that is why it is actually difficult to know what to do .
So I would ask you not to press me any further and I will do what I can .
The Council is most grateful for the very specific information you have given me .
Question No 5 by Michl Ebner ( H-0233 / 96 )
Subject : Protection of minorities in Member States of the Union
In view of the fact that many conflicts could be avoided by timely protection of minorities and that neither the Treaty of Rome nor that of Maastricht contain provisions governing the protection of national minorities , will the Council state in what form the rights of minorities in the Member States of the Union are to be enshrined at the 1996 IGC ?
I do not think it will be difficult for Mr Ebner to understand my thinking on the subject of what has been done by the Council and by Italy on the principle of respect for minority nationalities .
At this point it should be remembered how much the European Union , the individual Member States and Italy have been doing progressively over the last few years to advance the recognition of documents relating to minorities , like the Charters of Copenhagen and Moscow , in the context of the ex-ECSC , now the ECSO .

Certainly nothing is said about this in the Maastricht Treaty - there Mr Ebner is right - there is no explicit mention , in fact , except in the general area of the defence of human rights .

I would like to remind Mr Ebner and other Members that at the very first meeting the other day of the Intergovernmental Conference at senior official level , it was decided to make the question of what might be called the chapter on the rights of European citizens a priority . The rights of European citizens cover all the expressions of freedom .
Furthermore , the European Parliament is associated in the work of the Intergovernmental Conference , in the form you are aware of , and I think Italy as a country , certainly , and the presidency as long as Italy is in office , will always welcome anything that can heighten , enrich and make more meaningful the protection of minorities as they exist today in Community Europe and as they will exist in the enlarged Europe of tomorrow .
I do not know whether I am speaking on behalf of the Council or on behalf of Italy , Mr Ebner , but you know my views and you are fully aware that we must all have this issue of minorities very much at heart .
In fact , minorities in all their forms are one of the greatest living demonstrations and one of the most vital elements of the protection of the citizens of Europe , in their diversity of language , culture , and sometimes religion .
All this is part of the heritage of a Europe which belongs as much to its minorities as it belongs to all its citizens .
Count Ferraris , I am sincerely grateful both for what you have said and above all for what has been done in the past on this issue .
In this context , however , may I also intimate that , although the European Parliament wished and called , through the Reflection Group , for a clear and unequivocal opinion on consideration of minority rights , and although the subject was dealt with by the Reflection Group , the latter did not include the question of minorities in its report .
That is a great pity , and I believe that the demand made by the European Parliament in the Maij-Weggen / Dury report underlines this .
We hope that the subject of human rights which you mentioned will include the codification , or at least an acknowledgement , of the rights of minorities and will not be confined to non-discrimination , for as far as minorities are concerned non-discrimination is certainly not enough .
I think I can also say on behalf of the Council that this is non-discrimination : but that would be a long debate and I do not want to go into detail .
I would like to suggest that Parliament returns to this issue .
It is true it was not mentioned , but that was for the sake of brevity , not out of ill will .
I think point 4.13 of Parliament 's resolution on Europe 's support for the recognition of cultural diversity ought to be taken up .
Personally I hope that Parliament will seek to bring up this point when participating in the Intergovernmental Conference , because it is an intrinsic part of the heritage of rights of European citizens .
Mr President-in-Office , your answers have been excellent , but I am afraid the same cannot be said of the situation itself .
If we added all of the national minorities or ethnic groups in the European Union together , particularly after enlargement , they would constitute the second-largest Member State .
This , then , is a very sizeable problem .
At the moment , the preamble to the Europe Agreements contains an obligation to protect minorities .
When these states accede to the Union , however , this obligation will cease to apply .
The Intergovernmental Conference , of course , has a mandate to prepare the Community for enlargement , and I cannot imagine how the Community can be enlarged without an internal mechanism for the protection of minorities .
Otherwise many problems from central and eastern Europe will be imported into the European Union .
I have difficulty answering you , Mr Posselt , because I have already mentioned the importance of this issue in relation to the enlargement myself . Let me repeat that we are at the start of an Intergovernmental Conference .
This is a very important point and it needs to be raised .
The European Parliament is associated with the work of the Intergovernmental Conference , so it can propose something along these lines and I am sure that the governments will have no difficulty accepting it .
I entirely agree with you that it is an issue we need to resolve internally , before the enlargement produces further problems .
Furthermore , speaking as an Italian - I think Mr Ebner gave me credit for this - I believe we have done everything possible .
Problems will never be entirely solved ; total satisfaction will never be possible !
Otherwise we would not be human , we would be divine .
Frankly you place me in difficulty , because I am personally completely convinced of the importance of the minorities and so I think there would be full support from us , certainly from Italy , but also from all the countries of the Community for an issue which is important because - I repeat - it is an expression of freedom .
Question No 6 by Christine Oddy ( H-0247 / 96 )
Subject : Sri Lanka
What steps does the Council intend to take to ensure that urgently required medical aid is sent to Northern Sri Lanka ?
I think I have already replied in the past to questions about Sri Lanka and my reply to Ms Oddy is that the European Union is very concerned .
Obviously it is following the situation in Sri Lanka closely , it has repeatedly deplored the loss of human life caused by the war , it has urged the government and the Tamil Tiger movement to make every effort to protect the civilian population and it has also sent humanitarian aid to alleviate the sufferings of the population .
We are following developments on the ground and , as regards the medical aid Ms Oddy is talking about in particular , we are in a position to communicate that various Member States have initiated urgent aid to Sri Lanka on a national basis .
As to the solution of the problems which are at the basis of the armed conflict , the position of the Union is well-known and has not in fact changed since the last statement which goes back to November 1995 .
I have the impression , alas , that the Union does not have great resources .
I can only hope that the parties will return to the negotiating table , but in situations of this kind it is fairly rare .
Both sides must be willing to negotiate and this does not seem to me to be the case in very tragic conflict situations like the one in Sri Lanka .
I visited Sri Lanka from 1-5 April and met Joe Green , the Commission representative out there , who was very helpful .
He is under-resourced and this is bringing the European Union into disrepute at present .
There are three problems which I have now identified and I would like the Council 's views on them .
Firstly , a number of important supplies , such as medicine , which could help the LTTE , are banned from the north .
This affects children , elderly people and the disabled .
Can the Council use its good offices to ensure that civilians do not suffer from lack of medical assistance ?
Secondly , there is a drought in the country and it is feared that there could be a severe shortage of food in a few months ' time .
Again , will the Council comment on emergency preparations in place if that should transpire ?
Thirdly , there is a problem of lack of independent , objective assessment of the situation and suffering of civilians in the north .
Will the Council try to ensure that the ECHO office visits as soon as possible ?
You are right , Ms Oddy .
I can see that you probably know better than anyone that Sri Lanka recently reintroduced a state of emergency .
This measure was adopted by President Badaramaike , elected at the end of 1994 , if I am not mistaken , and sometimes that makes it very difficult to take the humanitarian action you quite rightly hope for .
The European Union can do no more than confirm the 1994 declaration , the condemnation of all who violate human rights , its position in defence of human rights , and the commitment deriving from Parliament 's resolution of 27 March of this year , calling for the definition of certain priorities .
But I really do not know what the presidency of the Union can successfully do apart from trying to work in the Council for the constitutional revision , to bring about action for peace on the scene and where possible to send humanitarian aid .
It is my opinion , finally , that the Union , the presidency and the Council are unfortunately powerless in the face of this tragic situation .
As you know , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the majority of the Council wants to agree the financial regulation as soon as possible for the MEDA programme , which affects not only Union countries but other Mediterranean countries as well . The funding is already earmarked for this programme , the political agreement exists and only needs to be made formal .
But there have been repercussions from the difficulties that arose between Greece and Turkey , and that has slowed down and hindered the adoption of MEDA , which should have taken place at the General Affairs Council last month .
Obviously the Council is aware of the opinion already expressed by the European Parliament on the Commission 's proposal and I am sure it will consult Parliament again as soon as the Council recognizes the political agreement . It is our purpose , our aim and our intention to bring that to a successful conclusion as quickly as possible .
Thank you , Mr President-in-Office , for your reply , which nevertheless directly contradicts what the European public has been told .
The answer you have just given me is new and contradictory , and is only comprehensible because of the lack of transparency in the debates of the Council .
The Member State which is blocking the regulation - the United Kingdom - has still not given an explanation .
Mr President-in-Office , could you please convey the fact to the UK Government that we are demanding an explanation for its obstructive stance , which is a gratuitous one that is holding up all the Mediterranean programmes ?
We want a clear and public explanation .
The position defended by the United Kingdom is more lax and less demanding of respect for human rights , and also has no real foundation - and I repeat this because the information is conflicting .
It is prejudicing the Mediterranean region , and in my view is based on an attempt to oppose the Mediterranean and the East in a way which has already been overtaken by events .
Mr President-in-Office , this is not an exercise in the politics of appearances , whereby we seem to be adopting policies in favour of the Mediterranean region , but when the moment of truth arrives , they are not implemented .
We demand an explanation .
I can give you the answers you want right away , Mrs Izquierdo .
I am afraid your information was not correct because the problem that existed with the United Kingdom has been resolved .
I am sorry to contradict you , but it has been resolved .
An accommodation was reached through the good offices of the presidency , and as a result there is now political agreement between all the Member States .
Only one difficulty remains and it was raised at the General Affairs Council last month . It relates to a conflict situation which a Member State thought should be taken into consideration .
The problem of the United Kingdom - a problem about how to decide on possible suspension in relation to possible violation of human rights - was resolved with an appropriate formula which was also considered acceptable by the United Kingdom itself .
Question No 8 by Per Gahrton ( H-0255 / 96 )
Subject : Openness and forms of decision-making during the Intergovernmental Conference
The Intergovernmental Conference will take the form of summits , starting in Turin , and a long series of meetings of Foreign Ministers , chief negotiators , and possibly other participants in other forms .
In the light of this , will the Council give a complete breakdown , by relative status , of the various types of meeting to be held within the framework of the IGC , the precise formal decision-making process at different forms of meeting , including whether minutes are taken , and the extent to which documents on which decisions are based are publicly accessible ?
At what sort of meetings are decisions taken ?
How are decisions taken , by consensus or formal voting ?
Are minutes of the decision-making process kept ?
How are the documents drawn up for and connected with the various meetings handled ?
Which documents are publicly accessible ? Which documents can only be made available to relevant bodies within the European Parliament ?
Which documents will be classified as secret ?
I believe this problem about methods was discussed in the plenary session of this Parliament a few days ago .
So I think this question probably predates the understanding adopted and then approved in Turin on 29 March .
Let me just remind you briefly that Parliament is invited , through both the presidency and Parliament 's own representatives , to join in the process of decision-making at the Intergovernmental Conference .
This is being vigorously promoted in cooperation with Parliament .
I think the solution adopted takes account of two aspects .
On the one hand , that it is purely and simply an Intergovernmental Conference and that therefore only governments can be involved in the actual negotiations ; on the other , that the governments and in particular the presidency and the majority of Member States want Parliament to be associated with it in an intense , penetrating and profound way because it is felt that the advice and support of Parliament is needed to achieve greater transparency and a people 's Europe .
We hope that the outcome of the Intergovernmental Conference will be advantageous to Europe and that these assumptions will be respected .
Mr President , I am sorry to have to say that it once again appears as if those with whom we speak in the EU do not understand what we mean , when we Swedish Members take up the issue of public access to documents on which decisions are based .
This is not a question of the European Parliament 's participation in the Intergovernmental Conference .
It is a question of public access for citizens and journalists to the documents on which discussions and decisions at the IGC are based .
It is a question of whether minutes are kept and whether those minutes are publicly accessible .
It is a question of how decisions are taken , that is to say whether this is done on the basis of a vote or of consensus , and whether unanimity is required or some form of qualified majority .
The most important thing here is however : will the people of the EU , through journalists , have access to the documents , the papers , and so on , on which discussions at the IGC will be based ?
I did not unfortunately receive an answer to this question .
Taking advantage of the fact that the President-inOffice is so in favour of transparency , I should like to ask him if he could provide me with some transparent information concerning what has been happening in the Council with regard to the blocking of the MEDA regulation .
I am not prepared to take that supplementary , because it referred to the previous question .
Question No 9 by Peter Crampton ( H-0261 / 96 )
Subject : Hong Kong
The British Government recently agreed to waive visa requirements for Hong Kong holders of British National Overseas Dependent Territories Passports after control of Hong Kong reverts to China in 1997 .
However , this will apparently not allow these citizens to enter Germany , France , Spain and Portugal , as visa rules have not yet been harmonized at European level .
Could the Council explain the steps it is taking to allow British National Overseas Dependent Territories Passport holders free movement in the European Union ?
According to a statement by the government of the United Kingdom , under the Act of Accession of the United Kingdom to the Community , the validity of which is recognized , inter alia , by a judgement of the Court , citizens of British Dependent Territories , with the exception of Gibraltar , are not considered citizens of the United Kingdom .
Therefore citizens from Hong Kong who hold British passports are included amongst citizens of third countries who currently do not have the right to stay and move freely in the territories of the Member States , unlike citizens of the Union .
Furthermore , on the adoption of Regulation 2317 / 95 , which determined which third countries ' citizens must hold a visa to cross the external frontiers of the Member States , the Council issued a public statement that the treatment of Chinese citizens who have the right of residence in Hong Kong and Macao will be established later .
Finally , still under the same regulation , it is up to Member States to decide whether citizens of third countries which do not appear on the common list attached to that regulation are subject to the obligation to hold a visa .
The Member States will have this power until the Council has completed the relevant harmonization .
In addition , under the same regulation , within five years the Commission must to proceed to closure with a report on that harmonization and , if necessary , it will present proposals on further measures necessary to achieve this objective .
However that may be , as regards the Italian presidency , we have sought to progress the work in the Council on both the draft convention on crossing of external frontiers and the three proposals relating to the free movement of persons presented in 1995 by Commissioner Monti , which includes a provision which would allow the citizens of third countries to travel inside the Community .
I do not know the problem in detail but it seems to me that British Overseas National status , which was set up to replace that of British Dependent Territories Citizen of Hong Kong with a view to the transfer of Hong Kong to the sovereignty of the People 's Republic of China , means that they cannot even reside in the United Kingdom .
So I think it is a little difficult to ask for them to be allowed to move around the Union when they cannot even go to the United Kingdom , if my information is correct ; forgive me if it is wrong .
However that may be , as from 1 July 1997 - at least according to the information I have available - passports will be issued as follows : Hong Kong Special Administrative Region passports to people who have not asked for British Overseas National status , and people currently holding a Hong Kong Certificate of Identity .
The methods for issuing this new Hong Kong Special Administrative Region document have not yet been established , but it should be a different passport from that issued by the Chinese government .
I am sorry , Mr Crampton , but that is the information I have .
This seems to be a very complex matter .
I repeat , if citizens of Hong Kong with this document are not even allowed to reside in the United Kingdom , then the question of visas for Germany , France , Spain and Portugal arises in a slightly different way .
But if the information is wrong , the presidency will be very pleased to receive clarification and further details from you .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was closed at 7.10 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m. )

Mr President , I have come here tonight to protest in the strongest possible terms and to ask you to change the Rules of Procedure which are being applied tonight to the statement by Commissioner Fischler on BSE .
At the Conference of Presidents last week it was agreed that the statement would be made , to be followed by 30 minutes of questions without a speaking list .
Anybody who looks at the agenda as published will see that it says quite clearly ' Statement by the Commission on BSE , ... followed by 30 minutes of questions ' .
In the allocation of speaking time it says : ' 3 to 6 p.m. , 9 to 12 midnight , excluding the Commission statement on BSE ' .
It is completely clear and the recollection of everybody from my group and , I understand , others who were there in the Conference was that there would be no speaking list and we would apply the rules of the Delors procedure whereby the President in the chair would call Members on a show of hands .
We are notified this afternoon that this procedure has been changed and that speaking lists have been submitted and been requested by other groups .
That is absolutely unacceptable .
I do not know who has changed it .
The agreement in the Conference of Presidents was clear .
I would like to insist now that we revert to what the agenda clearly says was the procedure to be adopted and that we should have a free 30-minute question time following the statement from Commissioner Fischler .
I think we should first of all deal with the agenda , that is , the first item on the agenda .
As soon as that subject has been dealt with I shall ask the Assembly , which is sovereign , whether or not it wishes to accept Mrs Green 's proposal .
I think that is the proper procedure to follow .
Mr President , I have to say that is manipulation of the worst sort .
It is perfectly acceptable for you to make that decision now , given the time of day that it is , given the fact that my group has prepared for this discussion tonight without a speaking list .
You are now saying that we should stay here and wait until this first debate is finished before that decision is made .
That is not acceptable , Mr President .
In the spirit of good will and the way this Parliament operates , we could take that decision now .
There is no reason why we should not .
I ask you to take the decision now , Mr President !
I think it is possible to decide now too , but to stick to the agenda which has been laid down .
First we deal with the subject which was on the agenda and then , as the second subject , under the procedure laid down by Parliament , the other matter will have to be dealt with .
Mr President , if you are telling me that at some later point tonight I may have to produce a speaking list for my group then I want some time to prepare it , and that means that we must take the decision now ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
We shall decide quickly the procedure on the list of speakers , but the discussion on this matter must follow the order laid down by Parliament and its services .
Is that agreed ?
Mr President , our group is under the same understanding as Mrs Green .
We understood that there was to be a statement made by the Commission on BSE in beef and the export ban in relation to UK exports of beef .
We understood that is was going to be originally at 3 p.m. , then at 5 p.m.
Then we understood that it was going to be at 9 p.m.
I move that we take that point now under the procedure that Mrs Green said was agreed by the political groups last week ; that is , whoever catches your eye in the Chair .
That should take place now and that should have precedence over the items on the agenda which , it was generally understood , would follow after this one-hour debate .
I am saying that we should decide quickly whether the speakers are to be called upon on the basis of a list or on an impromptu basis .
In any case as there is another item first we cannot upset the agenda .
So let us follow the normal procedure .
Mr President , I agree with Mrs Green , as my colleagues no doubt do as well .
I would ask , however , that questions should not extend beyond two minutes , to ensure that the maximum possible number of Members are given the chance of putting a question .
One minute would be even better .
The agenda cannot be amended , amongst other things because Rule 96 of the Rules of Procedure says clearly that once adopted the agenda may not be amended .
I now put to the vote Mrs Green 's proposal as to whether it is preferable to follow in the debate the procedure you proposed , that is , speakers taken on an unscheduled basis without any list of speakers .
( Parliament agreed to the proposal )
Mr President , I thank you very much for your cooperation .
As you will be in the Chair , I am sure it will be an extremely good session .
It always has been !
The Rules of Procedure themselves do not provide for a list , but there has always been fair play on the part of the Members in presenting it .
You are therefore fully entitled to make your request .
Mr President , I have a further point of order .
There has seldom been a discussion for which it has been so important to have the Commissioner responsible present in the House .
Could you please ascertain , at the start of our discussion of the item on BSE , why Mr Fischler is not present ?
We need him to give us a clear statement .
I do not wish to imply any lack of respect for his deputies , but we do need a clear and unambiguous statement from Mr Fischler himself .
I must say that it is not necessary for the Commissioner to be here , because we are dealing with another matter .
Let us proceed calmly and with due order !
Visby Summit
The next item is the joint debate on the following oral questions :
by Mr Burenstam Linder and Mr Martens , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , to the Council ( B4-0295 / 96 - O-0071 / 96 ) and to the Commission ( B4-0296 / 96 -O-0072 / 96 ) on the Visby Summit on the Baltic region ; -by Mr Olsson and others , on behalf of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , to the Commission ( B4-0297 / 96 - O-0078 / 96 ) on the Summit of Baltic States , 3 and 4 May 1996 , in Visby ; -by Mrs Roth and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , to the Council ( B4-0298 / 96 - O-0080 / 96 ) and to the Commission ( B40299 / 96 - O-0081 / 96 ) on the Baltic Summit ; -by Mrs Stenius-Kaukonen , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , to the Council ( B4-0300 / 96 - O-0082 / 96 ) and to the Commission ( B4-0425 / 96 - O-0083 / 96 ) on the Visby Summit on the Baltic region ; -by Mrs Lalumière , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , to the Council ( B4-0426 -O-0088 / 96 ) on the Summit on the Baltic Sea ; -by Mrs Hoff and others , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , to the Council ( B4-0427 / 96 - O-0095 / 96 ) and to the Commission ( B40428 / 96 - O-0096 / 96 ) on the Visby Summit on the Baltic Region ; -by Mrs Carrère d 'Encausse , on behalf of the Union for Europe Group to the Council ( B4-0429 / 96 - O-0099 / 96 ) on the Baltic States Summit ; -by Mr Krarup , on behalf of the Europe of Nations Group , to the Council ( B40432 / 96 - O-0101 / 96 ) and to the Commission ( B4-0433 / 96 - O-0102 / 96 ) on the Baltic States Summit in Visby on 3 and 4 May 1996 .
Mr President , I have asked the Commission how we can help at the Visby summit to prepare for the enlargement of the European Union and bring about cooperation with our neighbours to the East and with Russia which is characterised by trust .
The EU has every reason to support regional cooperation around the Baltic Sea economically and politically .
Greater Baltic cooperation will facilitate a rapid enlargement of the European Union to include Estonia , Latvia , Lithuania and Poland .
Baltic cooperation also demonstrates how cooperation between EU countries and countries outside the Union , such as Norway , Iceland and Russia , can be put into practice on the basis of trust .
By ensuring that the Baltic conference is a success the EU can also wash away the unjust images of the EU as an exclusive club for Western Europe alone .
I believe that the Europe agreements on trade between the EU and applicant countries should be reviewed so that they do more to promote trade and enterprise around the Baltic .
The Baltic region should once again be able to become a flourishing region for trade , investment and tourism .
Vigorous economic action is required from the EU for the environmental clean-up of discharge sources and to improve the marine environment of the Baltic .
The EU 's support system can definitely be used better to ensure the sustainable development of the Baltic Sea region .
I am surprised that the Commission has not permitted the European Parliament to participate sooner in the elaboration of the EU initiative on regional cooperation in preparation for the meeting of the Council of Baltic Sea States in Visby on 3 and 4 May .
The European Parliament has shown great interest in Baltic cooperation and issues concerning the Baltic have been debated here on many occasions .
We should have had the opportunity to participate in a dialogue on these issues sooner .
Mr President , the Baltic Sea area is turning into a northern extension of the European Union stretching far towards the Arctic Ocean .
All 11 states in the area are either members of the European Union or are linked to it by special agreements .
The European Union is also a full member of the area 's central cooperation bodies , particularly the Baltic Council and the Baltic Protection Commission ( Helcom ) .
At present , economic support targeted at the Baltic area is still only weakly coordinated in the Union .
The Greens in the European Parliament call for the Commission to develop an integrated Baltic programme .
It need not think that it would have to start building up such a programme from scratch , for cooperation has been established in the area for a long time and is indeed based on a centuries-old tradition .
The region 's own expertise and existing development programmes should be exploited and an attempt made to coordinate them .
Close cooperation particularly in the framework of the Baltic Council is now important because this body might become the region 's most important political coordinator .
The Baltic region also needs to build up a comprehensive environment programme on the basis of sustainable development .
Helcom has an operational programme currently in force and this could certainly be used as a basis for a more ambitious plan than in the past .
The Commission 's task is above all to ensure that it has sufficient international funding .
The Commission is due to assume the presidency of Helcom at the beginning of July and this will provide an excellent opportunity , nay , an obligation , to carry out this task .
In the plan for large-scale transport and energy networks a wide-ranging strategic environmental impact assessment must be carried out , because the Baltic 's sensitive environment cannot cope with these projects .
A very critical attitude needs to be taken to them and an attempt must be made to support environmentally acceptable solutions .
The region has considerable energy resources , even though it also has major problems .
Priority in energy policy should be given to natural gas networks ; the most dangerous nuclear power stations should be closed immediately and it must above all be remembered that there are measurable nuclear problems in the Kola peninsula .
The Commission ought to say how it sees the possible enlargement of NATO and the Western European Union affecting the stability of the Baltic Sea area .
In this new initiative which the Commission has proposed , all the various points of view , from environmental policy to security issues and economic development , should be brought together .
Mr President , the initiative adopted by the Commission to reinforce the stability and economic development of the Baltic Sea area is welcome .
The Commission is not offering any new resources , but is proposing a better exploitation of current cooperation and programmes .
There are good reasons for starting from this point : established forms of cooperation must be fully exploited .
The Commission proposal contains concrete projects in the energy field .
It notes that the crude oil pipeline from Russia to Finland , together with the linking of the EU 's and the associated countries ' electricity and gas networks , should be a subject of development .
By way of example , the Commission mentions the Baltic Electricity Ring which was adopted at Parliament 's suggestion as one of the list of energy networks in the Community interest .
The Commission 's new initiative will only be sufficiently comprehensive if it also includes a concrete opinion on the development of the gas network .
Simply having a positive attitude to this issue is not sufficient .
The development of the northern European gas network received the support of the European Parliament and Council Conciliation Committee .
Interinstitutional declarations stress that the development of gas networks in northern Europe creates possibilities for significant growth in gas markets and for the improvement of energy security and environmental quality throughout the Union .
In conciliation on energy networks Parliament 's proposal for a northern gas network - the Nordic Gas Grid project - was unfortunately omitted from the project list .
We gather that the Commission will begin updating the annex to the list as early as the middle of June , by which time Parliament and the Council will hopefully have adopted the proposals of the Conciliation Committee on energy networks .
I should therefore like to propose , in paragraph 7 of the resolution due to be adopted tomorrow , a wording which reflects the current state of the project .
In Amendment No 6 I propose that the Nordic Gas Grid project be included as soon as possible on the list of Europe-wide projects in the common interest .
The purpose of this project is to link the gas pipelines in the EU 's northern Member States Finland , Sweden and Denmark so that Russia 's and Norway 's gas resources can be used to increase the security of gas supplies both in the Baltic Sea region and in the whole of northern Europe .
The Finnish Members of the European Parliament were unanimous on this point .
However , I should like to repeat once again that the northern gas network is not only an important project for the Finns but is important for the protection of gas supplies throughout the whole of the trans-European energy networks .
Mr President , the Group of the European Radical Alliance supports the resolution on the forthcoming summit on the Baltic Sea , for reasons which I shall outline briefly .
The countries bordering the Baltic differ from each other and in their relations with the European Union .
Some are Union members already , while Poland and the three Baltic States have association agreements aimed at preparing them for accession . Russia , which has a partnership agreement with the Union , demonstrates more strongly than any of the other countries that it is a very substantial partner , though somewhat unpredictable and volatile .
It is heartening that the Baltic Sea summit should provide a forum where these countries can forget their differences in order to launch new initiatives for working together .
There is an urgent need for the Union to produce an overall action plan coordinating its activities in the Baltic , beyond the bilateral relations which it has recently established with the various countries , and on top of the financial aid provided through PHARE , TACIS , INTERREG , Synergy , the ERDF and other programmes .
The Union is involved in many sectors , including civil and military security , economic development in industry , agriculture , the services sector , transport and telecommunications .
It is also playing a part in advancing democracy and developing legal systems , as well as in fighting crime , safeguarding the environment and managing marine and energy resources , to mention just some of the sectors concerned .
In short , the Union needs a clear and coherent policy in this sensitive area of north-eastern Europe , and we are counting on the Council and the Commission - under Parliament 's supervision , of course - to frame and implement such a policy .
Mr President , when governments and heads of state meet in the Baltic Council , it must be presumed that this is to emphasise a desire for action and to underscore its high priority .
Parliament has , on several occasions , pointed out the need to bring about practical Baltic cooperation .
New Member States , more applicant countries , everything already points in the same direction , as other colleagues have stressed .
It is necessary to stimulate regional cooperation .
The historical changes alone require this .
The differences are not really that great as yet .
There are long and proud cultural traditions , there are long traditions of cooperation on trade , and with a security policy dimension in mind , all the indicators are that the next step for the region should be to step up cooperation .
The summit meeting , as we call it , followed by an actual Baltic Council meeting , should end with a declaration of intent to establish an actual Baltic programme in line with the Mediterranean programme .
The experience gained from our Baltic inter-parliamentary delegations should provide Parliament with a basis to support such a development .
It is exceptionally important that , for example , environment , transport , various networks and joint exploitation of the Baltic 's resources are discussed and planned in a common Baltic spirit .
In that way the region 's identity as an independent but very active part of Europe is strengthened .
The Council and the Commission must follow up the Visby meeting and ensure that hope , strength and faith in the future is given to the peoples around the Baltic Sea .
I would like to begin by saying that I have a lot of sympathy for the amendments tabled by Mrs Hautala and Mrs Stenius-Kaukonen , but the principal matter is the joint motion for a resolution .
I would point out that the history of the Baltic countries is at least bloody and troubled as the history of the rest of Europe , including that of France and Germany . But up in the north we put away our weapons of war at the beginning of the previous century , after the Napoleonic wars .
It is perhaps worth reminding this Assembly that the era of Swedish and Danish imperialism and the many wars fought between the two nations , was brought to a peaceful conclusion without any union - in fact , one might say that the opposite was the case , in that it led to cooperation at all levels , but without any supranational institutions .
These peaceful neighbourly relations have formed the basis for the international cooperation which has developed in the Baltic region , particularly as a result of the Helsinki conventions and the HELCOM cooperation on the Baltic 's marine environment .
It is not perfect , but it works without any supranational suprstructure .
But now it is going to end , according to the joint motion for a resolution , for the EU 's federalists demand that this regional cooperation , this international co-operation , be subordinated to the European Union .
This is shown most clearly by a number of provisions .
The English version thus refers to the Northern dimension of the European Union .
That is the point of departure , the Northern dimension of the European Union is nothing other than a kind of imperialism , since there are only four member states among the many states which comprise the Baltic region .
And even more clear and more absurd is the assumption that the Union holds the chairmanship of HELCOM , and that means that Sweden at the present time , and then Finland , Denmark and Germany will be identified with the European Union .
But , ladies and gentlemen - to speak on behalf of the peoples in the region - the Baltic nations are quite forthright in their views : Hands off Baltic cooperation !
I should be tempted to discuss with Mr Krarup whether or not there have been wars in the Baltic region , but that is not the subject this evening .
In anticipation of the forthcoming Summit meeting of the Council of the Baltic States , to be held in Visby and 3 and 4 May , the Council has been asked about the Union policy with regard to the Baltic region .
The Council is to be represented at the Visby meeting by the President of the European Council , that is by Mr Dini , who is an Italian and who will be taking part in this Summit precisely in order to emphasize the importance which the Council and the Union attach to the Baltic Union .
I should like to remind you that in May last year the Commission - which moreover is a member , if I am not mistaken , of the Baltic Council - was represented at the fourth ministerial meeting of that council , held at Danzig .
Point 8 of the declaration issued on that occasion expressed the view that it was desirable and important that there should be a further rapprochement between the Baltic States and the European Union - that is , those Baltic States which are not yet members of the European Union .
At that time the Ministers approved the accession of Finland and Sweden to the Union and the conclusion of agreements with Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania .
Moreover the Danzig Declaration referred to the cross-frontier dimension and the possible forms of financial aid in the framework of the PHARE and TACIS programmes .
In point 16 a favourable view was expressed of the Union 's approach to the Baltic area and finally point 28 stressed the objective of recognizing the Baltic region as a political force and a dynamic element in a democratic Europe .
I wanted to quote the Danzig Declaration in the trust and conviction that at Visby too there would be the same approval of that link , that relationship between the European Union and the Council of the Baltic countries .
I should like to point out that the Union supports regional cooperation initiatives in Europe .
Supporting them is , I would say , almost a Union policy .
It supports , in addition to the Council of the Baltic States , the initiative for Central Europe and economic cooperation in the Black Sea for which a meeting is to be held at the end of next week , if I remember correctly , on 27 April , to which the President of the Union amongst others has been invited , for the very purpose of furthering the economic development of the regions concerned and political stability and security in Europe in general .
The Union , then , is particularly interested as regards the Baltic States , bearing in mind that some of its Member States are also members of the Council of Baltic States - Denmark , Germany , Finland and Sweden - whilst others are members of the European Economic Area - Norway and Iceland - and others , finally , are associated States , namely Poland , Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania .
To complete the picture and to emphasize the Union 's particular interest in the Baltic countries , I would remind you that the Madrid Council , in December 1995 , took note of the Commission report on the situation and the prospects for cooperation in the Baltic region , a report which formed part of and was a follow-up to the conclusions on the development of cooperation , political dialogue and economic cooperation in the Baltic region .
In addition , and this seems to me an important observation , along the lines mentioned by Mrs Lalumière , the European Council of Madrid requested the Commission to propose an appropriate initiative for regional cooperation , to be submitted to the heads of State at Visby .
As far as we understand , this Commission proposal will be ready this month , April .
In any case , Commissioner Van den Broek will be able to tell you much more .
Finally I should like also to mention the other initiatives which the Union has taken as regards the region of the Baltic countries .
For example participation in the seminar at Karlskrona in Sweden last March on cross-border cooperation , in which the European Union was represented , demonstrating the concern and need to find adequate Community funds in connection with the TACIS and PHARE programmes .
Then the Union took part in the specialist conference at Copenhagen of the Nordic Council and in the Nordic Ministerial Council devoted to European subjects , with representatives from national parliaments , governments and of course from the European Union .
In addition our interest in the Baltic region extends , albeit indirectly , to the Central European initiative , of which Poland has been an important member almost from the outset .
Thus the initiative , from being four-sided , became hexagonal simply because Poland was involved .
Finally the political dialogue between the European Union and the European Economic Area - Norway , Iceland and Liechtenstein - involves countries which are more or less in the Baltic area .
A meeting at ministerial level is also being considered to give it greater moment .
To round off this matter , I should like to say that I myself , as representing the presidency , have travelled to the three Baltic republics , to Riga , to Tallinn and to Vilnius , in the past few days to discuss and consider together with the foreign ministers , the Presidents of the Republic and other bodies and organizations in those countries , the results of the Intergovernmental Conference in Turin and above all to show the European Union 's specific interest .
Those were not just formal engagements , however important those may be , and I would remind you that the foreign ministers of those countries had been invited to Turin together with those of the other applicant countries .
We should like to mention the usefulness of engaging in a continuing dialogue with those countries and , if I may add a personal comment , they particularly appreciated that very idea of dialogue : it gives them confidence to know that the presidency is concerned about them , is following their affairs , intends to keep them informed by holding a dialogue not just a one-sided affair , but allowing them to make proposals and suggestions which may be useful for the work of the Union as a whole .
In conclusion , I have taken note of everything that has been said , in particular regarding energy networks , and of what has been stressed in greater detail by Mr Olssen , Mrs Hautala and Mr Burenstam .
The interest expressed by the Members present here who are particularly close to the Baltic region , in particular those of Sweden and Denmark , show that the region is not forgotten by the Union .
That interest has been taken over by the Union as a whole and by the presidency in particular in so far as the Baltic region is an essential part of Europe , that is , of a Community stretching from the Mediterranean to the far north , and which finds the region of the Baltic a matter of particular interest in the runup to enlargement , which we hope will not be too long delayed , and may include all the countries of the Baltic region , that is , the three Baltic Republics and Poland , in our European Union .
Mr President , the Council of the Baltic Sea States , which the Commission regards as a unique forum , comprises four EU Member States , four associated countries , the Russian Federation , Norway and Iceland , as has already been mentioned this evening , and what is fairly unique in the view of the Commission is that the Commission is a full member of this Council in its own right .
Cooperation in the regions is developing speedily and the Commission feels that it has a contribution to make there , and is so doing .
To promote the objectives of the Baltic states the presidency , currently Sweden , has invited the prime ministers to an extraordinary summit in Visby .
The aim of this meeting , as we understand it , Mr President , is to have an optimal direct dialogue between prime ministers , to promote mutual understanding and define mutual objectives .
The conclusion of the summit should see an affirmation of objectives , namely the promotion of stability , well being and solidarity in the region , the presentation of an agenda for coordinated action for a stable , participative democracy , for economic cooperation , for integration and development and last but certainly not least for cooperation on environmental protection .
At the request of the European Council in Madrid the Commission has produced a document , to which President Ferraris has already referred , called ' Initiative for the Baltic Sea Region ' and this will be presented in Visby .
This document is based on an earlier Commission communication dated October 1994 called ' Guidelines for the Union 's approach to the Baltic region ' and on an earlier communication , ' Situation and prospects for cooperation in the Baltic ' , which the Commission presented in December 1995 at the European Summit in Madrid .
These documents give an overview of the region 's potential , of cooperation activities and of the financial instruments .
The Commission 's initiative on the Baltic Sea contains proposals for coordinated action in a number of priority areas , including first of all strengthening democracy and political stability , secondly stimulating the economy with emphasis on infrastructure , energy , nuclear safety and the environment , and thirdly development of regional cooperation including trans-border cooperation and simplifying border traffic .
The initiative was presented using the existing financial funds , which are , as far as the Commission is concerned , the PHARE programme , the TACIS programme ad the INTERREG programme .
It is also expected that the international financial institutions , including the European Investment Bank , will also grant aid .
Additional financing is therefore not required in our view .
The Commission is convinced that working towards common objectives and implementing coordinated measures will contribute to the desirable stability , prosperity and democratic content of the Baltic Sea region .
Mr President , I hope that the summit which begins on 3 May in Visby on the island of Gotland on the initiative of the Swedish government will mark the start of strong and increasingly comprehensive cooperation around the Baltic Sea .
The Baltic region is a region with many opportunities and great potential as regards natural resources , production and trade , with a total population of around 60 million .
The Baltic region is also a region of considerable importance as regards security policy ; it could play an important role in establishing good relations and closer cooperation between the European Union , the former Soviet states and Russia .
Nevertheless , common initiatives and efforts are required from both the Baltic States themselves and from the European Union if democratic and economic development in the region is to be fostered .
It is through practical proposals and the creation and strengthening of different forms of cooperation between peoples and at local , regional and intergovernmental levels to deal with common challenges that we can best lay the foundations for stable and peaceful development .
This is also the strategy adopted by the Council of Baltic Sea States for the summit , where the most important points which will be discussed are precisely cooperation on the environment , economic cooperation and cooperation at the level of the people , that is to say between one people and another .
A strategy of this kind is in accordance with the new , expanded concept of security which we must all accept .
An active and effective security policy must above all seek to counter the threats which have their origins in social , economic and ecological problems .
Military alliances and investment in military resources can never be the prime method of ensuring security and safety .
The countries which are not yet members of the EU should even now be involved in the work taking place in the social dimension , in the development of a common employment strategy and in the EU 's environmental policy work .
I therefore urge the Commission to submit practical proposals at the summit on these areas and thereby help make the outcome of the meeting as substantive as possible .
Finally , it is important to stress that we should not regard this Baltic Sea initiative as competing with the Mediterranean programme .
There is no conflict between these two areas of regional cooperation in Europe .
Both are equally important for the achievement of harmonious and peaceful development in Europe .
Mr President , at the beginning of May the heirs to the Hanseatic League will be holding a summit meeting in Visby at which the discussion will include promoting the development of the area 's economy .
For this meeting the Commission has drawn up its cooperation initiative for the Baltic Sea area , through which it will attempt to support the area 's development in a wide variety of ways .
In the field of economic cooperation the measures the Commission is prepared to support through the Phare programme include a free trade area comprising Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania and the foundation of a customs union by 1998 .
By means of the same programme the Commission undertakes to promote the achievement of free trade in the framework of the Central European Free Trade Agreement between the Baltic states and Poland .
Preparations for Poland 's membership of the OECD , the three Baltic countries ' membership of the WTO and Special Economic Zone status for the Kaliningrad region will also promote trade and investment in the area in a positive way .
The Commission quite rightly draws attention to the important role of small and medium-sized undertakings in promoting trade cooperation .
In order to improve their trading conditions the Commission is cooperating with the international financial institutions with a view , inter alia , to founding a Baltic business council .
Regarding energy cooperation the Commission notes that the proposed gas pipeline from Russia to Germany through Belarus and Poland , and the proposed oil pipeline from Russia to Finland must be the prime objectives .
The Commission also considers it important to link the Union 's electricity and gas networks to the corresponding networks in the associated countries , such as the Baltic electricity network .
These priorities are excellent , but it is surprising that the project list does not make any mention of the Nordic countries ' gas network linking the Russian and Norwegian gas resources .
This gas network permits a good level of security of supply which will benefit not only the Baltic region but the whole of Europe .
It is to be hoped that the Visby summit will extend the gas network list in this sense .
Mr President , I should like to put forward two points which I think are important .
First of all the Council and Commission must remember that the Barents sea area is a vital part of the Baltic region .
The Barents Euro-Arctic Council must be given an equal position with the Council of Baltic States .
The Union must also participate more actively than hitherto in the development of the Barents sea area .
Secondly , if the plans to deepen and enlarge the EU are achieved , this will give rise to a damaging two-way split in the Baltic region in which Russia will become isolated .
According to current plans the EU is developing into a tight economic , political and even military union from which only Russia will be excluded .
There is thus a serious contradiction between the Union 's declared and de facto objectives .
The aim of the Union is to prevent Europe from being divided in two again , but its own plans for deepening and expanding are leading towards a twoway split whose negative effects will be felt especially strongly in the Baltic region .
To ensure the favourable development of the Baltic region it is necessary to create pan-European cooperation in which Russia too has an equal part .
In principle this could be done either by accepting Russia too as an EU Member State or by turning the Council of Europe into a strong pan-European cooperation umbrella .
Both alternatives would mean in practice that Europe would be made up of several cooperation areas which each state would contribute to unifying under its own conditions and at its own speed .
I hope that we can promote a realistic discussion about the future of Europe as a whole on the basis of these alternatives .
Finally , when we speak of the development of the Baltic region , we must remember that this is a part of the EU 's wider northern policy which also includes the Arctic regions .
The Union is already involved in the work of the Barents EuroArctic Council .
Three Member States , Denmark , Sweden and Finland will be joining this Arctic Council scheduled to be set up in June .
This being so , the Union too must start developing its own arctic regions policy , including objectives relating to the exploitation of the natural resources of these areas and also the Union 's responsibility to protect the sensitive environment of these regions and take account of the privileges and rights of indigenous peoples .
Mr President , the Visby Summit is a welcome initiative of vital concern to the future development of the Baltic Sea region , discussing as it will security , crime , the environment and EU enlargement .
The summit is also important because it brings together members of the Council of Baltic Sea States and two of the three leading institutions of the EU : the Council and the Commission .
It is regrettable that given the importance of the summit there is not some representation from the European Parliament .
Four members of the Council of Baltic Sea States are EU Members already , while four are applying for membership : Estonia , Latvia , Lithuania and Poland .
The EU has a partnership and cooperation agreement with Russia .
The EU has a direct interest in the matters under discussion at Visby .
The EU is already playing a key role in encouraging better regional cooperation between the Baltic Sea states .
The EU is committed to countering pollution in the Baltic Sea and ensuring the safety of nuclear plants and installations .
Through TACIS , PHARE and INTERREG the EU is assisting the economic and political reform process in the former Soviet bloc .
The EU 's Europe and partnership agreements are designed to encourage this further with due respect to the human rights and rights of minorities wherever they live .
Controlling the growth of crime and the Mafia will be vital as the EU expands .
However , the EU should be careful that it does not stimulate unrealistic expectations amongst the Baltic Sea states .
EU entry for Poland and the Baltic states will not happen overnight .
The EU and the applicant states have much to prepare before enlargement can take place .
Obvious examples are the reform of the CAP and structural funds and reform of the EU 's decision-making structures .
Economically , legally and socially , Poland , and especially the Baltic States still have much ground to make up .
Further work needs to be done to guarantee the rights of Russian-speaking minorities in Estonia and Latvia .
Realism is necessary today to prevent bitter disappointment and disillusionment tomorrow .
When it comes to security we should make it clear that the extension of NATO to all potential future members of the EU is not desirable or feasible .
Other security mechanisms must be found : for example , the reformed WEU and a revitalized OSCE .
Security cooperation with Russia , through NATO , also requires further work .
I hope that the summit at Visby will take place in a spirit of positive , but realistic cooperation .
I should like to mention by way of a rider that I feel that the House has been treated somewhat with contempt today because this Baltic debate has been put back by four hours .
We had been expecting a statement from Commissioner Fischler at 5 p.m. , 9 p.m. , and now 10 p.m.
I do not think this is the proper way for Parliament to be run .

Furthermore , I think it is treating the Members of this House and the millions of people that they collectively represent with contempt .
I hope it will not reoccur .
Mr President , the major change in Europe over the past few years has significantly affected the position of the states in the Baltic sea area .
Finland and Sweden have joined the European Union following the breakdown of Europe 's ideological and military division .
The Baltic countries and Poland , having regained their independence , have concluded association agreements with the EU with a view to membership .
Russia is seeking its way towards democracy and the market economy .
A cooperation and partnership agreement has been negotiated between the EU and Russia which should hopefully enter into force this year .
It is important that all the regions in the Baltic area should take part in the Visby Summit and that the European Union should have a strong presence there .
Hopefully the meeting will mark the beginning of cooperation founded on the participation , equality and mutual respect of all parties .
The main objective of the Visby conference will naturally enough be strengthening democratic and economic development in the area .
Similarly the meeting is expected to send a positive message about EU enlargement .
It is also essential to give further impetus to concrete projects on the environment , transport and energy networks .
On behalf of the Finnish Social Democrats , I should like to place particular stress on the importance of implementing and reconciling the TACIS , PHARE and INTERREG programmes so that the region will benefit from them in practice .
We also support the inclusion on the list of Europe-wide gas networks the one linking Russia 's and Norway 's gas resources .
Attention has quite rightly been drawn in this house to the necessity of creating a programme for the European Union aimed at balanced and sustainable development in the Baltic region , which will strengthen joint economic and political activity in the area .
In the Baltic region there is a need for cooperation based on respect for the independence of all the countries in the areas .
At the same time emphasis must be placed on the protection of the rule of law and minority rights in the states of the region .
The Baltic countries and Poland have expressed their wish to join not only the European Union but also the European security systems .
It needs to be stated plainly that the legitimate security interests of these countries must be taken seriously .
The Baltic states must not be left in the lurch .
At the same time , security solutions must be such as to increase the stability of the whole Baltic region .
Mr President , the speeches of honourable Members in the last round have raised one or two points on which I should like to make a few remarks .
Mrs Theorin and Mrs Iivari in particular spoke of security and also of security organizations with regard to the Baltic .
I should like to point out that the four Baltic countries are associate partners of Western European Union and take part regularly as observers in various sittings of the WEU Council .
I can also say that at the time the association of these countries with the WEU was an Italian initiative .
It was during the Italian presidency of the WEU two or three years ago if I am not mistaken that that initiative was taken and their participation has been standard , active and effective .
I think that should be remembered .
Then I would mention that Poland , Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania , four Baltic countries which are not members of other European organizations , send observers to the WEU Parliamentary Assembly .
Strangely enough , the President of the Parliamentary Assembly of the WEU , Sir Dudley Smith , is in Rome today and will in fact be holding discussions .
Finally I should like to mention that various Baltic countries , apart of course from Germany and Denmark , - that is , Sweden , Finland , Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania - will be taking part in the Ministerial Council of the WEU in Birmingham in May .
Another point : Mr Väyrinen referred to the Arctic Council and the Barents Sea .
The idea in fact will have to be given some consideration in the future too , in relation also to the application of the law of the sea .
Mr Väyrinen and Mrs Iivari have also spoken of minorities , a matter which we discussed this afternoon in reply to a question from Mr Ebner .
We may therefore refer to what was said particularly as regards the European countries which are Members of the Union .
Here I should like to mention , in case it may be of interest , both the Council of Europe Convention on protection of minorities and the Central European initiative INCE in this same connection .
I mention all this in order to stress how , apart from the European Union as such , other European organizations have a particular interest as regards the Baltic countries , an interest which finds expression either in the field of security , the law of the sea or minorities , that is , in all the spheres touched on , I think , by honourable Members in their speeches .
I have received six motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at noon tomorrow .
Commission statement on BSE
The next item is the statement by the Commission on BSE , including the financial aspects .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on 27 March , in other words about three weeks ago , I took the opportunity of addressing Parliament on the subject of the background to the emergency decision which was adopted by the Commission on that day .
Since then , some three weeks have passed , and today I should like to bring the House up to date on a number of important events which have taken place , and make some comments for the future .
However , let me first of all say a few words of explanation concerning the remarks I made at the weekend about British beef .
The Commission has never said that British beef is unsafe .
The first doubts over the safety of British beef arose as a result of the statement made by the British Government in the British House of Commons .
Because of this , and because of the furore to which it led and the increasing disquiet in the Member States , the Commission felt obliged to take a number of steps , including the imposition of a temporary export ban .
This was based on Article 43 of the EC Treaty , which the Court of Justice has interpreted as extending to health issues , where these are connected with agriculture .
When a journalist visited me at the weekend and asked me if I would eat British beef , I replied that if I were visiting the United Kingdom , I would personally make no fuss about it .
And I cannot see any reason why I should behave differently from a British farmer , for example , or a British worker .
So I entirely fail to understand why I should be criticized on precisely these grounds by the British National Farmers ' Union - unless perhaps it is part of some strategy for restoring consumer confidence ?
And in any event , my comments make no difference whatever to the fact that the Commission was entirely within its rights in deciding to prohibit for the time being all exports of British beef and beef products .
Our intention was , and still is , to eliminate any possible risk for the consumer .
But let us return to my starting-point .
Since the suspicion that BSE might be transmitted to humans became known , the Veterinary Standing Committee of the European Union has examined all the available data relating to the new cases of Creutzfeldt-Jacob disease and the measures currently in force for the control of BSE in the United Kingdom .
The committee took the view that these measures were important , in that they reduced the risk of coming into contact with the infective agent which causes BSE .
However , it added that this threat should be further reduced by removing from the food chain all those animals which had had any probable contact with the agent .
As a result of this , as the House will be aware , a special meeting of the Council was held in Luxembourg from 1 to 3 April on the subject of BSE , at which the ministers came to the following conclusions : firstly , cattle in the United Kingdom which are over 30 months old at the time of slaughter must not be permitted to enter the food chain .
Secondly , specified bovine offal from United Kingdom sources , referred to as SBOs , must also be prevented from entering the food chain , whether for human or animal consumption .
Thirdly , the Commission will shortly adopt a decision requiring all offal from mammals to be treated using processes which ensure that the organisms causing scrapie and BSE are demonstrably rendered inactive .
Fourthly , the United Kingdom is to submit to the Commission by 30 April a specific proposal for the selective slaughtering of animals or herds which have probably come into contact with infected flesh or bone meal and which , from this point of view , represent groups which are at special risk .
Fifthly , the veterinary services in the United Kingdom will step up their inspections to ensure that controls on the identification and destruction of cattle are in fact being scrupulously carried out .
Within the next few weeks , the Commission will send an inspection team to the United Kingdom , including experts from the other Member States .
This team will have the task of checking on the implementation of the measures which have already been adopted .
On 9 April , the Veterinary Standing Committee again reviewed the whole body of scientific knowledge on rendering the infective agent inactive in the course of tallow and gelatine production .
On the basis of the data currently available , the committee identified two processes , one used in the production of gelatine and similar products , and the other in the manufacture of tallow , whereby products could be manufactured for use in foodstuffs , medicines and cosmetics without any danger to health .
On 2 and 3 April , prior to these discussions , the World Health Organization held a hearing of experts on public health issues connected with communicable spongiform encephalopathies in humans and animals .
Besides issuing a number of other recommendations , the WHO experts took the view that gelatine and tallow are quite safe , provided certain processing methods are applied .
All the WHO recommendations are due to be discussed again next week , in full and in detail , by the Veterinary Standing Committee , which will examine the WHO recommendations and decide what conclusions should be drawn from them in terms of Community measures .
I can also inform the House that on 15 April , the Standing Committee on Foodstuffs , chaired by my colleague Mr Bangemann , dealt with the issue of the use of gelatine and similar products .
The committee came to the following conclusion , and I quote : ' At the present time , the committee has no option but to recommend that bovine material for use in manufacturing these products should originate only in areas in which BSE is not epidemic . '
In addition , the Scientific Committee of the European Medicines Evaluation Agency met in London on 15 and 16 April .
The committee made it clear in its recommendations that in the manufacture of gelatine for medicinal purposes , raw materials should be used that were not of British origin .
As regards the use of tallow and other substances made from cattle , it was established that in the pharmaceutical sector , special manufacturing processes are applied which ensure that the agent causing BSE is rendered inactive .
However , we are not only concerned with health and veterinary measures ; as you know , we also have a tremendous marketing problem to solve .
Since the BSE crisis came to a head , the marketing of beef products throughout the Community has become a very serious problem .
On the other hand , average prices - except in Britain and Ireland - have not collapsed dramatically because farmers , for the moment , are only bringing small numbers of cattle to market , in the hope of seeing the situation stabilize in the near future .
But there is only one way to bring about this stabilization of the market , which all of us are striving for and wish to see .
Consumers are rightly demanding assurances that the meat they are eating is absolutely safe and will not harm their health .
Stabilization of the market cannot be achieved simply by intervention buying , because what we put into store today we shall have to sell again tomorrow .
Nor is stepping up exports a way to solve this problem in itself , because if European consumers have no confidence in our beef , we can hardly expect to find such confidence among buyers in third world countries .
On this basis , stabilization of the market cannot realistically be achieved unless we can offer our consumers , without hesitation , further guarantees as to the safety of our beef .
A first action of this kind is the measure co-financed by the EU to buy in British cattle aged over 30 months , ensuring that they do not subsequently find their way back into the food chain for human or animal consumption .
This plan was in fact agreed by the Management Committee last week , and is to be adopted by the Commission by written procedure in the course of this week .
Under a second plan , Belgium , France and the Netherlands will be given help to enable them to remove from the market any calves of British origin which were imported for fattening prior to the issuing of the ban on exports .
Apart from these measures , which are intended to help restore consumer confidence , the Commission is also supporting farmers in the other Member States .
Further to the special Council meeting in Luxembourg , it was decided by the Management Committee to bring forward the opening of intervention and at the same time to increase carcass weights .
Last week , the Commission put before the Management Committee a proposal for a procedure without weight limits and covering additional quality grades .
Apart from further scientific discussion and the forthcoming inspection arranged by the Commission in the United Kingdom , the Member States called on the United Kingdom at the last Council meeting to put forward a programme of selective slaughter designed to bring about a swift and substantial fall in the number of BSE cases in the United Kingdom .
I know that the United Kingdom Government has been discussing this matter intensively in the past few days .
The Agriculture Minister , Mr Hogg , speaking yesterday in the House of Commons , emphatically denied that any such programme would have to involve hundreds of thousands of animals .
Rather , those animals which present the greatest risk of infection should be identified systematically ; destroying them would ensure a significant reduction in the incidence of new cases of BSE .
We are now expecting to receive specific proposals from the British Government at any time .
My assessment of these proposals will be based on the extent to which they improve the protection of public health and are likely to help restore consumer confidence in the EU as a whole .
In accordance with the conclusions of the special Council meeting on BSE , the Commission will keep the Council and the European Parliament regularly informed on the question of BSE .
I am now providing Parliament with the first of our reports on this matter , and will submit a full report to the Council at its meeting on 29 and 30 April .
I cannot give a comprehensive answer today to the question of what financial resources would be needed for a so-called BSE crisis package , since there are still many unknown factors in our calculations .
For one thing , the specific proposals which , as I mentioned earlier , we are awaiting from the British authorities have still not yet come to hand , and consequently the cost of these cannot be worked out for the moment .
Moreover , no one can predict how the European beef markets will develop over the next few weeks and months , or the resources we shall need to have available .
We can , however , make estimates for the following measures . Firstly , the removal from the food chain of animals over 30 months old .
We are assuming that in 1996 , 400 000 cattle will be covered by this scheme , and 800 000 in 1997 .
At a price of ECU 392 per head , the Community budget will have to face expenditure in the region of ECU 160 million in 1996 and ECU 320 m in 1997 .
These figures are based on a Community contribution of 70 % .
The costs of the disposal of carcasses must be borne by the United Kingdom alone .
Secondly , the programme on calves will cost - and this figure applies only to 1996 - in the region of ECU 50 m .
And thirdly , for intervention , it is reasonable to assume that if we are looking at a figure of 50 000 tonnes in April , that will imply overall costs of some ECU 100 m .
In this context , perhaps I could say a few words on the revision of the financial perspective .
On the basis of the present data , the Commission takes the view that our proposal remains justified in its approach .
However , we must concede that as a result of the BSE crisis , our anticipated margin for 1997 has been significantly reduced .
Finally , I should like to report briefly on the discussions which I had last week with Professor Weissmann of Switzerland and Professor Collins of the United Kingdom .
I have invited Professor Weissmann to chair an advisory group of scientific experts , whose members are specialists in BSE and Creutzfeldt-Jacob disease .
This advisory group will keep us up to date on the state of research and on future research requirements .
I understand that Professor Weissmann and his working group will be able to provide us with appropriate recommendations in the autumn .
In conclusion , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to take the opportunity of asking Members most sincerely to join the Commission in seeking to avoid any further inflammation of public anxiety by its comments or actions , thereby further aggravating the problems associated with BSE .
Commissioner , I think that in the financial estimates promotion of meat consumption must be discussed .
It seems to me not only a British but a European problem .
Is it known that the DG VI services are thinking about the preliminary draft budget for 1997 with spending cuts on the promotion of agricultural products on the European internal market and international markets , and if not do you think that in the light of this situation that estimate must be revised ?
Mr President , I am glad to be able to answer that .
It is quite true that the Commission intends to help stimulate the beef market .
We are working on the principle that the only sensible way in which to proceed is to translate any such programme into action in cooperation with the Member States , and we have a budget appropriation for the purpose which we can use .
Finally , we believe that we must choose the right moment for starting such action very carefully , because if we were to choose the wrong time , whatever we do might well be counter-productive .
Thank you , Commissioner , for being here tonight because I know you have had a very hard day and you have met many groups in Parliament .
I hope you have had a good dinner .
It is important we recognize this as a European problem .
The Dutch have entered into a slaughtering system for which , I understand , there is going to be Community money available .
The UK is proposing a slaughter policy which will require some European money .
Is it your intention as Commissioner to develop a European policy to eliminate BSE throughout the Community ?
Because we should all recognize that there are other countries in the Community that have BSE and for some countries there is no apparent reason for this BSE .
I am thinking particularly of a country in the south of Europe which has had over 30 cases which are completely unconnected to the British problem .
I hope , therefore , that you can clarify that position .
You might also say something about pharmaceutical products , because of the provisions which allow pharmaceutical products to continue to be traded within the European Community that contain gelatine .
Mr President , I shall be glad to take your admonitions seriously and keep my remarks as brief as possible .
Firstly , as regards calves , it is true that in the Netherlands at the present time , calves are being slaughtered which originated in the United Kingdom .
However , I would point out that this measure does not represent a health requirement , but is one initiated by the Netherlands .
In view of the marketing problems involved , however , the Council has decided to give these measures some support as well .
As regards your question about the eradication of this disease in itself , I am sure we are all of one mind that it is in our common interest to have the disease eradicated as soon as possible .
But we cannot pretend that the answer is simply a matter of saying that the more animals we have slaughtered , the better .
We must also look at the targeting and effectiveness of our measures , and that is why it is now critical that we receive an appropriate proposal from the United Kingdom .
As for the measures taken in other Member States , the herds in which cases of BSE have appeared have so far been slaughtered as far as possible .
There have only been a few cases , and the Commission is also ready to discuss the cases which are still pending or to help with slaughter in those cases too .
As regards the further spread of this disease , I may have misunderstood the question .
At any rate , there is no evidence that the disease has spread into 30 countries .
Mr President , I thank you for calling the Member who represents both Aberdeen and Angus !
We are very hoping that the ban on UK beef can be lifted globally and we are all united on that .
However , if this proves not to be immediately possible , could the Commissioner confirm that there is no rooted objection in principle to the application of a regional or zoning approach , in particular as regards Scotland and Northern Ireland , given that they have a separate administration , a lower incidence of BSE and a much better control policy ?
Would the Commission therefore give serious consideration to any such programme were this to be brought forward from the UK for Scotland and Northern Ireland ?
If such a scheme were brought forward , what conditions would have to be met ?
For example , there is talk of cow passports .
Are we talking about extending the quality assurance to give it official approval so that we have in effect cow passports with visas to make sure that they can be safely exported ?
We had an opportunity of discussing this matter together this afternoon , Mr Macartney , and as I told you then , the first thing to be done is to ensure that the controls are operating effectively throughout the United Kingdom .
This means having checks on how the system is operating , on registration and the measures introduced in all parts of the United Kingdom , including of course Scotland , Northern Ireland and the various regions of England itself .
Over and above this , a question of differentiation or regionalization is emerging , on the basis of comparisons with previous control measures .
But I am sure you must realize that the regional approach that was adopted to cope with swine fever and foot-and-mouth disease in Italy , for example , or in the case of other comparable diseases , must be viewed quite differently from this present problem .
The crucial point will always be the adequacy of controls .
That is why the British Government has announced that proposals are also to be submitted in this respect .
In the first place , however , it is up to the British Government to put forward proposals of this kind , and as soon as such proposals are available , the Commission will of course assess them .
As regards a system of registration , or the sort of cow passport that you mentioned , the inspection team which is going to the United Kingdom next week has been asked to look at the registration system which is in force there , and will if necessary report on whether any further measures are needed in this field .
Commissioner , you said that confidence among consumers must be created through measures to guarantee health .
Do you think that a sweeping statement that British beef is safe represents that kind of measure ?
Do you think that if all of us sitting here tonight were to say that British beef is safe , that would be a confidence-building measure and anyone would believe us ? Or might we not be making ourselves look ridiculous ?
My second question is this : if , as you say , you cannot stabilize the market in terms of quantity , then why are you withdrawing 50 000 tonnes just when the debate is at its height ?
Whether it is actually safe or not , that meat is going to be forever tainted .
My third point is that you referred to selection or culling .
I would agree that even in Britain , not all the animals are sick , and not all their meat is bad .
Will the Commission put any effort into this aspect of the problem , and has Professor Weissmann made any proposals for tests to be carried out on live or slaughtered animals ?
There is a heated debate on this question at present .
Could not the Commission make some contribution here ?
Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , in reply to your comments about market measures , I said that intervention in itself could never solve the problem .
But that does not mean that the statement can be turned on its head and taken to mean that we should - or could - abandon intervention altogether .
There is one thing you must not forget , and that is that each of these cattle now standing in the cowsheds of Europe is growing one kilogram heavier every day , which means that they are becoming harder to market every day as well . Remember too that the quality of the meat does not improve with prolonged fattening .
All these factors , in my view , justify us taking action now .
If we wait until the market has totally collapsed , that will not do anyone any good .
With regard to tests on live animals , Professor Weissmann has told me that at present , there is no reliable procedure for carrying out tests of this kind .
He also pointed out that it will be no easy matter to develop such a test , for the simple reason that the biochemical mechanism of the prions is known to be constructed so as to prevent the body 's immune system from reacting to them .
This means that entirely new designs for testing procedures must be developed - assuming , that is , that such a thing is possible at all .
Mr President , following on the Commissioner 's earlier remarks , you are very welcome to visit Ireland where our beef is grass-fed as you know .
This is environmentally friendly , safe food of very high quality .
But you know we are currently suffering because of the controversy .
You gave some assurances earlier today at some meetings and perhaps you would clarify for all of us what exactly you said .
My substantive question is : I would like to know - in the present crisis and on a temporary basis - would you be prepared with regard to intervention , to consider raising carcass weights and price ?
If I may briefly recapitulate what I said earlier in my statement , we have already announced , for the 50 000 tonnes , an increase in carcass weights from 340 to 380 kilograms , and for the remaining quantity the weight limit has been removed entirely - in other words , there is at present no carcass weight limit here at all .
In addition , to match the higher weights involved , we have adjusted the quality classes eligible for intervention ; we cannot use intervention for all qualities , since we have no interest in holding only meat in intervention which no one else wishes to buy .
Mr President , BSE first came to light ten years ago , but it was the statement by the British Government just a few weeks ago that the disease could be transmitted to humans which sparked off a general panic , made worse by the fact that there is no concrete scientific evidence .
We needed this warning , however , in order to be made aware of the dangers connected with this disease .
I should like to ask the Commissioner whether he thinks that a European health observatory which , together with Parliament , I have been advocating for some time now , could have monitored BSE , or indeed other diseases of which we are not yet aware , and kept the public informed , thereby avoiding these obsessive fears as to the possible long-term economic and financial consequences .
As chairman of the French National Food Council , I should like to commend the measures taken by our minister to reassure both consumers and the breeders of unaffected livestock .
Mr Cabrol , in reply to your question as to whether a health observatory should be set up , I would say that this would make no difference at all to the situation we are faced with regarding BSE .
We simply have to live with the fact - and this is a problem and a responsibility that no one in Europe or the whole world can lift from our shoulders - that unfortunately we still have at our disposal very little scientific knowledge on BSE or the extent to which it can be transmitted to humans , and so on .
At the same time , this means that there are a number of things which unfortunately cannot be ruled out , and it is precisely this factor which is causing us so much concern at present . This is the difficulty which , in my view , we have to come to grips with as responsible politicians .
Mr President , I am grateful to the Commissioner for his reminder that the UK government has not yet put any proposals on the table .
But does the Commissioner recognize that the problem in the United Kingdom and the public reaction to what is happening on the continent is such that it threatens to spill over into wider areas of policy and to sour the whole spectrum of relations between London and Brussels ?
How does he intend to tackle this ?
Would he consider , as a way of moving things forward , a partial lifting of the ban , perhaps by lifting the ban on thoroughbred animals , those which we can prove have been fed organically , raised organically and have no history of BSE , such as the Dexter herd , as a way of seeking a compromise and starting to move the debate forward ?
As I have already explained , all these considerations and proposals must be based on comprehensible control mechanisms .
This is an essential precondition , because otherwise we shall never gain the confidence which has been mentioned .
However , I also feel that our initial efforts must above all build on those measures which have already been introduced .
I do not think it has really been made sufficiently clear to public opinion what enormous changes have been made in our procedures in the course of these last few weeks .
You should not forget that animals aged over 30 months are now excluded from the food chain both for human and animal consumption .
Equally , it must be remembered that the parts known as SBOs are now being removed from younger animals as well , and carefully disposed of .
These are major changes geared to public safety and confidence , and they should be put across much more strongly , because of the far-reaching effect they will have .
It seems to me that one cannot rely on the idea of each of us saying in turn : ' But my cattle are not infected . They have never been in contact . '
That would just be making things too easy for ourselves .
We must try to bring about an overall solution to the problem .
Mr President , I think - and this also emerged from what the Commissioner said - that we are operating in an area of scientific uncertainty and many questions .
Many times , the Commissioner used the words : probably , gelatine for the time being , and other suchlike .
From that point of view I fear that the mistake made by the British government during the past decade may be being repeated .
I would like to ask the Commissioner : for example , today , the expedient of slaughter is to be used as a protective measure .
But on the basis of the scientific information available to the Commission , is it certain that BSE is not transmitted via the soil or via slaughter-houses ?
Might it not be important and positive , besides the information we have from the Commissioner responsible for agricultural policy , to obtain information as well from the Commissioners responsible for public health and for research ?
One thing has become clear from scientific research , and that is that the suspect tissues which are at the root of the BSE problem are firstly the brain , secondly the spinal cord , and after that a number of very specific internal organs or offal .
This is where the real problem lies , and if you read the research findings , you will see what differences exist , and what concentrations of prions are encountered in these various tissues , when infection by the disease is clinically diagnosed in an animal .
Consequently , the deciding factor is this : can one or can one not eradicate these doubtful tissues or parts in every case ?
That is one of the crucial points .
As regards the mechanism for the disease spreading via the floor , I must confess that I really cannot imagine how that is going to happen in practice .
You cannot have any scientific evidence for this , and the point is best dealt with as follows : when it comes to slaughter hygiene regulations , we in the European Union have - and we should make this clear for once - the strictest regulations in the world .
We should not forget that , when it comes to the general point at issue .
In view of the lack of time , I shall simply ask two questions .
Do you not agree , Commissioner , that in the long run , it would be wiser to abandon intervention in the case of British beef ?
What I personally fear is that if this meat comes back on the market in the future , there will again be difficulties .
And there is another problem : the at-risk imported cattle which have gone to other countries should now also be looked at closely .
Will there be slaughtering programmes here too ?
I am sure you cannot read all the many press reports , even those in Germany .
But when we read in one of the leading German newspapers : ' Fischler says there are no medical reasons , only political ones ' , then in my view that does not help any of us .
Mr President , I have to say that I do not share the view that intervention should be abandoned for British beef , or that this would be possible .
Secondly , as far as British animals which have been exported to other countries are concerned , I have already said that here - with regard to cattle which could have developed problems or might develop them in future - we are of course working on eliminating this element of uncertainty .
As for the reports in the media , it often happens , unfortunately , that a number of journalists simply copy from one another , and in the process two things are frequently entangled .
The first is that there is of course a clear basis in law for the Commission 's decisions , and this forms what might be called the judicial background to this decision .
The second thing is , however - and this is where the end and the means have sometimes been confused - that logically , the measures we have taken not only serve the interests of public health , in other words eliminating uncertainty , but are also intended to help restore consumer confidence and control the upheavals on the beef markets .
Commissioner , I shall be very brief in order to allow my other colleagues time to speak .
I should like to know if you intend to bring proceedings before the Court of Justice against the companies which manufactured these products , so that those responsible have to bear the costs , rather than consumers .
Secondly , I should also like to know if you intend to provide any specific compensation for producers from other Community countries , and for all those downstream sectors which have suffered as a result of a drop in consumption .
Proceedings are only brought before the Court of Justice by the Commission when clear breaches of EU laws have taken place .
As regards help for farmers affected outside the United Kingdom , I have already pointed out , firstly , that we have provided help through intervention ; secondly , that we have offered special aid for calves imported from the United Kingdom in Belgium , France and the Netherlands ; thirdly , that we are prepared to support any conversion that is required in various carcass rendering plants to produce safe animal meal , so that this process can be completed on schedule by the end of the year .
Finally , it is expected - as I said at the beginning - that we shall adopt a variety of market measures to stimulate the purchase and consumption of beef once again .
Mr President , I understood at the beginning of this debate that you were going to take it as a free debate , that you would see people raise their hands and call them as you saw them .
I understand , though , that you have a list from some groups that you are using as an orientation for your choice .
I think that is not playing by the rules .
I am following the rules , except that Members all raised their hands at the same time .
What would you have done ?
Mr President , we are all concerned on this side of the House about the magnitude of the crisis .
Let me be clear .
We want this ban to end .
My question is a simple and straightforward one : can the Commissioner indicate to us why he believes it is taking so long for the British Government to get its act together and submit proposals which would allow the ban to be lifted ?
I can only say that the British Government and the British Minister for Agriculture have announced that they are now in a position to put a proposal on the table , as regards the additional slaughter programme , by the end of this month at the latest .
I received a telephone call yesterday from the British Agriculture Minister during which he informed me that he intended to come to Brussels next Tuesday and would present his proposals then .
Commissioner , the damage has been done .
But the fault lies with the companies - for the most part international companies - which produced the contaminated feed .
Everywhere , the law says that the guilty party should pay compensation . My question is therefore simple .
Are you willing to tell us the names , first of all , of those companies which have produced contaminated feed ; secondly , of the companies responsible for importing 42 000 tonnes of contaminated feed into France ; and , thirdly , of the international companies , such as Unilever and Unigate , which at the end of the 1980s and in the early 1990s hived off their animal feed producing divisions ?
All I am asking for is three lists of names .
Under Articles 129 and 129a of the Treaty on European Union , you are obliged to make such information freely available to all European citizens .
As regards the manufacturing of animal feeds , there are several provisions which have been adopted over the years .
But if the users of these feeds fail to use them properly , they can hardly have the producers prosecuted for that , since feeding them to ruminants has been unequivocally prohibited for several years now .
All the same , we have to take it that this ban is not always obeyed .
For several years , there has been a total ban on feeding ruminants meal which is itself derived from ruminants .
I have already indicated that this ban is unfortunately not always obeyed , but to bring the producer before the courts for that reason seems impossible to me , in legal terms .
The special Council meeting has now decided on three additional safety measures . Firstly , this ban must be made clear , and it must be made clear once and for all that feeding animal meal to herbivores remains prohibited .
Secondly , a further safety measure is to be introduced for all meat and bone meal production , to ensure that such feed can only be produced in plants where the processes used are declared by the experts to be free of any problems .
Thirdly , the way in which the contents are listed must be changed , so that the wording on the outside of the feed container makes it quite clear , in large letters , what the feed may and may not be used for .
We are taking it for granted that everyone can read .
Mr President , Commissioner , I think that we must analyse this issue with some realism .
I think that we are on the verge of the biggest revolution in recent decades in terms of changes in what we eat , that consumers have lost all confidence in their countries and producers and that we are not going to solve the problem by killing animals or banning particular foods .
I think we must go much further and much deeper ; we must make a pact of solidarity , a serious pact of confidence with consumers without which we will never solve this problem .
This pact means making alterations to the way in which states work , with active participation by consumers , and we must also set up national laboratories , we must impose new taxes on farms in order to change the system of compensatory amounts , awarding them only to protect public health and animal sanity .
But , for me , the most important thing , Commissioner , in this pact of confidence is winning over consumers and consumer associations .
I challenge the Commissioner to inform us whether , in this great food revolution which is upon us , he is willing to study this pact seriously , together with the active participation of consumers themselves .
Perhaps I can compensate for the length of my statement to some extent by answering what you have just said with a simple and sincere yes .
Mr President , the restoration of consumer confidence in beef is central to this particular issue .
I would like to ask the Commissioner if he will implement an effective promotional campaign in relation to beef and also a factual , credible information campaign for consumers ?
I would also like to acknowledge the fact that he recognizes that we have a special problem in Ireland .
I would ask him to respond in a positive manner to that particular crisis .
We are dependent on exports .
Up to 90 % of our beef is exported .
I think the Commissioner is doing a very good job in what is an extremely difficult situation .
It seems to me that the questions are starting to become somewhat repetitive , Mr Hyland .
I have already provided the information asked for in your first question , and would prefer not to repeat myself .
As regards your second question about the particular situation in Ireland , we know that Ireland depends on exports , that is quite clear .
Ireland is the Member State which is most dependent on beef exports , and I can inform you that we have been making great efforts to restart the exports to third countries from Ireland which have been affected by the various import bans imposed by states in Central Asia and the Near East .
Mr President , as the Commissioner said , there are still many unknown factors surrounding BSE .
I would like to ask the Commissioner if the Commission is willing to release a considerable amount in this budget year for scientific institutes to carry out further research into this disease ?
We shall certainly make a further sum available , Mr Mulder , if it is necessary and wise to do so .
But we are thinking in the first place of making the BSE question a central focus for research , and will give BSE a correspondingly high priority in the allocation of resources to research projects .
Mr President , I thank the Commissioner for his frank and straightforward statement .
Would the Commissioner , because of the problems of certain suckler herds - grass-fed beef which has never , ever been in contact with the food that is tainted - consider a top-up in the beef suckler premium scheme or the suckler cow scheme to actually help them in the future ?
I would like to point out that I have already answered this question too .
Mr President , in view of the Commission 's statement and assurance on 27 March that solidarity would be shown in helping employees most hard-hit by the crisis , does the United Kingdom Government 's statement of 16 April announcing compensation constitute adequate support for those working directly with cattle as well as those working in related food processing sectors ?
Has the Commission been informed by the United Kingdom Government of the destruction and disposal methods it proposes to adopt , and are these considered to be safe enough ?
We have been informed of the statement that was made in the House of Commons yesterday , and the Minister for Agriculture , Mr Hogg , also faxed his statement through to me .
There has been personal contact with the British Government .
The British experts have reported to various committees , including in particular the Standing Veterinary Committee .
As I have already stated , there will be a further meeting with the British Minister next week .
The main purpose of all these meetings is to allow us to discuss together the specific measures and decisions which must now be adopted .
I am closing the discussion on this question here , because forty minutes have gone by rather than thirty .
I am very sorry , but I think that on such an important and sensitive subject we shall have other occasions for everybody to speak .
On a point of order , Mr President , can I ask the Commissioner whether he will be attending a meeting of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development next week where some of us who have detailed knowledge of what is actually happening in our constituencies can put detailed points to him which are really very important ?
Mr President , I should like to take up and look into the suggestion which has been made today that I should also make myself available to the Committee on Agriculture next week .
It may be possible to arrange for us to continue today 's discussion next Tuesday .
I should like to say , in closing the discussion , that all the Groups present in Parliament have raised questions : naturally the biggest Groups have raised the most questions , but almost all countries have been able to express their views .
As everyone asked to speak at the same time , naturally we have not been able to satisfy all requests .
Mr President , I would like to thank you for your own chairmanship of this evening 's sitting , but also to say how lamentable it is that a subject of this importance should have been taken so late at night when neither the press nor the public will ever hear what was said .
I hope you could pass on those remarks to the rest of your colleagues .
We shall try to arrange our work better !
Mr President , on a point of order : I think that this type of debate must be urgently reviewed because we , the Members of the European Parliament , have been treated today like schoolchildren . This cannot be allowed !
Biocidal products
The next item is the report ( A4-0056 / 96 ) by Mrs K. Jensen , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the proposal and amended proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive on the placing of biocidal products on the market ( COM ( 93 ) 0351 - C3-0285 / 93 ) and ( COM ( 95 ) 0387 - C4-0311 / 95-00 / 0465 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , this directive is the missing link in a range of chemical directives .
It is absolutely necessary to be clear about what chemicals are being used in the Union .
It is said that 100 000 different chemicals are on the market .
Only a few have been through an authorization system involving risk assessment , and we see time and again that chemicals can have terrible effects on nature .
Just think of the debate surrounding the declining quality of men 's sperm because chemicals can behave like artificial hormones .
Under the proposal for a directive on biocides , more chemicals will be subject to authorization and that is very positive .
There have been a number of complaints that it will be costly for the manufacturers to have their materials and products approved .
That is true enough .
But it will cost society a lot more in the form of health costs and pollution prevention if we do not achieve better control over the chemicals .
The directive has been a long time coming .
After a long wait the directive is now complete , including Annex 6 .
When Parliament insisted on having Annex 6 on the implementing provisions , it was because it expanded on the principles and because we are talking about a directive of extreme importance to the relevant national authorities .
In addition there is a need for documentation providing technical guidance .
The directive is based on mutual recognition of the products containing biocides , and it may be a problem when not all the Member States have competent authorities within the meaning of the directive .
A weak link in the chain may allow access to the market to easily .
The Environment Committee has therefore opposed automatic market access after 60 days .
It is also important that each national authority has sufficient information before marketing is authorized .
The industry has asked for a longer period for data protection , while the unions in the textile industry , on the other hand , feel that an authorization procedure lasting 10 years is very long .
And it is worth noting that the period for data protection in this proposal for a directive is five years longer than that applying to the pesticide directive .
During this period we have listened to arguments , the majority of which are familiar from every environment debate : that rules will become bureaucratic and will erode the competitiveness of the industries concerned , and that we cannot impose stringent standards on ourselves in a world of international trade .
On the last point , all that needs to be said is that we have to start somewhere .
The European Union should set the tone for international assemblies , and it is wealthy enough to pave the way .
On other matters , too , the European Parliament has said that we should not wait for other parts of the world , we should be first ourselves .
The authorization system seems to me to be very flexible and not particularly bureaucratic .
It must be remembered that , at all events , it will take a long time before all the products have been through the procedure , and that it will be possible to market them for a long time yet .
The industry has claimed that a product which only alters in colour or smell will have to go through an entire authorization procedure , but the Commission has confirmed time after time in the Environment Committee , that this will not be the case .
The Environment Committee has been given two different explanations by the Commission as to why there are two Annexes , Nos 3 and 4 , on which to base trials .
Everything is subject to Annex 3 , while Annex 4 should only be used where it is relevant .
For a long time we were given the explanation that it was out of consideration for animals used in experiments .
For example , when toxicological data is already available , and the use of further animals in experiments can be avoided .
But at some point this explanation was altered , so that it was no longer the animals which were to be saved , but the industry .
And this point is really significant .
Parliament would , of course , very much like to save animals from experiments , but we are interested in finding out what the Commission 's interpretation of Annex 4 is .
Will it be possible to avoid Annex 4 simply by referring to economic conditions ?
I would like to point out that the committee has proposed a definition for framework authorization and that there is no need to adopt any of the other proposals submitted here to the plenary .
We cannot have different opinions about the same point .
An important aspect is the alternative assessment of biocides .
It will ensure that the most dangerous substances do not come on to the market or are taken off the market if a less harmful substance is found which can be used for the same purpose .
That is to say that the manufacturers of products containing biocides can always find an active substance , though possibly something different from what they had previously used .
There has , nevertheless , been a political commotion about alternative assessment , a commotion which , in my opinion has grown totally out of proportion .
As a society we should be able to protect ourselves both with products containing biocides but also against the most harmful of the biocides themselves .
An argument against alternative assessment is that it will be to the detriment of small and medium-sized businesses .
It should be remembered that small and medium-sized businesses more often produce products containing biocides rather than the active substances .
Consumers will continue to be able to buy products with which to combat a specific organism , as an active substance is only replaced if a new substance can be used for the same purpose .
It is this very soft and friendly form of alternative assessment which supplements the risk assessment being drafted .
Not a lot to write home about for an environmentally friendly politician , and it is also fully in line with the fifth environment action programme .
Alternative assessment is a new instrument which could well be incorporated into future revision of other chemical directives .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am speaking today as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy on the proposal for a directive on biocidal products .
The committee discussed the draft report intensively , and in November 1995 adopted the opinion by an overwhelming majority .
Our opinion seeks to take account of the special features of the biocidal products market .
The total value of this market is estimated at between ECU 1.5 and 2.5 billion .
Somewhat in contrast to the plant protectives sector , this is spread across some 400 active substances and 7000 biocidal products .
Standardizing the authorization procedures among individual countries is a sensible policy , and represents an enormous saving both for the Member States and the producers , and hence their customers .
The market is predominantly structured around SMEs , since the range of different applications for biocidal products makes it possible to cater for individual markets .
On the other hand , the development costs - and those of licensing and providing data - may in some cases , such as active substances , go well beyond the ECU 1 million mark .
Since market volumes are so limited , it needs to be considered how the necessary protection for mankind and the environment can be ensured with minimum financial outlay .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs has therefore drawn the following conclusions .
Firstly , the proposed directive , which closely follows the plant protectives directive , does not do justice to the particular position of biocidal products .
Secondly , the authorization procedure should be less costly , and past experience should be taken into account .
Thirdly , there should be provision for framework formulations for the authorization of active substances which would permit a simple registration procedure for less problematical biocidal products .
This proposal has also largely been adopted by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
Fourth , equal treatment of active substances and biocidal products produced in the Community with imported products must be guaranteed .
The rules of the directive must therefore also apply to imports .
Fifth , the fees should reflect costs .
Sixth , the Commission is called upon to submit a detailed study of the economic consequences for small and medium-sized businesses .
Unfortunately , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , in the course of its deliberations , showed little willingness to accept the amendments tabled by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
The rapporteur mentioned one critical question , that of comparative assessment .
This is a very strong measure to be applied here , and I think we have not heard the last of the debate on this subject .
However , I do believe that in line with Mrs Schleicher 's amendment , for products which are used in purely industrial production processes , a simplified authorization and licensing procedure or a simplified registration procedure should be made possible .
All in all , the Commission 's proposals will bring about a number of desirable improvements , but will also involve some considerable problems , given the special circumstances of an industry based on SMEs .
Mr President , even though it is late and many of us are tired I am glad that we are finally taking a decision and in any event conducting a debate on the proposal for a directive on biocidal products .
I believe that this is a report which displays both faith in the future and purpose .
It is also a report which gives us a tool with which to protect both people 's health and our environment .
I believe that it is important that we establish at Community level a common system for the control of biocidal products .
This applies in respect of both the environment and industry .
As a result of the directive companies will in fact have the opportunity and the right conditions to enable them to operate under the same conditions throughout the single market .
But perhaps the most important thing is that the report proposes a flexible system which will provide the incentive for the development of more environmentally friendly products and therefore also for steps towards a sustainable society .
By supporting the report Parliament can move towards this goal , which is so decisive for the future .
There are many who were concerned about what the system would mean for small and medium-sized businesses in particular .
This concern focuses above all on the text concerning comparative assessments contained in Article 9 ( 5 ) .
There is anxiety that companies will go out of business and that unemployment will increase .
Our experience in Sweden , however , where we have had this system for almost ten years , suggests the opposite .
We know that the active substances which are produced are produced by large companies which in fact have the capacity to contribute to positive development .
We also know that methods involving comparative assessments have resulted in a broader range of products being available and in more companies coming onto the market .
I also believe that it is important to point out that in our country comparative assessments are conducted in respect of about 10-20 % of the products on the market .
They are conducted whenever two active substances are comparable and effective in the same field and costs are the same , but one product is in fact much better for the environment than the other .
The comparative assessments which have been carried out have been conducted in consultation with both the company and the authorities , and of course consumers .
Though I consider that the report is a good one , I think it is a shame that we have expunged certain parts through compromise , thus weakening it .
This is true above all in respect of antifouling paint for boats , but I am nevertheless in favour of the report .
Mr President , the proposal for a directive concerning the authorization and placing on the market of biocidal products is a balanced one - at least that is my personal opinion - and aims to ensure the quality , safety and effectiveness of this widely used group of products .
As has already been pointed out , the proposed directive runs side by side with that already adopted for agricultural pesticides .
In Parliament 's debates on that directive , we had the opportunity to put forward many amendments , ideas and objectives , which ensured that the regulatory framework for agricultural pesticides is very satisfactory , and currently one of the best in the world .
The proposal for a Community system for the authorization of active substances on the one hand and specific products on the other is a good solution which fits in well with the process of European integration , in the sense that it balances centralized procedures with decentralized authorization of products , and until shown otherwise , the Community authorities will have full powers and responsibilities with regard to such authorizations .
The mutual recognition and freedom of movement of biocidal products should therefore be ensured , and nobody should call them into question .
A great deal of confusion was created in the debates in committee - as it will be , I imagine , in those in plenary - because an excessive number of amendments were tabled which in my view contribute absolutely nothing , and fail to take account of the ultimate purpose of this directive , which is , as I said before , to ensure the quality , safety and effectiveness of all biocidal products that come onto the market .
Parliament needs to be given evidence that the scientific and technical requirements which figure in the annexes are of the highest level , in order to ensure that the public feels protected .
The Commission has not made our work any easier , since although it is true that it finally met Parliament 's legitimate request to see the annexes , it has failed to take adequate account of the economic , social , scientific and technical problems to which this directive gives rise .
If its report had been more specific , things would have been much clearer to a large number of Members who are not familiar with this type of proposal .
Finally , introducing the fourth criterion of comparative assessment is , in my view , the weakest aspect of this proposal , since it leads us into considerable legal uncertainty - and this , I believe , is unacceptable and a departure from current practice in Community law .
Mr President , now for something completely different !
From mad cow disease to biocides - it is certainly a leap both in terms of content and media interest .
The substance of the biocides debate , which nobody by and large understands , is technical down to the smallest detail and totally lacking in ' sexiness ' and , therefore , totally beyond the glare of the media .
Mad cow disease has everything .
The mad cows have everything .
But that is the way it is with parliamentary work .
It has thus fallen to me to talk about biocides , which actually have a great deal to do with health .
Because if we do not regulate in this area , then it will be at the expense of people 's health .
The deaths are simply not acknowledged .
There are probably more people who have died from biocides than from mad cows .
But on behalf of the Liberal group I will say that we can support practically all the Environment Committee 's amendments and some of the others .
A reasonable balance has been struck between industry and the environment .
For the Liberal Group , it is vitally important that we maintain an incentive for the necessary development of more environmentally friendly products while , at the same time , not making unrealistic demands of the industry , and respecting its wish for confidentiality .
The most far-reaching , and therefore the most exciting , proposal from the Commission is Article 9.5 , under which a product may be barred if an alternative product exists .
Someone has to carry out this active assessment , of course , but , used correctly , this could put Europe out ahead , and that is what we need , and I shall call upon the Commission to be active in this field .
I shall conclude by thanking the rapporteur for the considerable work she has put into this proposal , and recommend its adoption .
Mr President , I believe that the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection has made considerable improvements to the Commission 's draft directive .
However , if we wish , as we should , to promote products that are increasingly less dangerous both for human health and for the environment , the procedures which are put in place must help to achieve that end .
In this respect , I have some reservations on the issuing of licences for ten years , which is a long period .
It does not allow the continuous assessment which would achieve the objectives I have just mentioned .
On the other hand , even if the principle of comparative assessment contained in Article 9 ( 5 ) is approved - which would be a positive step - it does not automatically follow that substances which are more harmful to the environment and to health would automatically be rejected .
That is why we have tabled a number of amendments which we hope will improve the present text .
I have one final remark to make regarding an amendment tabled by some of my colleagues concerning anti-fouling paints for ships ' hulls . The amendment is unacceptable because the chemical involved - tributyletin - is particularly toxic to marine flora and fauna .
Mr President , I welcome the fact that there is now European legislation on the admissibility of biocidal product for nonagricultural purposes .
That is not an unnecessary luxury on the internal market .
It is only regrettable that it has taken so long to put common principles down on paper .
The document before us , however , forms a satisfactory basis for a uniform admission procedure , in our view .
We are particularly pleased with the so-called alternative evaluation in Article 9 ( 5 ) .
The intention is that the environmentally friendly products will oust the harmful biocides from the market .
That is sad news for the producers of all the old biocides , but if we take sustainable development seriously then the damaging products will have to disappear in due course .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Jensen on her report .
She has put much time and effort into it , as the result bears witness .
Improvements have been suggested on various points , for example on the framework formulation .
That should prevent a load of red tape and unnecessary testing .
Another important point is the question of the pesticidal paint .
We have learned in the meantime , as Mr Lannoye has said , that this biocidal paint is very deleterious to the water environment .
Now we could in the European Union unilaterally ban the use of this kind of paint , but that would not achieve very much because if we ban the use of it here then ships will just go to the Far East for repairs , probably under even worse environmental conditions than here .
You would then be transferring employment to Korea without any noticeable advantage to the environment .
That is why I am in favour of Amendment No 61 which allows an exception for the use of biocides in shipyards .
It is not an elegant solution but I cannot see any other way .
That does not excuse Europe from the obligation to do everything possible to find a solution .
In this context I would ask the Commissioner what the Commission is doing about this .
Is any progress being made in the International Maritime Organisation , and when can we expect something from that organisation ?
Mr President , the ' Europe without frontiers ' needs frontiers .
In the absence of border controls the requirements relating to products coming on the market must be such that products can be safely used in all Member States .
There are many problems involved with the chemical industry , particularly as regards the environment .
Consequently clear legislation is needed to protect both the consumer and the environment .
In her report on biocides , Mrs Kirsten Jensen has addressed the central questions relating to the environment and the consumer .
The most important thing is that the products on the market should be those with the least environmental impact and that lower quality products should be removed from the market or that the ' reassessment procedure ' should be used .
The removal of border controls also means that there must be a reasonable level of certainty that a product approved in one country can be placed on the market in all other Member States .
However , we must be able to be absolutely sure that the ' weakest links ' are not used to obtain approval in the countries with the least strict standards .
This report gives the national authorities 60 days in which they are supposed to find time to carry out research , on the basis of information they have obtained themselves , as to whether biocide products should be released for sale .
However , I am not sure that 60 days will be enough in all cases .
There are some very widely differing ecosystems within the European Union . For example , in the cold weather area where the ground remains frozen almost all the year round , the disappearance of residues released into the water and the soil takes considerably longer than under any other conditions .
I should also like to take this opportunity to ask the Environment Commissioner , Mrs Bjerregaard , how the Commission intends to ensure that sufficient time will be allowed for the national authorities to investigate the suitability of products under differing conditions .
In other words , how it will ensure that the environmental impact of products on the market is taken sufficiently into account in differing ecosystems ?
Ladies and gentlemen , the active substances in medicines and plant protection products are covered by the corresponding EU directives .
The last major field remaining - all other active biocidal substances - will now be dealt with by this proposed directive .
These rules are particularly important for the environment and consumer protection , since many people come into contact with products containing biocidal substances .
We are talking here about insecticides , disinfectants , preservatives and products used to protect materials , to mention but a few .
As it stands at present , this new directive will apply to all the groups of biocidal products not covered by the plant protectives directive .
Since it deals with similar effects , the Commission 's draft follows that directive very closely .
Unlike plant protection products , however , biocidal substances are a very diverse sector , as Mr Langen has already pointed out .

There are some 400 active substances used in around 7000 products , and above all produced by many small and medium-sized businesses .
Individual substances and products are already tested on a national basis , and are only licensed for use after testing .
But so far there have not been the kind of uniform and systematic rules which are urgently needed at Community level , not only for reasons of competition and to ensure freedom of trade , but also and above all to protect consumers and the environment .
Every test involves not only costs , but also a huge investment of time and materials , with a corresponding administrative burden on the authorities of the Member States .
I regard it as absolutely essential to strike a reasonable balance here - with the proviso , of course , that the protection of consumers and the environment is guaranteed .
Important as this Community protective legislation is , it can only work if the implementing provisions are adopted at the same time , if both the directive and the implementing provisions are clear and unambiguous , and if evaluation is carried out on the basis of objective criteria , which in my view - as has already been mentioned , albeit the other way round - is not the case with the so-called comparative assessment provided for in Article 9 ( 5 ) .
With these points in mind , our group has tabled a number of amendments .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , biocides are products that are used in disinfectants or insecticides , to combat grain weevils , for example , and also in preservatives - we have already heard the figures .
It is high time that we established European rules on the marketing of these products .
The European Union , and the Commission in particular , has already taken up this initiative , and I welcome this on two counts : both for reasons of environmental protection and competition - which is so important , because without a level playing-field , we cannot run businesses in Europe .
The Commission 's proposal , to my mind , represents a good starting-point for our discussions .
As with the directive on plant protection products , the Commission has dealt with the active substances themselves and the register of them on the one hand , and the question of how biocidal products are to be authorized at national level on the other .
I believe that this division into centralized and decentralized rules meets the needs of the moment , and I am glad that this approach has been adopted here , since otherwise we should have had to take account of too many climatic and hydrological differences within the Union .
My amendments are focused on the definition and in particular the licensing and placing on the market of products containing biocidal substances .
I am glad that Mrs Jensen has supported these proposals , at a time when everyone is talking of Molitor and hence deregulation , leanness and simplification - which I too am in favour of , and indeed who in the House would not support them ?
However , there are more and more Members , and even spokesmen for the Commission , who are using Molitor and its ideas as a cloak for environmental dumping .
That is precisely what we do not want .
Of course , we do not have that impression in the case of this report .
I am very glad to hear that the Commission is letting it be known in the lobbies that it will accept our amendments on framework formulations .
What does this mean ?
It means that in future , products derived from processes which have already been authorized will have a simpler licensing route to follow .
This is a necessary move towards a transparent approach to trade and the environment .
So I am glad , Commissioner , that we have been able to firm up your proposal a little , and it is now well placed to go on for discussion in the Council and its second reading .
Mr President , this proposal for a directive on a common EU-approved list and approval procedure concerning biocidal products , i.e products used for the control of organisms that are harmful to human or animal health , has come up for debate in Parliament at what I believe is a most appropriate time , for alarming medical research has recently been coming from various parts of Europe on the number of growth-inhibiting agents and their residues which are harmful to human hormone activity and consequently tend among other things to weaken human fertility .
Secondly , discussion has centred on mad cow disease , which has been debated this very evening , and I am mentioning this now because it too is an example of how the whole foodstuffs chain has a great responsibility for human health ; consequently higher moral standards must be demanded of the food industry than at present to enable the food we eat to be as safe as possible .
Some countries ' environmental conditions differ from those in other countries .
In the northern countries , Finland for example , pest control agents are not needed in anything like the same quantities as in more southerly regions because of the cold climate .
Consequently the regulations in different parts of Europe are different .
Foodstuffs , however , cross borders and the consumer cannot always know nowadays in which country and how the food he is eating has been produced and where it originates .
It is therefore important that the proposal for a directive currently under discussion should standardize the biocides permitted in the EU countries .
In my opinion products for sale in EU countries but originating from outside the EU should also require this approval , otherwise the directive would damage and distort competition from the point of view of health protection .
It is important to remember that man is part of nature and is always just as sensitive to environmental pollution as the rest of nature . This proposal for a directive tends above all to protect the interests of human health and it is therefore essential that it be approved .
Mr President , I should like to begin by thanking the Environment Committee , the Economy and Monetary Affairs Committee and , of course , to a very considerable extent , the rapporteurs for the immense amount of work put into this proposal , which is the last piece of EU legislation on chemicals .
I would like to thank Mrs Kirsten Jensen in particular for a number of constructive and useful amendments which have made this highly technical proposal much more understandable , and which have also enhanced protection for animals used in experiments .
I shall , because of the time , refrain from my more general observations on the proposal , because they have been covered so excellently by the comments during the debate , and concentrate instead on the amendments .
The objective of the proposal is quite simple , while the means of achieving it are complicated , and for this reason the proposal is highly technical .
The Commission has acknowledged this situation and we are therefore pleased that the proposal has been clarified by many of the amendments .
A very large number of amendments have been tabled .
Initially 62 and then a further 34 supplementary amendments .
Two amendments , Nos 16 and 30 , were subsequently withdrawn , and of the remaining 94 amendments , the Commission is able to accept 36 entirely or in part or in principle , and where the amendments cannot be accepted this is often due to technical reasons , or because they are outside of the scope of the proposal for a directive .
It would take far too long to discuss each individual amendment in detail .
I understand , however , that I should for formal reasons give the Commission 's position on each individual amendment , which I am naturally pleased to do , but I will summarize and refer only to the numbers of the amendments and then comment on some of the most important .
First of all there are the amendments to the recitals .
Amendments Nos 3 , 6 and 92 are acceptable .
Amendment No 2 in principle and Amendment No 5 in part .
Amendments Nos 1 , 4 , 7 and 8 are unacceptable .
Then there are the amendments to the articles .
Amendments Nos 9 , 11 , 17 , 21 , 29 and 31 are acceptable .
Amendments Nos 10 , 14 , 18 , 19 , 24 , 26 and 37 together with supplementary Amendments Nos 76 and 78 are acceptable in principle , and Amendments Nos 36 and 39 , together with supplementary Amendments Nos 70 , 93 and 95 are acceptable in part .
Amendment No 20 is also acceptable in part .
Amendments Nos 12 , 13 , 15 , 22 , 23 , 25 , 27 , 28 , 32 , 33 , 34 , 35 , 38 and 40-43 , together with supplementary Amendments Nos 63 , 65-69 , 71 , 74 , 75 , 77 , 82 , 84-91 and 94 are unacceptable .
Then there are the amendments to Annexes 2 and 3 .
Supplementary Amendments Nos 79-81 and 83 are acceptable , while none of the first Amendments Nos 44-45 are acceptable .
Then there is the amendment of Annex 6 , common principles .
Of these amendments , Nos 56 , 57 and 59 are acceptable .
Amendment No 61 and supplementary Amendment No 64 and 96 are partly acceptable in principle , while Amendments Nos 55 , 58 , 60 and 62 are unacceptable .
I shall now briefly comment on some of the amendments .
The amendments to the recitals which the Commission is able to accept concern greater protection for animals used in experiments , while those which cannot be accepted involve revision of the annexes which we do not consider appropriate in purely technical terms .
With regard to the amendments concerning the articles , I would again like to thank Mrs Kirsten Jensen for Amendment No 31 , which represents a significant improvement to the text .
Of the unacceptable amendments to the articles , I would like to concentrate on Amendments Nos 12 , 13 and 15 , which concern the scope of the proposal , and Nos 42 and 43 which aim to extend its scope .
First 12 , 13 and 15 .
Here I would stress that the proposal for a directive covers the marketing of all products in the Community containing biocides , and that it also includes the conditions of use .
The proposal for a directive does not concern the manufacture of the actual products which contain biocides or treated materials , i.e. materials which are treated with products containing biocides .
Neither does the directive cover products containing biocides which are destined for export outside the Community .
Amendments Nos 42 and 43 , finally , aim to introduce economic means or other measures to restrict the use of products containing biocides .
I can , in general , support these ideas , which are completely in line with the fifth action programme in the environmental sector .
But I must , unfortunately , stress that they do not belong here in this proposal , because the proposal concerns assessment of the risk to humans and the environment associated with the various active substances and the products containing biocides , which contain those substances .
The aim of the proposal is therefore not to draw up an overall strategy for their use .
In this connection I can announce that the Commission has embarked on an investigation into how we might best achieve a viable use of pesticides in the future .
And then there are a number of supplementary amendments which I shall not comment on further , unless I am subsequently requested to do so .
As regards the amendments to Annexes 2 and 3 , I would merely note that the acceptable amendments seek to make the requirements of applicants adaptable to technological developments , and the Commission considers that a good idea .
As regards the amendments to Annex 6 , it is the anti-fouling agents in particular which Parliament seem to have been interested in .
I will be pleased to admit - and somewhat different opinions have been voiced in the debate - that the Commission is favourably inclined towards an exemption .
We prefer it to be based on Amendment No 61 , specifically naming the anti-fouling agents , and we are also in favour of restricting the supplementary extension period referred to in the amendment , to a further five-year period only .
There was a separate question from Mrs Kirsten Jensen concerning mixing up Annex 4 and Annex 3 and different statements by the Commission in connection with consideration of the proposal .
I have understood the two answers to mean that the proposal aims to cover both aspects - it seeks to alleviate the burden on animals used in experiments , but also to alleviate the burden on the industry ; the Commission has not contradicted itself in this respect .
I would also like to say in reference to Mr Blokland 's question on anti-fouling agents , that there will be a meeting of the IMO as early as this July , and that the Commission has proposed that a special committee be set up to see whether alternative agents can be found .
With these remarks I would again thank you for a very positive reception and consideration of the proposal by Parliament .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at noon .
Price indication
The next item is the report ( A4-0109 / 96 ) by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive on consumer protection in the indication of prices of products offered to consumers ( COM ( 95 ) 0276 - C4-0301 / 95-95 / 0148 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , although the hour is late I wish to present my report on unit pricing .
I apologise to the House that we only managed to vote on this report last Monday ; the subject is of concern to many Members , as is often the case with environmental issues , which tend to cover a multitude of areas .
Mr President , I enjoyed working on the directive on unit pricing because the problem has been with us a long time and has already been the subject of a great deal of legislation ; but what has most frequently happened is that new legislation on the subject has been postponed because it was considered too complicated and the exercise was limited , perhaps necessarily so , to reaching compromises between the various Commission services , and indeed between the various organisations in our society .
And that is also the problem .
There is legislation , but legislation which is too complicated , but at least everyone can agree on the principal .
The attempt has always been made to inform the consumer about prices so that he could make comparisons , but the complex legislation on product series , for example , did not work .
There are voluntary and compulsory series , as we see , and there are exceptions allowed at the European level , and exceptions allowed at the national level too , and if you understand it all , Mr President , you are a better man than I am because when I first looked into this whole business I could not make head nor tail of it .
If you establish the principal that you should be able to compare prices , that you want to help the consumer , then you must do it in a perfectly understandable way .
Mr President , I do not claim to have invented the simple solution .
It was the people in the Economic and Social Committee who produced a good report and a Greek colleague , Mr Folias , who produced a good report which was endorsed by all parties , employers , workers and also the consumers in the Economic and Social Committee ; I was more than happy to endorse it .
It was adopted unanimously .
Then I thought : if the people who know something about it and whom we are called upon to represent , if they produce this report then we should be grateful for it , and I really did not have to make many changes to it .
Mr President , what did they want and what do we want ?
We want to put an end to all these complications , we want to stop the endless prolongation of legislation , we want clarity .
And that clarity means trying in principle to indicate the price of the product per unit .
That is the principle , so put an end to working with product series even although I as a member of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection have of course a lot of sympathy with series .
But series are so badly treated even in this Parliament , take wine for example ; you have series of a litre , of three quarters of a litre , then you find a half litre and now it is two and a quarter .
You could no longer see the wood for the trees although I would have happily lived with intelligible series which would also have brought quite a number of environmental advantages .
But that did not happen , Mr President , and that is why we now need this transparent solution .
Now I do appreciate that this transparent solution could bring a few problems in its wake .
For example , if we are now going to dictate that very soon the unit price per product must be easily identifiable everywhere , and that is the principal we are working towards , then I know we will be unpopular with every wine grower in every single country .
I know that full well .
We did not try fighting windmills in the Dutch parliament , as Doeke Eisma knows , and I do not fancy trying that here because I know where it would lead .
That means , Mr President , that the various amendments I would really like to have introduced so that unit prices could be compared everywhere have been withdrawn in favour of the solution offered by the Commission , in other words that wine , spirits and the like may remain exempt .
I have written off that problem .
And then Mrs Thyssen and a few others , including Kirsten Jensen , came up with another problem , namely what about the small and medium-sized business .
Well , Mr President , I am most concerned about them because I also hail from a small village where alas the last corner shop has disappeared .
What has to be done to save the corner shop ?
Mr President , we have presented three solutions for that one .
First of all the exemption remains , secondly there is an introduction deadline which we in this House want to change from four to six years , which means that even after the introduction of the Ecu the prices will be given per standard quantity .
The third solution was produced by Mr Folias and I think it is rather a good one , and that is that if the corner shop has also to go along with this system then it does not need to go out an buy a complicated computer because the little old lady who keeps the corner shop cannot be expected to operate a computer ; she can just display a simple list with the exact cost per standard quantity , for a kilo cheese , a kilo dried sausage or ' saucisse ' or whatever .
The shopper can read it off the list .
Now some people say that that is a problem , but I disagree because a smaller shop with a smaller range of goods usually gets their supplies from a wholesale outlet where the prices are already marked .
Mr President , I think that all the problems have been solved and it is not just the Commission but also the Economic and Social Committee we have to thank for that ; I hope Parliament will accept the amendments we adopted in committee so that we can have this adopted at both the first and second readings .
Mr President , I moved my seat closer to the centre because at this late hour I think we should all huddle together for comfort .
I do not think this has been the most distinguished evening in the history of Parliament .
Maybe now we are discussing something which is not so much a Columbus egg as a Columbus omelette .
We are , at this moment , at this very late hour , trying to decide the strengths and weaknesses of the directive .
I want to congratulate the rapporteur - once again - for coming forward with a measure which has significant benefits for consumers in the European Union .
I echo her words of praise for the Economic and Social Committee , from whom I have learnt a great deal in the course of our discussions .
It was only on Monday evening that we finally voted in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection - again in a late and hurried fashion .
I want to confine myself to speaking about some of the reservations that were raised then which I hope to put to the Commission .
There is a good deal of uncertainty about a number of things : the cost of the equipment , which the small trader will need .
Some will go for a list , some may use a price-gun , some may want some computerized system .
That is compounded by the multiplicity of prices that will have to be displayed as this period overlaps that in which we shall be moving towards the single currency .
Finally , there is a difficulty because the price estimates that have been produced by the Commission thus far are somewhat at variance with the estimates we have from the retailers themselves .
That is not surprising .
They will sometimes exaggerate and sometimes the Commission may underestimate .
But there are differences and we believe that there should be a continuing review of precisely what the price implications will be .
One of Mrs Oomen-Ruijten 's amendments deals with the question of information for the small retailer .
I hope some amendments which have come from our side of the committee will give further reassurance in this matter .
I introduced Amendment No 45 to make sure that there was a six-year period for implementation , running from 1997 to 2003 , thereby overlapping the strained and difficult period which will be covered by the early years of this directive .
I personally can see no reason why , in that time , the main problems for small traders cannot be met .
It is not our intention to introduce amendments tonight which prevent this directive coming into force , or in any sense allow for the postponement of serious discussion until the next millennium .
We are saying to the small retailers we are trying to help that this is the timetable within which , we hope now , this adjustment , with our assistance can be made for your benefit as well as that of European consumers .
I have also offered - it was only been tabled very late on Thursday of last week - a new amendment which I have discussed with the rapporteur and which specifically looks at a number of exclusions .
She has indicated general assent with most of these exclusions .
So instead of simply having an argument over a definition of what retailing might be , we look instead at the products and the kinds of trade which plainly are not in the static situation of even the corner shop itself .
If that list of exemptions , or something close to it , can be sustained over the next few weeks and months I am confident that this directive can be what we all expect and hope it will be , and be greatly to the benefit of the consumer .
Mr President , the two-fold pricing that the Commission is proposing is undoubtedly a help for shoppers who want to compare prices .
To that extent the proposal for a directive is to be welcomed .
But if I look at it not solely from the consumer 's point of view but in a wider context , and when I think of attempts to cut down the red tape , especially on the eve of the historic change to the Euro , then on balance I must unfortunately reject it .
First of all we have yet another demonstration of how good Europe is at paying lip service to small businesses but how difficult it is to help them when it comes down to practice .
Whether a shop gets a transitional period of two or four or six years , and whether it has to indicate prices manually or by computer , it all boils down to an increase in paper work and there is already far too much of that .
Some amendments , Mr President , offer a glimmer of comfort , but apart from Amendment No 5 they are all theoretical .
Even Amendments Nos 7 and 9 fail to convince me .
Of course it sounds good to provide financial aid for information brochures for the SMUs , but small businesses are well able to do their sums and they know that there are such things as PCs .
They do not need information so much as less paperwork .
And speaking of small businesses , Mr President , we are not just talking about corner shops owned by little old ladies , but about many young people who are trying to make a business for themselves with very little capital and certainly no hoards of staff to do this kind of job for them .
Mr President , my second objection is to the timing .
I fail to understand why this proposal cannot wait until the Euro has been introduced as the sole legal tender , to July 2002 .
Amendment No 18 confers on Member States the opportunity , not the obligation , to permit small businesses a postponement , thanks to our colleague , Mr Whitehead , but why not postpone the whole thing ?
A regulation which says that three or four prices must be indicated per product , and even up to six or eight for price reductions does not , to my mind , help the consumer a great deal .
I would like to ask the Commissioner how she sees her proposal for a directive being applied in practice in the transitional period to the Euro as of 1999 and especially in the period between January and July 2002 .
Mr President , I shall speak briefly only for long enough to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , for dealing in such a complete and well-informed manner with a matter which is technically not of the simplest .
The Commission had two aims in this directive : on the one hand to keep consumers ever better informed and on the other to protect the distribution system , particularly for small- and medium-sized businesses , which are the ones which will suffer most from the introduction of technology .
I think the extra time for technological adaptation is enough .
But I should like also to express my appreciation to Mrs Commissioner Bonino for accepting a large number of the suggestions made with regard to the first version : the document is now more manageable and closer to the real objectives proposed , namely to inform consumers simply but completely .
Still , we would ask the Commission to make a further effort to accept the amendments presented today , which are those left over from the last draft , voted on Monday evening .
They are all really useful , although a little repetitive in themselves : useful for making a directive which on the one hand follows closely both the market as it grows and changes and on the other hand is useful for the requirements of the final customer who is able to compare prices and quantities .
Thus I think we shall have a directive appreciated both by traders and consumers - and that is not a trifle !
Mr President , I wish to congratulate my colleague , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on her flexible approach as rapporteur to the subject .
We are used to a different technique from her , especially on drugs , but in this case she has been very flexible .
The Group of the European Liberal and Democratic Party welcomes the present directive to replace two old directives for the last two just did not work in practice .
They were based on the idea of standard packages , which the producers could not agree about , which meant that the system of selling products throughout the whole of the Union in the same quantities was just impractical .
The consumer was therefore unable to compare prices , which is why we have this new directive which departs from the old system and indicates the price per measurement unit , i.e. per kilo or per litre for each product .
Some colleagues and even the Agriculture Committee have tried to re-instate the old system .
We reject their attempts to do so , as they have proved not to work .
We also insist on the amendment which calls for the Commission to produce a statement on the financial consequences for the retail trade , especially the small and medium-sized businesses , so that we in this House are better able to evaluate the next stage in the procedure .
My question is : when will the Commission , when will Commissioner Bonino , produce the statement on the financial consequences of this system for the retail trade ?
We consider it only logical and reasonable that funds are made available to help the retail trade , with information programmes on the introduction of this new system .
Mr President , we would have preferred nothing at all to be laid down in this directive on the transitional period when the Euro , not the Ecu , is introduced .
We are crossing bridges before we come to them , and I think it much more sensible to produce general rules for this transitional period when more is known , rather that try to write solutions into all kinds of different directives .
Finally , Mr President , we support the amendments which say that the price of the product does not always need to be indicated on the product itself but , again to help the retailer , may be on the shelf or elsewhere .
That makes it much simpler and I am looking at Mrs Thyssen .
Let us make the new system of pricing , which I support , as easy as possible for retailers to apply .
Mr President , some supermarkets already indicate prices per unit .
It does not cost the shop keeper any extra money but it helps the consumer .
That is why I welcome binding European legislation on pricing .
We can happily assume this will be welcomed by consumer organisations .
I wish to pay tribute to the work of the rapporteur , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten .
With her amendments she has improved considerably a number of points of the Commission 's proposal .
They may seem trivialities , but this legislation has tremendous repercussions for innumerable shop keepers and consumers .
That is why it is important to word things carefully and define retailers ' obligations .
I think a good balance has been struck for the position of the small business .
I understand that Mrs Oomen-Ruijten is confident that her report will be passed in the final vote .
Perhaps the Commission 's opinion on the amendments may yet cause her a sleepless night .
Be that as it may , I do wish her a good night 's sleep .
She has earned it and to look at her she needs it , and she is not the only one .
Mr President , despite the lateness of the hour , I should like to thank the rapporteur for the way in which she has reconciled so many interests - those of the producers , the wholesalers and the retailers .
The point has already been made that the directive allows retailers a period of grace , without in any way affecting the protection given to the consumer .
Anyone wishing to breathe life into the section of the EU Treaty which refers to a high level of consumer protection must , to my mind , be in favour of this report .
Anyone who goes into a shop today to buy food for the weekend - and I assume that even Members do such a thing occasionally - has to spend a great deal of time and either be good at mental arithmetic or have their calculator with them if they wish to be price-conscious and compare prices .
For many products , they cannot see the unit price at a glance .
Price transparency does not exist - but that was the aim at European level nearly 20 years ago .
The rules which have applied up to now have no doubt made things better for the consumer in some countries .
Personally - and here I am in the same boat as Mrs Oomen-Ruijten - I have found them rather confusing , and quite often simply a puzzle .
If I bought an unwrapped piece of ham , I could see the selling price and the cost per kilo .
If I bought a prepacked item , I could see that there were two pieces , but had no idea how big they were : it would just say 116 grams and the selling price .
I had to work out for myself what the cost per pound or kilo was .
So I am very pleased , no doubt like the great majority of consumers , to see the unit price at last becoming a reality .
Mr President , I want to put on record , since I believe that in future some European Union of small shopkeepers may look up this debate , that we are debating it at nearly half past midnight with 10 Members and a Commissioner whom I congratulate on her stamina .
I say that people will look back on this debate and I want to put this on the record because I believe that although unit pricing can be of great advantage to consumers in larger shops in the larger supermarkets , when we come to the small shops the directive will introduce an insensitive degree of extra regulation .
It is true , as the rapporteur has explained , that she has tried in various amendments to lighten the burden on small shops .
In her Amendment No 14 we read of the possibility of putting up price lists and placards inside shops .
Well , Mr President , you come from Italy .
I ask you , think of those small Italian shops that you know in Italian towns , piled high from floor to ceiling with goods , hundreds of different items .
Well you can go back and tell them that thanks to this directive , admittedly within six years rather than in four years , they will have to have unit pricing on all the items in those shops .
I do not myself think that it will be possible in small shops with that huge variety of items packed close in to have unit pricing indicated simply by putting up posters at one end of the shops .
A survey within the United Kingdom of small shops in the Spar grocery chain found that typically they include some 3 , 500 items and in a small shop of that type your are looking at some price changes of about 100 a week .
So that would mean that it would be much easier if you went over to a computerized system of pricing .
The net result of this directive , unless the burden on small shops is lightened , will be that small shops either narrow the range of their products or else they go out of business .
If they are on the verge of going out of business then the one piece of good news that we offer them is , that under one of Mrs Oomen-Ruijten 's amendments , we are going to be sending them a brochure to explain why the European Union is putting them out of business .
I must explain that I believe that Amendment No 7 is not possible for the Commission to accept .
It would set a tremendous precedent to invent Commission support to help pay for the price of the directive .
What we need to do is to put the emphasis on Amendment No 5 in this report and to request the Commission very strongly on behalf of all groups in Parliament that they should come forward before the second reading with some real estimate of the cost of this directive .
I find myself in the unusual position for a Conservative Member of speaking on behalf of the Cooperative Union of the United Kingdom , but also on behalf of the Retail Consortium , the Association of Convenience Stores , the Association of British Chambers of Commerce , the Automatic Vending Association and , strangely , the Scottish Grocers ' Federation .
They cannot all be wrong !
This directive creates real problems for small shops and I hope the Commission will address it .
Thank you to the rapporteur , thank you to the Members who have followed this debate .
I should like to take the cue from come observations made by Mrs Jackson and make one or two clarifications .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Commission is not inventing a directive .
I have to tell you that there were three complicated and unworkable directives which would have been due to enter into force in 1997 , three sets of legislation so complex that they could not , in our opinion , have been applied , but which all the same would have come into force in 1997 .
I should like to ask the honourable Member to consider the positive aspect of this attempt to simplify the situation , at least for the small- and medium-sized businesses and , we might say , postpone it : we have accepted six years as a compromise to give time for adjustment .
But perhaps the honourable Member ought to answer another question : if the Commission , by agreement , I hope , with Parliament , had not taken this initiative , the transitional period would have ended in 1997 and the three most complicated existing directives would have come into force .
I should really like to ask honourable Members and the whole Parliament to consider the positive aspect of this initiative , benefiting not only consumers but also traders who would otherwise have found themselves , if I may say so , in a desperate situation .
Of course I do not want to go into the details of all the rules , I should just like to explain in the few minutes available to me the amendments which for the moment the Commission does not intend to accept , and briefly to explain the reasons .
Of the remaining amendments the Commission accepts the great majority and also thanks Parliament its effort at clarification through much re-wording which seems to us more appropriate .
The Commission however thinks , at least at present , that it would be premature to commit ourselves now regarding the decision and all the amendments , or rather two of them , which refer to the coming into force of the single currency .
I think we have enough time , between now and 2002 , to understand a little better how we can adjust the measure : Parliament is well aware what great importance the Commission attaches to the problem of the single currency , in particular as regards consumers , so I do not want to commit us to a decision today .
Secondly , as regards financial support , the Commission will draft a report , as requested , but not in a year 's time .
One year is really too short a time to manage to draw up a coherent report .
We therefore maintain our proposal of two years , with a report on the situation as regards entry into force .
But the Commission really does not think for the moment that it needs to intervene on financial support , since it has accepted as a compromise a longer period of application .
Amongst other things I should like to tell Mr Eisma that , as regards the financial costs , there are now detailed data which my officials will be pleased to send you , since there are four different solutions for implementing the directive .
That depends for example on the manual method , the computerized method and the contingency of various costs and prices which will have to be checked in implementing it , but as from now , Mr Eisma , the officials are available to give you the information in our possession today .
The other amendment which I think I cannot accept today is that which excludes automatic distribution , because frankly I do not see the point : certainly there is no question of costs from that point of view .
As regards the list of exemptions , Mr Whitehead , as you said , it did not arrive at the right time , in the prescribed time , but the Commission is in a position to examine the list of products which we know you think warrants consideration .
I am referring for example the antique trade and others , some of which warrants a moment 's reflection .
That said , I should just like to say in conclusion that by striving to improve we often mar what is good and that this report or this directive could certainly be improved in one way or another , but they do seem to me to simplify existing legislation and , I think , to help small- and medium-scale businesses .
I should finally very much to thank Parliament for its time - I know you have very much speeded up your work - to thank the rapporteur for her dedication and also the chairman of the committee ; they have given me the opportunity - for which I am very grateful - to take this directive the Consumer Council next Tuesday .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at noon tomorrow .
( The sitting was closed at 12.35 a.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , in yesterday 's Minutes it is recorded that I abstained on Amendment No 22 on the Oostlander report . It was my intention to vote for it .
It was a case of mea culpa rather than a faulty machine .
Please , could it be corrected .
It will be corrected .
Mr President , yesterday I managed to reach the Chamber just as the Minutes were being agreed - I had been attending another meeting .
Had I been here , I would have made a correction .
Yesterday 's Minutes said that we agreed Tuesday 's Minutes but in fact Tuesday 's Minutes were incorrect .
They omitted the reference to my presentation of the discharge report on the general budget and the FED .
It was a 13-minute speech .
I may not be the world 's greatest speaker but 13 minutes is quite a sizeable chunk to miss .
I should be grateful if that could be corrected in Tuesday 's Minutes .
We take note of that .
( Parliament approved the Minutes )
Monetary cooperation
The next item is the report ( A4-0053 / 96 ) by Mr Garriga Polledo , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the strengthening of world monetary cooperation to ensure better regulation of monetary and finance markets .
Mr President , firstly , I regret the absence of Mr de Silguy , who kindly let me know that he could not be present ; I should therefore like to welcome Mrs Wulf-Mathies .
Secondly , I should like to stress the fact that I believe that I have drawn up a consensus report .
I accepted a considerable number of amendments in committee , since I believe that a European Parliament resolution on a subject as important as this must be able to count on the support of a substantial majority of Members .
Turning to specifics , Mr President , I wish to emphasize that the main objective of this report is to put forward a joint European Union proposal for the strengthening of world monetary cooperation , and not to present proposals for the regulation of the markets - for which reason I must announce that I cannot accept the amendments tabled by the Green Group .
We take as our starting-point , ladies and gentlemen , the clear fact that the globalization of the economy and the astonishing growth of the financial markets have reduced the effectiveness of traditional economic policies and weakened the ability of national governments to define independently their macroeconomic objectives .
In 1995 , for example , the value of transactions on the international foreign exchange market exceeded USD 1300 billion per day - more than twice the total currency reserves of the industrialized countries .
In twelve years , the value of transactions per day has multiplied by a factor of twenty .
The report 's general thesis is that this strengthening of the international markets is positive and beneficial to national economies and the world 's economic systems as a whole , as long as the mechanisms for international economic and monetary cooperation are at the same time improved , reinforced and perfected .
The international capital market enables countries with little capacity to generate domestic savings to gain immediate access to external savings - often on exceptionally favourable financial terms .
This allows such countries to finance economic development policies which they would otherwise be unable to fund .
And the conditions set by the markets in allocating these external savings are precisely those which are writ large in any manual of economic policy : that the beneficiary countries must maintain low inflation rates and carefully control their public deficits .
When national governments depart from economic orthodoxy , the markets impose the adjustments which those governments have not dared to make . And adjustments imposed by the markets generally have an unacceptable social cost , as well as provoking a disproportionate reaction which makes the economic situation of the country in question even worse : let us recall the ' tequila effect ' , or the crisis in the European Monetary System .
Consequently , whilst accepting the fact that the international markets have achieved a degree of autonomy which is far greater than the ability of individual governments to influence them , the alternative which I am proposing to the House today is to strengthen international cooperation , within the existing institutional framework , and drawing on the encouraging experience of economic and monetary union .
Therefore , we are calling for the current international monetary system , based on the predominance of the dollar , to be developed into a system which incorporates other currencies - including , of course , the future euro . This would serve to minimize the risks of fluctuations in the dollar and reflect far better the make-up of international trade flows .
Furthermore , we are calling on governments to pursue exchange-rate stability , on the basis of sound monetary and fiscal policies , and to maintain low interest and inflation rates and levels of public deficit .
We are calling explicitly - within the framework of the International Monetary Fund - for the strengthening of the multilateral monitoring procedures , the reinforcement of the means for preventing financial crises , and the full provision of information to all market participants .
Finally , we are calling for the essential cooperation between the Governors of the Central Banks to be carried out under the auspices of the Bank for International Settlements .
Fundamentally , Mr President , this report seeks to suggest that the European Union 's experience of making progress towards economic and monetary union through economic cooperation and through the application of convergence criteria could serve as an example on a global scale of how to strengthen monetary cooperation , with a view to achieving the general conditions for sustained , noninflationary and job-creating economic growth .
I should like to end by thanking my colleagues - especially Mrs Randzio-Plath and Mr Katiforis - for their contributions and amendments , and by reminding Mrs Wulf-Mathies that Parliament is making a formal request to the Commission to draw up a white paper on the role of the European Union , after the start of the third stage of EMU , in the world economic system .
Mr President , this report on the strengthening of world monetary cooperation to ensure better regulation of monetary and financial markets is very timely .
After all , we in Europe recognize only too well that activity one side of the world can have profound effects elsewhere , including Europe .
I do not just refer to the collapse of Barings Bank in London , following dealings on the Singapore market , but also to the consequences which followed lower interest rates in the United States in 1995 .
The Deutschmark interest rate remained high , with enormous knock-on effects on Europe 's economy and its ability to climb out of its economic pause - to borrow a phrase favoured by the Commission .
If that is true in the Europe of today , imagine the situation once the Euro has entered the currency markets .
What are we to do in this new environment which will be upon us shortly ?
We will need strong international cooperation , and the newly-fledged European Central Bank will need to quickly master its global , as well as its local , role .
I would suggest that part of its and the Commission 's responsibilities in this new environment is to improve not just monetary cooperation in the world but also to promote greater synergy in the fiscal and economic areas .
Although the Garriga Polledo report perhaps underplays the degree of danger unleashed by liberalizing the financial markets , I believe we can support the remedies suggested by the rapporteur .
He highlights the need to put in place an effective advance warning and monitoring system ; he encourages prompt and appropriate political responses ; he agrees with the G7 's request to the IMF to establish new procedures regarding finance mechanisms and , of course , he calls again , through the G7 , for strengthening international cooperation .
To these suggestions I would add that the G3 or the G7 should not exclude other important global players , including Asia and ASEAN , whose parliamentary representatives are in conclave with Euro-MPs this morning here in Strasbourg .
Nor should we fail to remind the financial community of their own responsibilities .
The better they can regulate and monitor themselves , the better we , the politicians , will be satisfied .
The sorry story of Barings ' collapse reveals all too palpably human frailty at work .
Whatever else is true , it is apparent that the internal checks and balances were not operating successfully between London and Singapore .
That brings me back to where I started .
Today 's lead story in the Financial Times reports the IMF 's regular world economic outlooks exhortation to Germany to cut its interest rates and so boost economic recovery .
We truly live now in an interdependent world and must reform ourselves to meet these new circumstances .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Garriga Polledo 's report , which takes due account of both the advantages and disadvantages of the general liberalization of the capital movements and the globalization of the economy , recommends to the Commission and to the European Monetary Institute a package of measures or recommendations focusing on three themes , which we endorse .
I recommend , in essence : closer cooperation in the field of economic policy between the ' big three ' , in other words the United States , Japan and Germany ; closer cooperation with regard to exchange rates , in particular between industrialized countries ; and , finally , action to promote greater international financial stability in the context of a would be globalized economy .
This would be implemented by the use of an early-warning system , relying on the appropriate financing mechanisms and promoting the strengthening of international cooperation .
The report likewise shares the opinion of the G7 that the best way of achieving stability of exchange rates is to implement monetary and budgetary policies which are compatible with the fundamental economic parameters - and this is a good thing - for fear of exposure to the devastating and immediate effects of speculative capital movements in search of the best short-term profit .
It is true that market reaction is often the logical result of the thoughtlessness or inadequacy of the economic , monetary and even budgetary policies pursued in some quarters ; the result is devaluation , which imposes a direct and heavy penalty - especially in terms of employment - on the more virtuous and stricter policies pursued by other States .
We must therefore congratulate ourselves on the results of the meeting held in Verona last weekend , following which the Finance Ministers of the fifteen States of the Union called upon the Commission to study the setting-up of a mechanism intended to counter any attempts at competitive devaluation .
There are three main lines of approach that come into question here : strengthening the present multilateral surveillance system , making payments from the Structural Funds subject to certain conditions in the event that a country fails to move with sufficient determination towards economic convergence , and , finally , setting up a fairly complex system which would deprive the defaulting State of a ' laisserpasser premium ' , guaranteeing that it would receive no more money from Brussels as long as that aid - currently paid in ecus and in future to be paid in Euros - would represent a large sum in national currency after devaluation .
The operative part of the motion for a resolution contained in Mr Garriga Polledo 's report , the broad lines of which we support , prompts two comments from us .
First , as regards recital No 1 : it is impossible to say that the present weakness of the dollar is responsible for the appreciation of the German mark , for a very good reason : the American currency has continuously gained ground against the mark for the past year .
Secondly , the wording of paragraph 19 of the motion for a resolution is not acceptable to our group , because it requests that , via the Commission and the future European Central Bank , the European Union should be a full member of all the international institutions mentioned and that it should be involved as such , in the drawing up and taking of decisions .
I would remind you here of the content of Article 109 ( 4 ) and ( 5 ) of the Treaty : ' The Council shall , on a proposal from the Commission and after consulting the ECB , acting by a qualified majority , decide on the position of the Community at international level as regards issues of particular relevance to economic and monetary union and , acting unanimously , decide its representation in compliance with the allocation of powers laid down in Articles 103 and 105 . '
The Commission has been invited to the meeting of the G7 which is to be held in Lyons in June , but as far as I know it is not involved in the G7 meetings attended by the Finance Ministers .
We therefore need to keep out heads and not put pressure either on the course of events or on the States .
If the question should eventually arise as to whether the provisions of paragraph 19 are to be proposed and transcribed into international reality , then we shall discuss the matter again , but as far as the Treaty on European Union is concerned , this hypothetical situation cannot be taken into consideration at this stage .
Mr President , the rapporteur seems to be relying too much on the assumption that the movement of capital functions best under the current international funding systems .
Nor am I sure about the Social Democrats ' proposal that it would be sufficient to set up an international economic council to monitor speculation .
There is a need for a much more radical change to worldwide funding structures .
At present the sum of money changing hands throughout the world is equivalent to three times the foreign currency reserves of many industrialized countries .
Neither any national banks nor their international counterparts are capable of combating this level of speculation .
Of course the Greens too support the establishment of this type of early warning system and the strengthening of cooperation on international financial policy .
This , indeed , was proposed last year at the Halifax Summit and this is what the rapporteur is now proposing , but it is really not enough .
There is a need for measures which will automatically prevent speculation , and the speculators must be made to pay for such measures .
The proposal which is urgently needed is to bring into force an international tax on speculation capital .
This was proposed as long ago as 1978 by James Tobin , who later won the Nobel Prize .
Even a very low tax , of the order of 0.5 % on the quantity of capital exchanged could have a significant effect on reducing particularly short-term placements or speculation proper .
It will not of course be easy to introduce such a tax , but it should be attempted , with a view thereby to achieving an entirely new system for the supervision of capital movements at global level .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it seems to me fair to say that the system introduced at Bretton Woods , over fifty years ago now , has lost all its legitimacy today , despite the updating of the Plaza and Louvre agreements , or the Halifax declarations of intent , and yet it has continued to generate numerous effects which cause a serious imbalance for the majority of the world 's States and their populations .
Whatever one may think about the Bretton Woods agreements , the superiority of the dollar as a reference currency for the entire international monetary system was justified on three grounds .
One was political : the United States had just won , and helped the Europeans to win , the Second World War .
That was an important reason , but it was one born of circumstances , and has now become invalid .
The second reason was economic : the United States were financing European reconstruction through the Marshall Plan .
Here again , they seem to me to be its main beneficiaries , but this reason too has ceased to exist .
As for the third reason which enabled the superiority of the dollar to become established , it was a purely technical and monetary one , and was linked to the commitment by the United States to guarantee the permanent convertibility of their currency into a fixed quantity of gold .
The United States abandoned that guarantee on 15 August 1971 .
We even experienced American treasury officials touring Europe and saying to the European leaders : ' The dollar is our currency and this is your problem . '
The fact is that , since that time , they have enjoyed a preeminent position because in point of fact it is the other nations , and especially the Europeans , which are paying off the public and private deficits accumulated by the United States of America .
To put it bluntly , if my debt is expressed in my own currency and if international trade is all settled in that currency , I know that I am not going to pay my debt - it is as simple as that .
Today , these imbalances have become so serious that - while paying tribute to the efforts of the rapporteur - I cannot endorse some of his conclusions , or indeed some of his premises .
In the motion for a resolution , I read this : ' recognizing that the liberalization of capital movements brings enormous benefits , since a free capital market ensures that savings are assigned to the most productive investments ' .
Well , everyone knows that the reverse is true : the deregulation of the national markets and the liberalization of international capital movements steer the savings towards immediate profits which no longer have any relation to production , and we are operating in a ' casino ' economy , where the financial flows are no longer in any way representative of the trade in goods or services .
I think , therefore , that we should think carefully .
After all , as has just been said , a universal capital taxation mechanism serves a speculative purpose .
We also need to consider what , today , is the justification of credit , and especially short-term credit , and we need to consider a new monetary agreement .
This is why the Group of the European Radical Alliance is resolutely in favour of the single currency , and I would say that even without dwelling too much on its immediate social cost , though this remains an essential point as we see it .
Over and above that social cost , however , we know that the move forward to the single currency is the only way for the European Union to bring about the adoption of a new international monetary agreement which , for us , has to be the prerequisite for the conversion of the present World Trade Organization into a World Economic and Trade Organization .
By subjecting the latter organization to that prerequisite this would allow the introduction of a social clause , a clause relating to the placing of export products on the internal market , an environmental clause and a democratic label .
Mr President , I too am grateful to the rapporteur for this very well presented and very effective report .
I should like to begin with one or two points of interest : the report contains some introductory remarks which provide information on the deregulation of domestic financial markets , the associated trend towards the globalization of financial and capital markets , and the liberalization of capital movements .
It also states that a free capital market ensures that savings are assigned to the most productive investments .
Some very interesting comments are made in relation to the overvaluation of the US dollar in the international economy , whereby 60 % of world currency reserves and half of all private financial wealth are invested in US dollars , even though the US economy accounts for only 20 % of total production and 14 % of world trade .
This highlights the need for Europe to act .
I certainly do not take the view that Europe 's scope for taking action should be hampered by imposing a tax on speculation , as the Greens have once again proposed today : this would be tantamount to double taxation , since profits from such financial transactions will in any case be taxed as profit by the domestic financial institutions .
To my mind , this report contains three important calls : the first is for a financial system to be established which avoids inflationary or deflationary cycles , achieves a healthy balance of payments , and leads to lower interest rates and sustained , high-quality economic growth .
The second call , to curb the predominance of the US dollar , is without doubt justified , and the single currency might be of assistance here .
If all the Member States take part , the convergence criteria are met , and the citizens of Europe put their trust in the new currency , the euro could perhaps become strong enough to act as a third ' international currency ' .
It is also important to bear in mind external debt and the developing countries .
I do not think there is any point , in this context , in writing off financial positions as debts which will never be repaid .
Overall , therefore , I think the report is a constructive one : it provides a good starting-point for further discussion in the various European forums .
Mr President , this report is a most timely one , in that immediately prior to the April meeting of the IMF and the World Bank , it once again calls for an improvement in international monetary cooperation .
The embryonic reforms of the international financial institutions have not been enough to establish an effective early-warning system , to ensure better intergovernmental harmonization , and to involve not only the G7 industrialized nations but also other countries in institutionalized cooperation .
It is therefore right to make these calls now , in view of the globalization of markets and the weakness of cooperation in this area between the governments of the major industrialized nations , as well as the technical advances in communications and the massive increase in capital movements , only 4 % of which are accounted for by the real economy and real trade .
It can thus be said that a new Bretton Woods system is even more urgently needed now than was the case when it was originally introduced .
We are all aware that such a system is no longer possible today , but because the rules of the game have changed , I believe , like my colleagues and the rapporteur , that European monetary union could allow us to apply some kind of plan for target zones or even improve monetary cooperation in this direction , once the euro becomes the second international reserve currency , since it will then be easier to see the true value of this currency .
Because after all , as the report makes clear , the US dollar accounts for 60 % of world currency reserves , which in no way corresponds to the importance of the US economy .
The European Parliament has already quite rightly called on the Commission several times to produce a white paper on monetary developments .
Today we are going further , and also asking for an assessment of the effects of monetary union on the stability of the international financial system .
This is particularly important now that there are new financial instruments on this market which can influence monetary planning , for example the blueprint for the future European Central Bank , since these new financial instruments will mean that it becomes harder to assess and manage the money supply than has hitherto been the case .
I therefore believe that we are quite right to call on the Commission to carry out further studies in this area .
What is most important of all , however , is to establish a UN Economic Council along the lines of the UN Security Council , in order to institutionalize monetary cooperation .
Clearly , it will otherwise be impossible to reconcile the different economic and financial interests of the large industrialized nations and the threshold countries , and this must be done if monetary policy is to take due account both of the requirements of countries and their peoples and the need for financial discipline .
Mr President , in my opinion Parliament acted responsibly when it gave the Committee on Economic Affairs the opportunity to draw up this report .
The economic cooperation which has developed has benefited nations and their citizens .
The exchange of raw materials and product information has fostered development . The use of energy provides a good analogy for this process .
Skill in exploiting energy , consumption of and trade in raw materials have benefitted us to a great extent .
Only the excessive use of energy and its various forms are causing us problems .
In the same way we may say that the liberalization of capital is positive in itself ; however , the enlargement of foreign exchange markets has assumed ungovernable proportions .
When markets grow twenty-fold in ten years and daily currency movements have doubled in relation to currency reserves , we may guess what type of risks this may bring .
Our new technology makes it possible to carry out transactions at the speed of light and when speculations are added to this problem , we are really endangering the conditions for international free trade .
Common sense dictates that a change must be made .
It is also clear that the European single currency would facilitate the necessary cooperation with Japan and the United States on setting rules for the currency markets .
There is frequent talk of the confidence of the citizen .
This is also an essential condition for all democracy and market economy .
Therefore the world democratic governments must bring the currency markets under control .
There is no time to waste ; regulation is needed above all to protect ordinary citizens and their jobs .
Their work depends on the real economy , not on speculation .
Small businesses in small countries suffer especially from uncertain currency markets .
They do not have the resources or the opportunity to protect themselves .
Small countries also have to increase their currency reserves many times over compared to large countries .
EMU would in these circumstances be a healthy development .
It would reduce the need for these reserves and yet at the same time could increase creditability .
It is quite true that the regulation and taxation of capital movements need to be harmonised .
If the movement of capital is free , such taxation should be made compulsory .
Capital cannot be given a free ride . It must bear the social responsibility of paying tax .
But if progress is to be made in this matter we must also support the Single European Currency .
Only in this way will it be possible to move forward in this area .
Mr President , I start by congratulating Mr Garriga Polledo on the very comprehensive and technical report before us today .
The international financial markets now play a very important role in the world economy .
The deregulation of financial markets in many member countries has meant that trillions of pounds and dollars can now flow across international borders to seek a return for those investors .
I congratulate Mr Garriga Polledo on identifying some of the major issues which affect the success or otherwise of those markets at the moment , in particular his reference to counter-cyclical action with respect to the booms and busts that the world economy has seen over many years .
It is clear that what we need is sustainable positions across the globe whether it is in the United States , Europe , Japan or indeed in the developing world .
It is clear as well that the actions of the market in the longer term will lead to lower interest rates which will make it cheaper to borrow for investment and in turn will create jobs .
I also accept some of the analysis of Mr Garriga Polledo in terms of the fact that the international monetary system needs rules .
I echo the words of Mr Rönnholm on that .
In order to create those rules it needs an institutional framework .
At the moment , as we see in Europe , the Bundesbank acts in the interest of the German economy .
We are trying to create a system where we would have a European Central Bank acting in the interests of the European economy .
We see a similar position with the US , the Japanese and the European markets acting to some extent on their own .
What we need is a system which acts in terms of the global interest and international objectives .
The only way we can do that is through rules and through international cooperation .
I also accept some of the assertions by Mr Garriga Polledo about the damage that floating exchange rates can do .
It can cause over-evaluation of currencies .
I believe that the money markets are not necessarily the best judge of real economic performance , as we have seen with the exchange rate mechanism here in Europe .
I do not necessarily believe either that intervention is the answer .
What we need is a new direction . That new direction is cooperation .
We need a framework which will be brought into existence after stage three of monetary union .
I do not necessarily believe , as the rapporteur suggests , that the IMF and the World Bank are the best institutions to do that . But I agree that the G7 is not enough .
What we need is to include the fast-growing economies of Asia in that process and , at the same time , look at how we can involve the developing world in that process .
We need new multilateral procedures , we need cooperation because the success of the global economy and the livelihoods of many people around the world depend on it .
Mr President , at national level we accept that markets cannot function without rules imposed by national government .
Whilst national markets still functioned primarily on a national scale this worked well enough .
With the advent of the European Single Market the ability of national governments to continue imposing their own rules on markets was weakened .
Much of the internal market programme was then targeted at reproducing at European level this ability of national governments to set the rules .
On one level , however , the Member States were negligent .
When capital movements were liberalized the advice of the European Parliament that instruments should be set up at European level to counter any undesired developments was ignored .
With the globalization of capital movements , resulting from the predominance of liberal thinking and technological innovation , a worldwide capital market came into being which knows no rules but its own .
In normal circumstances this seems to work reasonably well .
But when these markets fall prey to speculation , there are manifestly no checks on the system .
The tidal waves then unleashed do great damage to the economy , but governments collectively and the central banks have no power to do anything about it .
The question is , should the political and nonfinancial business world resign itself to this and regard waves of speculation as merely a natural phenomenon , or not ?
My Group firmly believes that efforts must be made both to regulate the financial market and to create instruments whereby waves of speculation can be prevented or checked .
The keys to this are closer cooperation between governments , especially those of the three main economic blocs , and the central banks and on the other hand the possible introduction of a tax on capital transactions .
However tricky a tax of this kind might be , its introduction depends primarily on whether or not the necessary political will is there .
Pious aspirations about reducing labour costs by taxing less can be realized in this way .
It will certainly be easier than putting a man on the moon and far more useful .
Mr President , Mr Garriga Polledo has worked very conscientiously on a technically and politically difficult subject , and he deserves the congratulation of his colleagues , particularly for the broadmindedness with which he cooperated with his colleagues on the Subcommittee on Monetary Affairs .
The same cannot be said about the subject of his report , the international financial markets .
It is fashionable to hear , particularly from many on the opposite side of the House - though fortunately not from Mr Garriga Polledo himself - that we should be grateful to the international financial credit markets because they save us from the stupidity with which governments manage the economy .
The international money markets are supposed to achieve this by penalizing governments with high interest rates , currency devaluation or the flight of capital if they pursue mistaken policies , in other words policies that seem to the markets to be inflationary , or , now that most of us are implementing anti-inflationary policies , ones that do not seem sufficiently so in the eyes of the markets .
When the markets tame the budget deficits , they begin concerning themselves with broader issues such as the social state deficit forecast for the coming century , which we must also restrict or better still eliminate if they are to stop penalizing us with unjustifiably high interest rates .
The rationale of the markets has almost gone too far .
A few weeks ago , Wall Street started to fall , not because unemployment in the United States increased but because it fell .
Think what would happen to us if unemployment began to fall in Europe !
Fortunately , our conservative governments , with their employment policies , protect us from any such ill-omened development !
Ladies and gentlemen , we ought to turn the picture upside down and , one day , count the disasters heaped upon the world 's economy by the deregulation of the financial markets , as it is elegantly termed , or their untrammelled action as I would call it myself .
They have created the Third World debt disaster .
Has anyone counted how much hunger , how much backwardness , how much disease , how large an increase in infant mortality Third World countries have had to suffer in order to make up for that ' slight error ' by the major banks ?
The deregulated money markets created the SLM scandal in the United States , a scandal involving hundreds of billions of dollars that taxpayers had to pay for .
Similarly , a year ago they created the Mexico crisis even though Mexico implemented all the rules they had dictated to it .
And here , European taxpayers have also had to pay their costs .
Mr President , in today 's political conditions the major conservative governments refuse to cooperate on monetary issues .
From that point of view , it is just as well that Mr Garriga Polledo 's report keeps the subject open and , in common with others among us , I too would like us to take another and more effective look at the issue of controlling the international money markets .
Mr President , the Commission welcomes Mr Garriga Polledo 's report , which recommends greater international monetary and financial cooperation .
This report has been perfectly timed to support the Commission in its efforts to improve international monetary cooperation .
In the Commission 's view , and as emphasized by the rapporteur , a stable national economic policy remains a necessary but not a sufficient condition for the stability of the international monetary system .
Moreover , while the markets serve a useful purpose in imposing discipline , they can have destabilizing effects which need to be offset by international cooperation .
The Commission therefore supports the proposal that monitoring procedures should be tightened up , and believes that the European Union 's experience of multilateral procedures to monitor national budgets could be of assistance in this context , for example .
As Mr Santer and Mr de Silguy have emphasized to the relevant international bodies , the IMF and the G7 , increased cooperation on the macroeconomic policy front implies that all those concerned must agree on the objectives , and undertake to use the instruments which enable those objectives to be achieved .
In the short term , this is above all a matter of improved monitoring and the creation of crisis prevention mechanisms .
In the longer term , institutional reforms are needed to make it easier to step up international cooperation and enhance the coordination of macroeconomic policy .
The Commission is therefore in favour of increased cooperation between the international institutions .
One of the major challenges for international cooperation in the future will be to take more account of the interdependence not only between countries , but also between their policies .
The House is also calling for the European Union to play a greater role in international cooperation and , via the Commission and the European Central Bank , to become a full member of the international institutions concerned .
The Commission is willing to assume this role .
The question of international cooperation in the monetary arena must also be considered in the light of monetary union , which will have far-reaching consequences for the international monetary system .
It should be stressed here that the introduction of economic and monetary union should considerably improve international monetary cooperation .
First of all , the increased role of the euro as an international currency will help stabilize the international monetary system and , secondly , monetary union should give the European Union a weight and influence more in keeping with its economic importance than has previously been the case .
In this way , the Union would also be in a better position to coordinate monetary policy with its international partners and to bring about a reform of the international monetary system .
To achieve this , however , the European Union must adopt a firm and steadfast attitude towards its partners .
The practical details of the legal framework governing the monetary union 's external responsibilities are currently being considered : clarification is needed of the monetary union 's responsibility for external economic , financial and exchange-rate policy , and the functions of the relevant institutions need to be laid down .
It also remains to be decided how the monetary union could and should be represented in the international institutions .
The Commission 's services are looking into these issues at present , and Mr de Silguy , who is unfortunately unable to be here today , will keep you informed of the progress made , as he has done in the past .
Until such time as a new framework for international monetary and financial coordination has been defined , however , it would seem premature to comment on a financial support mechanism to minimize exchange-rate fluctuations .
Finally , as far as financial monitoring is concerned , the Commission will continue to carry out its existing responsibilities .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12.00 .
Economic and Monetary Union
The next item is the report ( A4-0073 / 96 ) by Mr Walter , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , on Economic and Monetary Union and economic and social cohesion .
Mr President , Commissioner , the development of the European Union has until now revolved primarily around progress in the economic sector , and the moves towards economic and monetary union represent another important milestone on this road .
And yet , if the nations of Europe are to continue to coexist in peace , they must be guided by more ambitious goals .
This includes bringing the EU Member States closer together in terms of living standards and opportunities in the various regions .
Despite all the efforts which have been made , regional disparities in income , infrastructure and employment levels are still substantial : by comparison with Europe 's ten most prosperous regions , the ten poorest regions have an average per capita income which is three and a half times lower , and an unemployment rate which is six times higher .
Economic and monetary union is a crucial and , we believe , an inalienable part of Europe 's future ; when it is completed , the advantages will be felt not only in prosperous regions , but in peripheral and disadvantaged ones too .
It will also help to improve the effectiveness of the Structural Funds , the Union 's most important instrument of economic and social cohesion .
But both before and after EMU , the overarching aim - cohesion - must be borne in mind , and we must ensure that the effects of economic and monetary union and of cohesion policy are complementary , not contradictory .
It is therefore necessary to draw up a cohesion strategy laying down specific stages , as happened in the case of economic and monetary union .
In practice , this means that once EMU is up and running , we must first do our utmost to ensure that its foundations are stable and lasting .
This will require both the participating countries and the pre-in countries to act responsibly .
Secondly , however , we shall need to be supportive of those who are pressing on steadfastly with their sometimes difficult task of meeting the criteria .
This could perhaps be done by means of an extended instrument of solidarity like the new Cohesion Fund .
We are definitely not thinking here of financial compensation : an equal measure of solidarity must be shown by the ins and the outs .
Furthermore , if economic and social cohesion is to make progress , we shall have to define more clearly and realistically than in the past what we mean by cohesion and the adaptation of living standards in the Union .
We should consider using less rigid indicators than GDP , as at present : unemployment statistics should be included .
However , in view of the strong trend towards migration , especially in rural areas , the economic summary should also include as a criterion the actual number of jobs in a region , in other words the rate of employment .
Key factors are sustainable growth , changes in economic trends , action to prevent exclusion , and the state of infrastructure , including social and cultural infrastructure .
These indicators should also be used in developing and focusing the Union 's most important instrument of cohesion , the Structural Funds , and the challenges which lie ahead of them .
The Structural Funds should therefore be reformed in order to support efforts to achieve cohesion ; in other words , even in the event of the enlargement of the EU , the catching-up process of disadvantaged regions must still be possible and affordable .
We should also have the courage to set deadlines by which tangible progress is to be made .
The self-confidence shown when EMU was introduced must not be dismissed as unattainable in the case of cohesion .
A true cohesion policy , designed to dovetail with economic and monetary union and to absorb any adverse effects , will entail greater coordination in all policy areas which have a bearing on economic and social cohesion .
In a European Union with 17 million unemployed , employment policy must take top priority .
We are therefore calling for an explicit article on employment to be incorporated into the Maastricht Treaty .
An active , sustainable environmental policy must also be put in place : a healthy environment will make a major contribution to the quality of life in the regions and their attractiveness .
In terms of social policy , everyone must pull together to avoid the distortions caused by social dumping - and I say everyone , to include in particular the country which has until now been opting out .
If we add cross-border regional planning , a coherent European industrial and research policy , and the safeguarding of public services which are accessible to all , what emerges is a cohesion policy worthy of the name .
Europe will have a bright future if it can combine solidarity with reliability .
Policies to create economic and social cohesion will be the litmus test of a peaceful and united Europe .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the long-term goal must inevitably be for all Member States to take part in monetary union , and in that respect there is no conflict with the goals of greater economic and social cohesion .
Problems are more likely to arise in the short to medium term , if one acknowledges the possibility that employment might be adversely affected in countries which are not yet taking part in monetary union .
On the other hand , such short- and medium-term considerations may well have to take account of distortions or even disruptions of the internal market .
It has to be said , however , that adverse effects on employment certainly do not occur in one direction only .
We experienced this in Austria when , in 1995 , our Italian neighbours devalued the lira .
It was not the case that adverse effects on employment were immediately felt in Italy - far from it .
Austria , a country with a hard currency , was the one to suffer , when millions of schillings ' worth of purchasing power poured into Italy from Austria .
All I am saying is that there is no one-way street here and no automatic response , but that the effects are of many kinds and must all be taken into account .
I therefore believe that it is illogical at this stage to discuss the basis for monetary union and to ask whether the convergence criteria are correct or , as you mentioned , whether or not we need a new European industrial policy , and the inclusion of employment in the Treaty .
None of this goes far enough .
Our number one concern must be to forestall any distortions in the single market by creating a new European monetary system - an EMS II - which seeks to keep real exchange rates within a certain range .
Secondly , when overhauling the Structural Funds , I think it is important to focus on projects which are needed in order for countries not yet taking part in monetary union to meet the convergence criteria .
And thirdly , private investment must be stimulated , since this alone can create truly secure jobs .
Mr President , I am very pleased we have been able to have this debate today following the initiative of my own political group to draw up an own initiative report on EMU and economic and social cohesion .
The reason we wanted this was because in all the discussions we have had on EMU and the single currency , Member States and experts simply have not dealt with the regional issues .
They have only dealt with the macro-economic issues at the level of a national economy and ignored the regional impact of EMU , or have ignored the relationship between EMU and cohesion policy .
People in our industrial , declining , peripheral and rural regions need to know that EMU will have some benefit for them .
Cohesion is the overriding objective in our Treaty , it stands over and above EMU and that is why we believe that EMU and its processes and stages need to be scrutinized to see how they contribute to cohesion policy .
In this report my group has pledged its support for EMU .
We recognize the advantages due to the cuts in transaction costs , due to the harmonization of interest rates and the growth in employment potential of EMU ; but we also have to say that we do not believe necessarily that EMU and social cohesion are mutually reinforcing .
They are certainly not mutually exclusive , as Mr Walter has said in his report , but we believe it will be nominal and real convergence which will support the European Union 's competitiveness with the new Asian Tigers , Japan and the US .
EMU therefore needs to demonstrate that it can support , underpin and promote cohesion .
I wish to emphasize again what Mr Walter has put into his report .
He is calling for an integrated cohesion strategy which means that we include EMU , regional policies and all relevant policies in the processes of cohesion .
He is asking for flanking measures to ensure EMU and cohesion come together and we are asking also for a solidarity mechanism to protect the financial markets against speculation and to include countries wishing to come in .
It is a very relevant debate .
President Lamfalussy of the EMI spoke to Parliament 's Subcommittee on Monetary Affairs on Monday and presented the annual report .
The word ' cohesion ' did not pass his lips once .
It is disappointing that these issues are not dealt with as a whole and cohesive strategy .
Looking at the countries that will join EMU from the beginning , it appears that the countries on the outside may suffer punitive actions .
That is why the Walter report is such an excellent one , because it puts forward constructive policies on how we can help those countries move into EMU and into the third phase faster .
Finally , we need to step up our actions in the regions .
We need to reaffirm what was agreed at the European Council in Madrid .
We need to look at local initiatives , education , training , the organization of working time , promotion of SMEs ; but above all we need to win the arguments for EMU in our regions .
This is why we need an active cohesion policy orientated towards employment and growth .
I know the Commissioner will take this forward and I ask him to do so with the incoming Irish presidency and future presidencies so that the Walter report does not lie in the filing drawer covered in cobwebs and dust .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , along with the completion of the internal market and the achievement of economic and monetary union , the promotion of economic and social cohesion represents one of the EU 's three political priorities .
Nominal and real convergence are not two mutually contradictory goals here .
Sound public finances , stable prices , low interest rates and a stable exchange rate are preconditions for growth and employment .
EMU , with all its advantages - including in particular for social and economic cohesion - is impossible without nominal convergence .
It is therefore clear that a reduction in crippling national debt plays an important role with regard to investment , and thus employment .
Practical experience in recent years has shown that where unemployment has been tackled by increasing national debt and raising taxes , no lasting success has been achieved .
Only a stable economy , which is the crucial precondition for participating in monetary union , can create market confidence , encourage trade and investment , and hence stimulate growth and job creation .
Regardless of the agreement on the long-term goal - that all Member States should take part in EMU - a transitional phase in which some , but not all Member States take part will pose problems , as Mr Spindelegger has already mentioned .
One of the main challenges at the start of EMU will therefore be to define the relationship between the currencies of participating states and those of countries which are not participating .
The Walter report explores this problem .
The many amendments tabled by my group have , in my view , brought about some good compromises , even though not all our hopes have been fulfilled .
Let me therefore draw particular attention to two points which are of considerable importance to my group .
The first is Amendment No 9 on paragraph 22 , in which we state that the current provisions of the Treaty are not inadequate and incomplete , but merely need to be strengthened and properly applied .
Furthermore , we cannot agree to an economic steering body as a counterpart of the ECB .
The second point relates to Amendment No 11 on paragraph 41 , where we refer to the Ciampi report , in which leading European trade union and industrial representatives point to a direct link between public services and competitiveness , and state that greater competition in public service provision is of benefit to governments , economies and consumers .
Therefore , public services - and incidentally , the Treaty refers here to services in the general economic interest , and I think the proper terminology should be used - should not be immune to free competition on the EU market .
We cannot and do not wish to alter the Treaty ; otherwise , competition would ultimately be eliminated and the market partially segmented , to the detriment of consumers .
Surely that cannot be in our interest .
I would therefore ask the House to vote in favour of our amendment on this specific point .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we all know that economic and social cohesion is one of the principles of the Treaty . However , it must be present in all measures taken by the European Union , although the most obvious facet of this cohesion tends to be the structural funds .
We must bear in mind that this principle should not be limited to the structural funds but should be applied to all the measures taken by the European Union and also to Economic and Monetary Union .
Cohesion is not a vested interest of country A or B nor is it a vested interest , for example , of the countries which are furthest away from Community averages , but it is the vested interest of everyone .
That is the only reason why it was given so much emphasis in the Treaties .
At this point , I should like to distinguish between two aspects : first of all , that the level of cohesion cannot be measured only between countries but also between regions ; secondly , that reinforcing this cohesion cannot be seen only as the co-responsibility of each Member State or only the responsibility of the European Union , but it has to be seen as shared responsibility by both .
On the other hand , we must acknowledge that economic and monetary union is one of the most ambitious projects and perhaps the one with the greatest implications for the European Union and its future .
In my opinion , a positive implication . Positive implications to take place which we feel are worth the sacrifice that we can make in order to bring about , for example , the criteria of nominal convergence , imposing discipline but also sacrifices , imposing sacrifices which are obviously heaviest for those states which are furthest away from the average Community incomes .
We have discussed both of these issues many times separately .
Economic and social cohesion , on the one hand , and economic and monetary union , on the other .
But we have to see them as interlinked .
That is the great merit of this report . In other words , it has put together these two aspects of European union which we must be capable of reconciling .
In these situations , what is on the table is the fact that we are not able to choose between these two aspects , we are not able to choose between economic and social cohesion and economic and monetary union .
We must reconcile the attempt at achieving economic and social cohesion with achievement of economic and monetary union .
That is what we have to do and that is what is imposed upon us by the Treaty on European Union .
The Walter report shows us that this aim is not easy but nor is it impossible .
Moreover , if we fail to bring about this reconciliation the effects for the European Union will be disastrous .
I therefore congratulate Mr Walter on his report because I think that it has led to a very positive debate which has been open to all contributions .
In my opinion , the outcome is obviously balanced and essentially - and , perhaps , most important of all - it shows that it is possible to reconcile the two aspects , namely economic and social cohesion and economic and monetary union .
With one condition , namely that we actually do so , and in order to do so we must have a concerted strategy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioners , it is a matter of priority for the European Union to promote economic and social cohesion , in order to provide a guarantee for the leastdeveloped regions that in the transition to economic and monetary union , the inequalities do not increase .
Nevertheless , as Mr Walter reminds us in his excellent report , despite the efforts made and the progress achieved , the regional disparities in the Union in terms of incomes , infrastructure and levels of employment are still very wide .
We support the proposals in this motion for a resolution which are aimed at promoting solidarity , offsetting or avoiding the adverse effects of economic and monetary union and , above all , combating unemployment : cohesion and unemployment are incompatible .
Cohesion and degradation of the environment are equally incompatible .
And , to ensure adequate regional development that is geared to cohesion , there is a need to create trans-European transport , telecommunications and energy networks and a horizontal European industry in all regions , promoting and defending public services , social rights and everything that is European .
The Confederal Group of the European United Left wishes to express its concern at the dangers to cohesion which economic and monetary union involves .
The present convergence criteria laid down in the Maastricht Treaty are neither compatible with the principle of cohesion , nor sufficient .
Others must be considered : convergence in terms of unit labour costs , the wage-productivity ratio , and so on .
Otherwise - and this is a serious point - the adjustments will be made , and they are already being made , at the cost of jobs .
Because , as Mr Walter points out in his report , the conclusions of the Madrid summit and other initiatives may remain empty words if they are not genuinely put into effect .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this report is important in that it spells out the danger that the principle of economic and social cohesion might be abandoned in the context of economic and monetary union .
Unfortunately , it is not consistent .
On the one hand , it calls upon the IGC to maintain economic and social cohesion as a policy in its own right , but on the other it is inclined - more so here than in the first draft - to misuse structural policy as a carrot-and-stick approach to the consolidation of national budgets .
Although the idea of solidarity with countries which are unable or not allowed to take part in monetary union does feature prominently in the report , it is inconsistent here too , because dividing countries into first and second class in itself belies the notion of solidarity .
The effects on regional development make the downside of the planned monetary union all too clear .
Our role in Parliament is in fact to take corrective action , but Parliament too is starting to question the original principle of economic and social cohesion .
I indicated during yesterday 's debate on enlargement to the east that the European Union is in urgent need of reform .
Social and ecological reform would provide an excellent opportunity to bring the economic crisis under control .
Mr President , it goes without saying that this report deals with economic and social cohesion in Europe , and I believe that when reference is made to preserving the convergence criteria , it is clearly being assumed that the Commission has left itself some room for manoeuvre under the Maastricht Treaty as regards strict observance of the convergence criteria .
It cannot be said in respect of government debt and net deficits - the two points which repeatedly crop up in the debate - that the criteria have to be observed to the letter : there are phrases such as ' declined substantially and continuously ' , or achieving the aim ' at a satisfactory pace ' .
I believe that three points should be borne in mind when it comes to meeting the criteria on government debt and net deficits .
Firstly , the Member States should realize - or be reminded - that the only way to achieve this objective is by means of a judicious savings programme .
Quite simply , employment will suffer if budget spending on investment is reduced , if the structure of expenditure in the more unproductive sectors is not adapted to allow for privatization , if government intervention is not pruned back and wastage curtailed , if bureaucracy reigns supreme and laws continue to be passed at the drop of a hat .
Secondly , we must of course ensure that the criteria concerning government debt and net deficits really are adhered to , since otherwise EMU could become a marriage of unequal partners , and that would undoubtedly be detrimental to Europe 's financial market in the long term .
Thirdly , and quite simply , there must be a guarantee that this single currency will not be imposed against the wishes of the citizens of Europe .
I am therefore firmly convinced that any country able to do so should put the question to its citizens in a referendum , to be sure that monetary union meets with the acceptance of Europe 's citizens .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my only purpose in speaking is to congratulate Mr Walter most sincerely on his excellent report and on the intensive preliminary work which enabled him to reach these conclusions .
The hearings of experts , the contributions of the unions , and the appearance of Commissioners Wulf-Mathies and de Silguy before the Committee on Regional Policy have enabled us to broaden our knowledge of an issue of overwhelming importance : the relationship between economic and monetary union and economic and social cohesion - complementary goals of equal political importance , as laid down by the Maastricht Treaty .
Economic and social cohesion has always been a Community goal , but as Mr Walter points out , the Treaties do not provide us with a clear definition of this concept .
In my view , therefore , the request to the Commission to include in the first three-yearly report on the state of cohesion a clear and comprehensible definition of this concept , and to improve and broaden the indicators used to measure it , is a very important one .
The report raises another issue to which I should like to refer : the impact of future accessions on Community regional policy .
The future enlargement will require the Union to make a substantial budgetary effort if it wishes to consolidate the achievements of the cohesion policy , since if the current level of expenditure is maintained , the funds that are allocated to regional policy will have to be diverted to the future Member States . And in this case , ladies and gentlemen , the cost of enlargement will fall entirely on the less-favoured countries and regions of the Union , as is happening at present .
Mr Walter is quite blunt on this point : the future enlargement must , under no circumstances , be carried out to the detriment of the cohesion countries .
In conclusion , I offer my sincere congratulations to Mr Walter on the content of his report , the working method chosen to draw it up , and the excellent degree of consensus which has been achieved .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Walter 's report is an important one .
I myself am a member of the Committee on Regional Policy and of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy in which the report was discussed .
The proposals it contains to counter social dumping and strengthen regional policy and employment policy in order to counterbalance EMU are of course good ones .
Here , however , I represent opinion in the Nordic countries which is critical of EMU , Mr President .
I myself am against EMU - my group holds a different view .
The reason for my critical attitude is that the risks are too great .
EMU is a high-risk project , as the Walter report makes clear .
Sweden and the Nordic countries are vast areas and already have serious regional problems .
We are afraid that these problems will become considerably worse if EMU is implemented .
The consequences which are examined in the report are interesting to see but I consider that there is a lack of depth as regards the issue of studies of the effects on unemployment , regional balance and the environment .
Such studies on the effects of EMU on these areas , both in the long and the short term , should be conducted before EMU is implemented .
For example , what will change for the Member States when they become part of EMU - if they do so ?
What instruments of control will remain at national level to deal with economic slumps , for example ?
Sudden changes in , for instance , the timber industry as a result of lower prices would soon turn into a crisis in Sweden and Finland .
Will countries still be able , at national level , to pursue certain economic policies , interest and exchange rate policies , regional and labour market policies , and so on ?
Or - as is the idea with EMU - will EMU and the measures which will be taken by the EU and the European Central Bank balance out these disadvantages for the individual states so that the EU can take the necessary decisions on stabilisation , in order to prevent , for example , massive economic change within a sector such as the timber industry ?
I doubt it !
It would also be best if the EMU project - if it is implemented according to the current timetable - contained a description of the decision-making process .
Should decisions on EMU be taken at EU level , should they be taken here , by the people 's representatives - which is unlikely to be the case according to the Maastricht Treaty - or is it the European Central Bank which should take the main decisions ?
A final point on this subject : before EMU is implemented , if it is , the democratic process must be strengthened in all Member States .
I am in favour of referenda as one way of doing this and of improved activities to provide information on the advantages and disadvantages of EMU .
The present report should be seen as an initial step towards elucidating the consequences of EMU .
Mr President , the report by the Committee on Regional Policy states that the less-favoured regions will derive advantages from the single currency , yet it is forced to admit that the application of the convergence criteria may slow down growth , worsen unemployment and reduce social spending .
It does not call the criteria into question , and goes no further than calling for the adoption of supporting measures to ensure that the Economic and Monetary Union is not prejudicial to economic and social cohesion .
This approach is illusory .
The allocation of structural funds has not , hitherto , done anything to reduce the regional disparities in the matter of income , infrastructure and employment which are very prevalent in the European Union , as the Committee on Regional Policy acknowledges .
The European Commission , for its part , is not prepared to hand out budgetary compensation since it purports to sanction the so-called ' cohesion ' states which fail to meet the convergence criteria .
Mr Walter 's report falls foul of a substantial obstacle which he cannot overcome : the incompatibility of the single currency with economic and social cohesion .
Experience shows us that the application of the nominal convergence criteria for the preparation of the single currency is nothing less than the declaration of war on employment , wages , social protection and the economy in regions which are already less favoured .
Furthermore , the European Social Observatory has recently acknowledged that the Economic and Monetary Union model inevitably carries the seeds of social deregulation .
The former Chairman of the Bundesbank , Mr Otto Pöhl , for his part recently stated that compliance with the convergence criteria was incompatible with the desire to combat unemployment .
The only means of creating jobs and ensuring genuine economic and social cohesion is to reexamine the issue of the single currency , which subjects economic policies and national budgets to the domination of the financial markets .
The social unrest in France during November and December opened the way to the financial markets by expressing the workforce 's rejection of a social model based on ultra-liberalism . By lending weight to this social movement , and prolonging it , we must help to lay the groundwork for a new type of development of society , in Europe in particular and , let me add , throughout the world .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this is a crucial issue .
I am deeply sorry that the European Parliament excludes the possibility of headto-head discussions in which I , could for example , counteract the opinions of the previous speaker with whom I disagree .
This debate is a series of isolated statements without any real dialogue or thought .
But the Walter report is a noteworthy report of enormous lucidity and I am entirely in agreement with it .
A single currency will represent one of the most profound changes which Europe has undergone in recent decades .
There will be a ' before and after ' in terms of the single currency .
A new ball game .
And the challenge to the poorer regions posed , in the field of the single currency , an extremely powerful challenge .
The single currency is going to be an important element of the identification of European citizens with the European Union .
In addition to its symbolic import , its cultural and psychological effects , it will imply and generate a powerful integrating logic which is going to change everything : monetary policies , economic policies and budgetary policies , etc .
Early on , the Union will have to set up a federal-type budget .
The current budget will be insufficient , too limited and restricted in terms of the implications of economic and monetary union .
Without such a federal budget the imbalances across the Union 's territory might well worsen , especially when we note the so-called asymmetrical shocks which will effect certain countries and regions more than others .
That is why territorial cohesion calls for the continuation of structural policies and this itself calls for a stepping up , rather than a closing down , of structural policies .
The Union 's cohesion in the broadest sense is going to depend on the single currency and it will depend on economic and monetary union , it will depend upon solidarity and generosity , it is going to call for the continuation of transfers of resources from the richest countries to the poorer countries but it will also demand of the poorest regions and countries greater responsibility and better use of those resources .
Mr President , I think it is continually becoming easier to grasp the positive consequences of introducing the single currency : reduction of the cost of exchanges , uniform interest rates , the avoidance of inflation caused by money market crises , a boost for the competitiveness of Europe 's economy , and finally , development and new job opportunities for the unemployed .
With a view to the aim of a single currency , I think we will have to insist on the application of the convergence criteria decided at Maastricht .
And we must not do this just because nominal convergence is a prerequisite for the introduction of the single currency .
We must do it because nominal convergence is to a large extent a prerequisite for true convergence .
By improving the health of the weaker economies we help them in the long term to approach the stronger ones .
However , the criteria for achieving nominal convergence , however important they may be , are not enough for the achievement of true convergence .
The weaker Member States are forced to make cuts in their public expenditure and public investments in order to restrict their deficits , cuts that may make the economy healthier in the short term , but which can slow development and broaden the gap between the strong and the weaker .
The Union must therefore implement a generous policy via the Structural Funds and the Cohesion Fund , so that the resources needed by the weaker may be found , to enable them to invest in education and training , basic infrastructure , and to modernize the structure of their economies .
Mr President , there is a risk associated with enlargement , concerning which we all of course agree in principle .
The candidate member states have low levels of development and will absorb large sums , resources which must not , however , be taken away from the weaker Member States because that would undermine all that we keep saying about economic and social convergence .
As we know , the IGC is not going to consider the problem .
To me , this seems like burying one 's head in the sand , since the problem of own resources and the sufficiency of resources for the policies we announce is an issue of great importance .
We need not only a Europe institutionally equipped for enlargement , but at the same time a Europe ready to deal with the economic issues raised by enlargement itself .
It is therefore a matter of absolute priority to implement an integrated regional policy , with all the improvements demanded to make it more effective .
And among those improvements , personally I believe that we must include , first , a European policy on regional planning that will allow a global approach to the problems of development , and secondly , an integrated policy on island and remote regions , which in any case the report calls upon the Intergovernmental Conference to adopt , a thing that I think is happening for the first time in the history of the European Parliament .
Mr President , as has been demonstrated in the Commission studies and has been referred to by the rapporteur , Mr Walter , it is to be hoped that the introduction of the single currency , being in the interest of the whole of the Union , can be especially advantageous for the less-developed countries : with businessmen suffering to a greater extent from uncertain micro-economic costs and calculations and the macro-economic costs of monetary instability , which is the current situation .
It can also be hoped that greater growth in all economies will have especially marked effects on these countries , as has been noted in the developments of national averages in the European Union and that countries have grown closer as growth increased .
As it is , however , far from certain that these effects will be noticed immediately we must bear in mind that the difficulties of real convergence can be especially great in some of the less-favoured regions of various countries , as has already been said by my colleague , Mr Costa Neves , which has not been recovered even in the more prosperous periods which we have been through .
In any case , the distance , even at national level , is so great that decades will be needed until cohesion countries reach a rough approximation of the Community average , vital in order to avoid risks and in order for the benefits of European monetary union to be felt .
Nevertheless , there is no going back and , on the contrary , with the approach of the single currency , we shall have to strengthen cohesion policies , as the rapporteur quite rightly suggests in his magnificent report .
However , since the less-favoured countries must also make a greater effort towards nominal convergence , in order to meet the Maastricht criteria , it is also important that , without delay , there should be some more flexibility in the requirements of additionality , since it is vital that real convergence should be achieved without a worsening of budget deficits or public debt .
This is what I would suggest to the Commissioner : without increasing European Union appropriations and by easing the requirement of additionality of the different countries , it would still be possible for countries to recover without any adverse effects on the criteria .
Mr President , the reality lived by Europe 's citizens today , and those of the most backward areas too , confirms that economic and social cohesion is incompatible with EMU and the convergence criteria imposed by the Maastricht Treaty .
It has already been proved that the effort to fulfil the criteria for nominal convergence has negative results for development , reduces the GNP and leads to job losses on a dramatic scale .
Such a situation is politically unacceptable and economically destructive , especially for countries like my own , Greece , which are advancing at the lower speed .
Yet , the picture of negative consequences is still incomplete .
A study of the consequences of the Single Currency and the Stability Agreement for the economic and social situation , both in countries that join EMU and in those that stay outside it , would , I believe , produce new and impressive results .
Might it be that the Commission and the European Parliament too should begin working on such a study ?
Mr President , I want to thank Mr Walter for his report .
It contains a lot of ideas and useful proposals .
I think it is a good comment on regional policy and its importance within the European Union .
Economic and social cohesion is what we are trying to achieve with regional policy .
Regional policy is something we will need always .
The figure in that report that indicates that 0.4 % of GNP is devoted in the European Union to regional policy draws attention to the fact that the resources committed are quite small .
By comparison with resources in the United States of America they are quite small .
We have to recognize that if enlargement is to take place , and considering that the gap is even wider than this report says - my understanding is that the candidate countries have an average of only about 30 % of the GDP of the Cohesion Fund countries - then obviously , we are going to have to strengthen European policy considerably .
We know from historical experience that economic activity ebbs and flows and what is rich today may be poor in 50 years from now .
If we are going to have a European Union then a strong , important regional policy will be a very important component of the policies that we pursue at European level .
I would like to draw attention to the fact that the report gives us the figures for the amount of structural fund resources committed to various countries .
In the case of Ireland I think the figure is a little bit out .
It says 3.3 there , while the sixth report of the Commission on structural funds says the figure is 2.1 .
Taking into account the GDP of Ireland as it is today , I think that the figure is actually on average over the six years of the programme around 2.5 .
However , even that amount of money has made a big impact .
I have never accepted that Economic and Monetary Union is a threat to the peripheral regions , just as I have never accepted that the completion of the internal market was a threat to the poorer peripheral states .
Experience has shown that the internal market has helped the poorer and peripheral states to grow .
The gap between Ireland and the average European Member State has closed by 21 points ; for Spain , by 7 points ; and for Portugal , by 9 points .
Greece is the exception .
Our colleagues from Greece would have to explain to us why it is the exception .
Sicily also is an exception , but there is a problem there .
For the future , the sacred cow of additionality will have to be revised under new programmes . It only complicates the whole issue .
We are saying in the structural funds that we must have additionality .
That means that most of the Member States - the poor states - will increase spending .
But as far as monetary union is concerned we are saying that they must reduce spending .
When we have a new programme we will have to look at the economic planning of the less prosperous states .
There has to be a partnership between them and the Commission .
We have to sit down and work out sensible economic plans and apply to their policies the resources that we can afford .
But the element of additionality cannot be proven in such small amounts of money spread over so many policies .
It is only wasting the time of Commission officials and obstructing the whole business of trying to evaluate what has been achieved .
Mr President , I should like to begin my speech with the warm congratulations deserved by a well-drafted report such as that presented by Mr Walter .
I would also make an initial remark comparing one aspect of our situation with that of the United States .
Per capita income in the richest region in the United States , Connecticut , is twice as high as that in the poorest , Mississippi .
Per capita income in Thuringia , the poorest region in the European Union , is one sixth of that in Hamburg .
Perhaps it is realities such as these , amongst other things , which ensure that economic and social cohesion is not an incidental goal of the European Union , but an objective which is enshrined in the Treaties .
The European Parliament is calling on the Intergovernmental Conference to promote and defend economic and social cohesion as a key element of the European Union .
And we must state quite clearly that we fear that economic and monetary union may have a serious negative impact on cohesion , if the necessary accompanying measures are not taken .
I do not intend to examine the statistical details of convergence .
Let me simply point out that at the present time , the only three countries which would fulfil the convergence criteria are Argentina , Taiwan and Singapore .
I should like to know how many interpretations of the Maastricht Treaty will be made if France or Germany fail to fulfil the criteria .
It is good to provide a model of budgetary discipline - I agree with that ; but it is better still to ensure that no mistakes are made with regard to convergence .
No country which has made a genuine effort to fulfil the convergence criteria should be excluded from the single currency .
That is my personal position .
Mr President , I also welcome this report and congratulate the rapporteur .
As we know , the reduction of regional disparities is one of the fundamental aims of the EU .
In fact Ireland insisted on Article 130b being inserted into the Maastricht Treaty .
The Irish economy is a very open economy and very dependent on foreign trade .
We could see that recently with regard to the beef crisis , which showed the effect on our exports and how dependent we are .
I believe the EMU will be of particular benefit to Ireland and other peripheral regions .
There has to be a balanced relationship between EMU and cohesion .
The structural funds after the year 2000 should be qualitatively and quantitatively strengthened in their third stage .
A balance must be struck between the continuing needs of the present Member States and the demands of the new Members that will join us after the next phase of enlargement .
With regard to unemployment , while I understand that there are difficulties about making it one of the convergence criteria , I believe that we should have a chapter on unemployment or employment in the new Treaty .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I very much welcome the European Parliament 's initiative to bring economic and social cohesion back onto the European political agenda in the runup to the IGC and the transition to monetary union .
By holding the hearings on the social consequences of EMU and producing the excellent report by Mr Walter , Parliament has provided some important food for thought about the social dimension of the European Union .
The Commission 's position paper of 28 February on the IGC , which sets out a clear commitment to a socially responsible model of European society , proves that you have a political ally in the Commission .
Moreover , the deliberations of the G7 countries in Lille revealed that after a decade of neo-liberal thinking , there is a growing awareness not only in Europe but around the world that competitiveness and social progress go hand in hand .
This is one crucial message contained in your motion for a resolution to which I fully subscribe .
The single European currency and the completion of the European single market are needed to ensure our competitiveness , but they must be supplemented by the European Union 's third priority : economic and social cohesion .
The convergence criteria , which have been the subject of sometimes heated public debate , not only correspond to a sound economic policy , but are also necessary for cohesion .
Generally speaking , it is the weakest Member States which suffer from having to pay a risk premium on interest rates .
The effect of a sound budgetary and financial policy will be to stabilize exchange rates , causing interest rates to fall sharply in those countries - more even than in the rich industrialized countries - and this will stimulate investment .
A high degree of price stability and healthy public finances - nominal convergence , in other words - are necessary conditions for growth , but will not in themselves be sufficient to ensure real convergence of incomes between the Member States and regions .
Real convergence requires an active national and European policy to promote growth in the poorer regions .
Experience over the past two decades has shown that in the long term , devaluation does not improve the competitiveness of European countries .
The international capital markets are progressively narrowing the scope for national action ; exchange-rate fluctuations caused by speculation are hampering economic growth in countries with both hard and soft currencies .
So there is a need to create an exchange- rate mechanism alongside monetary union which will stabilize the currencies of countries unable to take part in monetary union from the outset .
The Commission shares the House 's wish that an agreement should be reached on exchange rates in order to foster a joint approach to stability and to prepare for the pre-ins to join the single currency as soon as possible .
Further thought must also be devoted in this context to an extension of the Cohesion Fund for the purposes of achieving the convergence criteria .
The Commission endorses many of your recommendations to the IGC , for example on employment policy , and I would point out that Mr Santer 's initiative has made clear our intention to give this topic a very high profile .
I would also stress that a third of the whole Community budget is already flowing , through the Structural Funds , into projects such as the fight against unemployment .
We also share your opinion about the link between environmental and regional policy .
I am not sure whether there has been some misunderstanding on the question of public services , as the Commission 's position paper made it clear that equal access by all citizens to public and community services should be regarded as fundamental to the European model of society .
This does not rule out competition either within the public service or between the public and private sectors ; nor would it exclude public-private partnerships .
I think in fact that we all agree on this point .
As to future financial requirements , which are not on the IGC 's agenda , I am both a little more realistic and a little more optimistic than most of today 's speakers .
If the formal conditions , the desire to increase efficiency and the positive effects of cohesion policy are taken seriously , I believe it will be perfectly feasible to achieve our objectives without increasing the financial burden any further .
It is therefore important for us to unite in advancing your main demands about the future profile of cohesion policy , in particular concentration , increased efficiency , the strengthening of partnerships and the promotion of local employment initiatives .
I would end by repeating that I fully agree with your assertion that the Community 's structural policy is an independent policy pursuing its own objectives beyond that of EMU .
In my view , if economic and social cohesion is to be increased , living standards in the Union must be aligned and overall economic development brought into balance .
This means more than fulfilling the convergence criteria .
It includes the creation of jobs , especially in structurally weak regions and for problem groups within the workforce ; it includes sustainable development in disadvantaged regions .
I think it is important that the House should continue to highlight these factors in the forthcoming debate , because the European model of society demands that economic efficiency should be in tune with social cohesion , and it should remain so in the future !
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at noon .
1994 Cohesion Fund
The next item is the report ( A4-0069 / 96 ) by Mr Costa Neves , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , on the complement to the Commission 's annual report on the Cohesion Fund ( 1994 ) ( COM ( 95 ) 0222 - C40237 / 95 ) .
Mr President , first of all I would like to congratulate Mr Costa Neves on his report .
On behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , I would like to point out that in accordance with the principles governing its operation , the Cohesion Fund aims to underpin the efforts of the less well developed Member States .
Its declared aim is therefore to support economic and social cohesion .
Financial support for infrastructure projects is aimed at doing something about unemployment in weaker Member States and about the structural problems of their economies , in an effort to make an important contribution towards development .
Consequently , it is an important instrument for the exercise of economic policy , and it can play some part in the reduction of regional inequalities and in a fairer distribution of revenue within the framework of the European Union .
Yet , the linking of a smooth flow of finance or approvals of new projects to the absence of excessive financial deficits , as envisaged in the related regulation , could lead to negative results and undermine the Cohesion Fund 's declared aim , granted that the Fund was created to contribute towards convergence and not to be converted into a means of imposing specific financial conduct .
Approval and the payments of credits must go together with the fulfilment of conditions such as compatibility of the project with the Fund 's declared principles , its suitability and utility for development , its connection with the promotion of the project and its proper and transparent management .
However , to link it to the size of the overall financial deficit of the beneficiary state could impede efforts towards convergence , bearing in mind the condition in which most of those states find themselves .
It also leads to a vicious circle since the withholding of credits then leads to worse recession , which entails additional non-productive expenditure , which in turn exacerbates the financial problem .
Consequently , the assessment of projects and the finance for them should be based on the criterion of how well the project contributes to the developmental effort of the Member State in question , and should take into account facts and figures that reflect its particular features .
The debate on this item will be resumed today at 6 p.m.
Before going ahead with voting time , I would like to tell you that , as reported by the news agencies , a terrorist attack took place this morning at 7 a.m. , 5 a.m.
GMT , at the Europa Hotel near the Pyramids of Gizeh , 5 km outside Cairo .
A group of terrorists attacked innocent tourists with the loss of 17 or 18 lives , most of them Greek tourists , and 14 or 15 wounded , 7 of whom are in a critical condition .
It is reported that 14 of those who died were women , and I would like to express the House 's most vigorous possible condemnation of that terrorist attack , and our absolute opposition to terrorism wherever and against whomsoever it takes place .
I would also like to express the sentiments of us all , I presume , in addressing Parliament 's warmest condolences to the families of those who died , and our sympathy towards the families of those wounded .
Mr President , you have spoken for us all .
I too heard a little while ago about what has happened , from Mr Dimitrakopoulos .
I just wonder , besides what you have said , whether the Commission , the Commissioner responsible for tourism ought not to consider the need to inform European Union citizens about the particular dangers they may well have to face in certain countries ?
I do not know whether that would be part of a travel directive or something else , but I believe the European Union could contribute in some way towards the protection of citizens .
Mr President , on behalf of the Socialist Group I would like to express our revulsion and sorrow at this terrorist act , and our sympathy for the families of the victims .
Mr President , I too , on behalf of our political group , would like to express our sharing of this grief and to ask that we should not dignify such occurrences with a political or any other character .
Terrorism is to be condemned anywhere in the world , and that is all .
Mr President , on a very serious point of order .
I shall be very brief .
Last night , in the exchange of views with Commissioner Fischler , the chairman of my group asked for a vote by Vice-President Fontana so that we could have an open question-and-answer session .
I have discovered that , although we protested to the President in the chair , he used the speakers ' list that was given to him by the other political groups .
I find it unacceptable that out of 14 speakers , 11 were on the speakers ' list .
There were at least 70 people in the Chamber .
I find that unacceptable in terms of the democratic accountability of this House .

Mrs McCarthy , I was not here yesterday evening , but I asked our collaborators at the desk , who take a different view of the matter . However , we will see that you are informed about the facts so that we can look into it further .
Votes
Mr President , is it acceptable , now that we have voted on nearly a hundred amendments , that the plenary should substitute its own text for that of the committee responsible ?
Mr Pasty , I think this is an issue that should be considered both by the Conference of Presidents of the Political Groups and by the Bureau .
I would not like to start a debate here , in Plenary .
It is one of Parliament 's eternal problems and we have tried very many times to solve it without any result so far .
Let our Presidents look at it again , and let us do so ourselves , in case some new effort can achieve something better .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Green Group in the European Parliament voted against the report which has been adopted today , because it contains a number of loopholes which pose a major problem in terms of authorization .
We very much regret that our amendments were not carried , above all the one taking up the Swedish proposal on comparative assessment , whereby authorization would be refused if the assessment revealed that a less harmful biocidal product was available .
The report now says that a product may be refused and removed from the list .
But may does not mean shall : this means that we have abdicated all responsibility and placed it firmly in the hands of the Commission , instead of insisting on the imposition of a rule to prevent biocidal products , with their damaging effects on human health and the environment , from reaching the market .
We also regret the adoption of an amendment authorizing anti-fouling products for ten years , even though we know that mechanical methods exist which make the use of these products superfluous .
This is all the more unfortunate since we are aware that these products are the main cause of pollution in our seas and oceans . It is therefore utterly incomprehensible why , in voting today , the European Parliament has above all looked after the interests of industry , rather than trying to adopt a report which seeks to minimize the quantity of biocidal products being placed on the market .
We also find it regrettable that authorization is granted for such a long period of time , and that our amendment in line with the Danish proposal was rejected , namely to authorize highly toxic products for four years only .
No-one can fail to be aware that there are differences in temperature and climate between the north and the south of Europe which cause different conditions for microflora and parasites to live in and hence give rise to a different demand for products such as biocidal products for example to solve this problem .
Harmonization ought to take account of this and that implies a certain flexibility in the list to be prepared and a calm and accurate evaluation of the whole problem in all its breadth and complexity .
Our inclination is to maximize the benefits and minimize the risks and to correct the belief that biocidal products are necessarily always damaging to the environment and dangerous to human health .
The directive under discussion does not refer to a new sector but forms part of an already existing legal system governing chemical substances and preparations in general .
Rejecting Amendments Nos 4 and 42 on laying down a green tax , and Amendments Nos 7 , 38 , 43 , 87 and 89 , and accepting instead Amendments Nos 96 , 97 , 100 and 101 , we support the directive .
The increase in the number of biocidal products is alarming .
Our dependence on chemicals is a growing cause for concern .
Only a fraction of the almost 100 000 chemical products on the market have been authorized .
Some ECU 400 million is spent on biocidal products and more than ECU 11 billion spent on pesticides each year .
As a result , there was a need for this proposal for a directive concerning the placing of biocidal products on the market , in order to establish an approved list of active substances and a system for the mutual recognition of biocidal products in the single market .
Because of the complexity and interdependence of the 20 or so existing directives on chemical products , understanding and interpreting this draft directive is not easy .
There is an urgent need , in this area , for the simplification of legal texts that was proclaimed in the Treaty on European Union , and I therefore wish to congratulate Mrs Jensen on her work .
I would end by expressing my endorsement of the agreement which I reached personally with the rapporteur concerning the alternative evaluation methods that are required , which despite representing a very positive step , could have given rise , without this compromise amendment , to unacceptable situations of privilege and monopoly .
Given the importance of this issue , and the support of the Commission and Parliament for Amendment No 95 , the Spanish socialist delegation will be voting in favour of this report .
The so-called ' biocidal ' products , such as disinfectants , products for treating wood , bird repellents , anti-slug agents , insecticides , etc . , are not ecologically harmless products .
Furthermore , this wide domain of chemistry has a substantial economic value .
It is , then , because it lies on the border between economics and ecology that this report arouses strong feelings .
I would like to say at once that I fully endorse Mrs Kirsten Jensen 's reservations regarding the ' automatic ' principle introduced into the directive . In accordance with this principle , a biocidal product which has been authorized by the responsible authorities in a single State would also have to be authorized automatically by the authorities in other States within a period of sixty days .
This poses a problem for those countries whose ecological standards are high , and it presupposes the existence of authorities that are genuinely capable of making distinctions .
According to the rapporteur , there are at present about a hundred thousand chemical products on the market , very few of which have been authorized under the procedure suggested in the present directive . The importance of efficient monitoring procedures will be readily appreciated .
We need not only to enable consumers to protect themselves against chemical products whose side effects are little understood , but also to defend nature and wildlife against invasive chemistry .
What we need to do , therefore , is to provide the Member States with the option of conducting a fresh assessment and refusing approval to a substance if it appears that a similar substance already exists and poses fewer health or environmental risks .
Compliance with this principle , combined with the requirement that the Member States should be provided with genuinely comprehensive information , can restrict the damage caused to the environment and to health by biocidal products .
That is why I strongly support Mrs Jensen 's report .
Oomen-Ruijten report
One of the fundamental principles of the European Union is that of subsidiarity .
In order for the Union to function effectively and in order for the people of Europe to have faith in cooperation , Community legislation must concentrate on those problems which national governments can only solve through cooperation .
The measure concerning comparative price labelling is a clear example of the move away from the principle of subsidiarity .
Such a move will provoke criticism from the Member States about unnecessary bureaucracy emanating from the EU .
We believe in principle that this type of legislation should not be the subject of a Community directive .
The proposed legislation is not needed to make the single market work .
We consider there to be few disadvantages in certain differences existing between Member States in this field .
Where legislation is needed urgently , this should be the concern of each country individually .
In principle we believe that the EU should have nothing to do with issues such as this and that they are best dealt with at national level .
We have , however , chosen to support what is best for the consumer , and have therefore voted for the report .
We support the fact that things are to be made easier for consumers , among other things by making price comparisons where necessary , by including comparable prices in advertisements indicating prices and by removing the link with quantity series , as they make things more difficult for consumers .
We cannot support the amendments concerning the single currency , as we do not support the idea as such ; nor do we believe that it will come to pass .
From the consumer point of view we do not believe either that it will be easy to make sense of all the different prices which will be indicated .
Consumer protection and consumer information are both very important , especially in the internal market .
As a consumer , I wish to be informed about what I buy : informed about the content as well as the price .
I wish to be able to make objective comparisons .
Yes , ladies and gentlemen , objective !
In other words , distinctions must be drawn .
We have managed to achieve standardized sizes for many products on our markets .
Consumers benefit from being able to compare them .
We improved matters in the wine sector in the late 1980s by banning 0.68 , 0.7 and 0.73 litre bottles and replacing them with the now compulsory 0.75 litre bottles .
This EC-wide harmonization was , moreover , an attempt to reduce the number of bottles in circulation by increasing recycling .
At the time , this was a major cost factor for the wine industry .
A basic indication of the price per litre without distinguishing between different , legally controlled qualities of wine - which in Germany range from simple table wine to top-of-the-range specialities like Trockenbeerenauslese and Eiswein - would fall well short of ensuring price transparency , in other words enabling consumers to compare the quality and price of the individual wines on sale .
Not all wines are the same .
What is marketed in 0.75 litre bottles is not sold in 1 litre bottles , and to compare wine made from late-harvested grapes with ordinary table wine would be like comparing chalk and cheese .
An objective approach is thus essential .
And let us carry out a cost-benefit analysis of all the rules that we adopt .
Conversion does not come cheap .
But where is the benefit for consumers ?
I think we have to draw distinctions .
Where standard sizes have already been introduced , it will be enough to go on indicating prices for these units .
Dual price indications should only be provided when it is objectively possible to compare prices , and therefore helpful for the consumer .
Talleyrand said everything which is exaggerated is insignificant .
It was this basic proof that came into my mind when I analysed the report by our Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection proposing a new Community directive relating to the indication of prices of products offered to the consumer , with a view to protecting the consumer by providing appropriate - in other words - specific - information on prices , so as to enable a comparison .
I am bound to say that I could happily have accepted the Commission 's proposal , which seems to me to conform to the intended objective of protecting the consumer .
As regards the new obligation on retail traders to disclose the selling price and the price per unit of measurement - in other words per metre , per kilo or per litre - obviously there can be no question of forcing the retailer to disclose , for example , the price per litre on a bottle of first grade growth wine which is supplied only in the standard 0.75 litre bottle .
What would be the point , in this case , of indicating the price per litre ? After all , for wine of this high quality there are no litre bottles on the market .
Such information would tell the consumer nothing . All it would do would be to increase his confusion , a nonsensical result .
I trust that the amendment before us will be interpreted in this way , if it is adopted .
Too much information , especially irrelevant information , is counter-productive .
I wonder whether we do need to force traders , following the introduction of the single currency , to quote three prices for each product during the transitional period : the price in national currency , the price in European currency , and the price per measured unit in the single currency , and why not quote this price in the national currency too , which would ultimately result in four different quoted prices ?
However , the authors of these amendments seem to have lacked the courage of their own convictions , since they propose a detailed report of what these obligations would cost the retail trade , and even suggest a solution to the problems faced by small traders .
The answer , according to them , could be for the Commission to provide aid to persons in this category , though of course they give no details as to how such a proposal - doubtless well intentioned - could be implemented in practice to the tens of millions of small retail traders in the Community .
Nor do I understand why we are being asked to delete the Commission 's very reasonable proposal that the Member States should be permitted to exempt products from the obligatory indication of the price per unit of measurement if the provisions laid down at national or Community level do not require any indication of the length , weight or volume of those products .
This option includes , in particular , products sold by the piece or unit .
Why delete this reasonable provision ?
Why impose abnormally short deadlines for the application of all these new obligations ?
I think that the Commission 's proposals are far more reasonable . For all these reasons , I abstained .
Walter report
I have voted for the report .
I regard it as a first attempt to illuminate the social consequences of EMU .
This does not mean I am in favour of EMU .
On the contrary , I am against EMU precisely because I consider that there are considerable risks that unemployment will increase still further , that regional imbalances will get worse as a result of greater concentration in trade and industry and that environmental problems will grow because of the lack of environmental criteria for ' growth ' .
The report should also have looked at the changes which will take place as regards the instruments which may be used at national level to counter downturns in the economy , as they affect forestry for example .
Will Member States be able to pursue their own economic policy , interest rate policy , currency policy , regional policy and labour market policy in the future so as to respond to such changes in the economy or will all the relevant decisions be taken at EU level by the new central bank ?
In the long term , will tax and finance policies be decided at EU level too ?
The democratic process leading up to a decision on EMU is important .
It will be made easier if the advantages and disadvantages of EMU are better explained .
Referenda should be regarded as the obvious means of ensuring that EMU has the support of the people .
This report contradicts itself to a great extent .
Both in the explanatory memorandum and in a major part of the conclusions many of the negative traits of the current economic and social state of the European Union are recognised .
In fact , it is worth remembering , and we think this is quite obvious , that economic and social cohesion and the reduction in the disparities of development are central objectives of the European Union and we should also remember that EMU will not just be an instrument - just one alternative , we should add - but is a sharp reminder to all of those - including the Governments of the 15 countries - transforming the passage to a single currency into a central objective ( which should not even be an objective at all ) and in addition excluded from any of the discussions about the revision of the Treaties .
We should also like to point out that the increase in unemployment ( a further one and a half million jobs lost by the year 2000 ) , the reduction in economic growth , the increase in taxes or the reduction of social public spending ( or both ) are all consequences of the achievement of the criteria of nominal convergence and we should also remember that a Union at different speeds is a contradiction in terms - none of this comes as a surprise because we have been saying it for a long time .
The contradiction in this report resides in the fact that some of the conclusions insisted , nevertheless , as is recognised , on maintaining the existing criteria with a view to the single currency , in the suggestion of tightening up the criteria after 1999 ( with disciplinary or punitive measures applied to the ' ins ' and the ' outs ' , despite the fact that a multi-speed Europe has already been accepted ) , by restating - unbelievably - the principle that EMU can actually foster social cohesion , when it is really a contradiction in terms , by putting back on the table a proposal of conditionality for the Cohesion Fund and the implicit rejection of the creation of identical regulations for the structural funds after 1999 .
We tried to solve this contradiction by letting the peoples of Europe have a say and by proposing the conducting of constitutional referendums on a handover to a single currency , but this amendment was rejected .
Therefore , and without denying the public recognition which we have defended for a long time , and which a major part of this report actually corroborates , we had no choice other than to abstain from the vote on this document .
Chernobyl disaster
Mr President , I have just voted for this report with the greatest of pleasure .
I would remind honourable Members that we have had a visit here from a delegation from the Ukraine .
I myself was involved in this visit .
It emerged once more from the talks we had with the delegation just how complicated the situation in the Ukraine is .
But I should also reiterate the point made by many honourable Members in past debates , namely that there is no need to dismantle the two new nuclear power stations .
The old plant meets only 16 % of the Ukraine 's energy needs and it became apparent to us in the course of our discussions that the search for alternatives would be welcomed .
But the Ukraine - rightly - wants more than words and wants to see action .
So I urge the European Commission to work vigorously with the Ukraine to find alternative options .
I think that country deserves this , but we as Western Europeans deserve it too , despite all the risks entailed .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted against the resolution , because I find that there is more hypocrisy here in the European Parliament than anywhere else .
Politicians are concerned not about whether we will survive a second Chernobyl , but only that the West European nuclear industry might not survive a second Chernobyl .
The European Union has failed lamentably .
It has left the nuclear industry to cope with the consequences of the Chernobyl disaster .
However , it is unacceptable for tax revenue to be spent on studies designed to create a new market outlet in Eastern Europe for the West European nuclear industry .
We know that West European nuclear power stations are not safe either ; we should therefore have begun by decommissioning our own nuclear reactors .
Even the World Bank has recognized that the best and quickest way to help the East European countries is to upgrade their gas and oil supplies , not to rely on nuclear energy , which is so dangerous and completely uneconomic .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , for more than seventy years the USSR regime was presented as the model society , the result of the application of a socialism which was allegedly both scientific and inevitable .
Today , this very House is crawling with the USSR 's travelling companions - green or red - and paid spies . And that same USSR today presents us with the terrifying spectacle of an unprecedented global devastation , because although communism certainly killed people in Gulags and massacres , we now see the consequences of its madness endangering not only the heroic Chechen people but the entire human race .
It is not only the Chernobyl power station - where the fusion of one of the two reactors still cannot be brought under control - that still threatens Europe with a fresh disaster : there are twenty other power stations that could explode at any time .
Not forgetting the Barents Sea , transformed into a vast radioactive dustbin where 30 , 000 fuel rods have been dumped and where 52 abandoned nuclear submarines represent 52 separate terrifying dangers .
The same is even true , I regret to say , of the Far North of Siberia , where there are nuclear dumping grounds for submarines .
To take account of this vast , tragic situation is the most urgent task confronting all the nations of Europe .
That is why we voted in favour of the text presented to us , whatever its deficiencies .
Mr President , I voted against this motion for a resolution because the text allows the Western nuclear industry complete freedom to go and carry out cosmetic operations in the countries of the former USSR .
In this connection , let me cite the example of the pressurized water nuclear power station of Cattenom , which is in my own region .
Once it had been found that the probability of an accident was very much higher than had initially been admitted , and after an opinion had been sought from the Commission in Brussels , iodine filters were fitted which are supposed - in the event of a melt-down - to prevent the escape of radioactive iodine .
Well , those filters have never been tested - not even in a laboratory - so that this is indeed a case of ' cosmetic ' treatment , in so far as it serves no purpose whatsoever .
For my part , I would have preferred the public funds to be invested in cogeneration rather than in the alleged improvement of existing power stations .
The Chernobyl disaster was discovered in Sweden and apart from Ukraine and Belarus Sweden has been the country which has suffered most from the consequences .
Still , ten years on , 7-8 % of the Lapps ' reindeer in North Bothnia are condemned because of excessive levels of caesium 137 .
A large proportion of natural raw products , such as game , fish , mushrooms and berries , are also unfit for human consumption on account of their caesium content .
25 % of elk have to be condemned and in the worst hit areas more or less all roedeer .
It is not unusual to find roedeer with 30 000 becquerels in the Gävle region - and all this despite the fact that the authorities promised ten years ago that all radioactivity would disappear very soon !
At the same time Sweden is one of the countries most dependent on nuclear power for its electricity supplies .
To implement the decision which has been taken to decommission all nuclear power stations by the year 2010 will not therefore be easy but it must be done nevertheless .
Despite the fact that the nuclear industry has invested enormous sums of money in PR campaigns to avoid decommissioning , Sweden 's new prime minister , Göran Persson , has voiced his views in such a way that he was described as an enemy of nuclear power in the newspaper ' Aftonbladet ' the other day .
Persson has said that the decommissioning of nuclear power is an opportunity for development .
His industry minister , Anders Sundström , said yesterday that nuclear power as a source of energy was finished .
Sooner or later it would have to be phased out everywhere and it was good to be among the first .
The EU should listen to this Swedish minister .
The phasing out of nuclear power - in order to avoid other Chernobyls in the future - is both possible and necessary and could , moreover , confer a competitive advantage , since those who are first to give up this doomed energy source will have put all the problems of conversion behind them when the competition still has them to come .
Here in the European Parliament various committees have pronounced in favour of the phasing out of nuclear power , in favour of Euratom becoming a body for alternative energy .
If the European Parliament really wants to protect the future of the Union , a common plan for the phasing out of nuclear power should be very high on the agenda .
I have voted for the resolution but would , if I had been permitted to draft it , have included a section on the fact that nuclear power as a source of energy should be phased out both within the EU and in the rest of Europe and replaced with renewable and sustainable sources of energy based on the principle of recycling .
The EU should therefore amend the Euratom Treaty so that the current text relating to supporting civil nuclear power is removed ; the Treaty should then promote renewable energy sources which are sustainable in the long term .
Visby Summit
The forthcoming summit meeting to be attented both by the heads of government of the countries around the Baltic Sea and the EU presidency , as well as the Commission President , in many way constitutes a milestone in European cooperation .
It is four years since the Baltic Sea Council was established as a Danish-German initiative ( in April 1992 ) .
The Council already forms a framework for gradually closer ' triangular cooperation ' between the EU , the Nordic countries and the Central and Eastern European countries in the region .
At the same time several parallels may be drawn between this new Baltic Sea Cooperation and Mediterranean Cooperation .
First of all , because the circle of participating countries in the Baltic region also consists of both existing and future EU Member States , as well as countries for which EU membership is not currently relevant for various reasons .
Secondly , because there is a high degree of similarity between the problems which the two fora for cooperation are intended to resolve .
Both in the north and the south , the aim is to secure democratic development and lasting political stability by means of cross-border cooperation on trade , the environment , establishment of an improved transport infrastructure and combating international crime .
Part of the cooperation process is a developed network of association agreements between the EU and the European third countries in the region ; the EU provides support for the promotion of economic growth and the solution of a number of acute environmental problems .
It is worth noting that the setting up of the Baltic Sea Council has been instrumental in strengthening the Baltic states ' freedom of action and independence in foreign policy in the context of broader European cooperation - a process which the Nordic countries have a special obligation to promote and strengthen for both geographical as well as historical and cultural reasons .
Middle East situation
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we did not vote in favour of the texts that had been presented , reflecting as they do in the refusal of this Parliament to denounce the collusion by Israel and Syria at the expense of Lebanon .
These text , once again , make no genuine peace proposals , and the peace of 1993 has failed .
Why ?
Because it strengthens the apartheid between Jews and Palestinians , an apartheid which is just as unacceptable as the form which once prevailed in South Africa , between the Bantu homelands and the predominantly European areas .
Well , on the basis of the noble ideas of peace , democracy and progress that everyone advocates , why not learn from the example of South Africa ?
I propose to this House the creation of a Federal Republic of the Middle East , constructed on the principles of equality and the rejection of exclusion .
In four words , one man , one vote .
It will comprise the territories of the former British mandate : Jordan , Israel and Palestine .
Its President , on the same principle as Nelson Mandela , would be Yasser Arafat , representing the Arab majority , and assisted by a Vice-President , like Frederik De Klerk in South Africa , who would be Shimon Peres , while his Minister of the Interior , equivalent to the Zulu Chief Buthelezi , would be the King of Jordan .
I have no doubt that the anti-racist Jewish leaders would accept this solution of universal citizenship , as the Whites did in South Africa .
My thanks to the ushers and officers for their attention .
The Green Group has voted for the joint resolution concerning the Baltic Sea conference , despite the fact that we regard it as being far too weak in many respects .
The environmental situation in the Baltic Sea is alarming , not least in respect of exhaust fumes from road transport and the risks from nuclear power stations .
The EU should therefore take its own rules on environmental impact assessments more seriously where TEN projects , including the Öresund bridge , are concerned , and adopt a clear policy on the closure of dangerous nuclear power stations in the region , rather than supporting them and prolonging their active life .
The potential for alternative energy sources has not been exploited at all .
Nor has sufficient attention been paid to the risk that EU membership and the Schengen Agreement , which it is true will increase freedom of movement for EU citizens within the EU , may result in the establishment of new barriers between peoples in the Baltic region .
Finally , there is no serious analysis of the security situation in the region .
Many former communist states are now doing all they can to become members of Western military alliances ( NATO and / or the WEU ) .
At the same time it seems there is only limited interest within these alliances in an enlargement which would give them a long common border with an Eastern , Russian-led bloc .
The Greens are opponents of military blocs and would warn against a new division of Europe .
It is therefore surprising that the majority in the European Parliament would appear to have so little interest in exploiting Sweden and Finland 's experience of non-alignment as the basis for new , common security parameters in the region .
Irrespective of whether one is in principle a believer in or an opponent of enlargement of NATO and / or the WEU , alternatives must be prepared .
Current policy , which gives the impression that the countries concerned will soon be incorporated in a Western system of military ' security ' , may cause people to feel they have been deceived and give rise to a dangerous backlash if it does not become reality soon ; it may also foster nationalist sentiments .
A serious analysis should therefore be made of the opportunities which exist for the creation of a non-aligned security zone in the Baltic region for those parts which are not part of the Russian Federation or NATO and of course do not become dependent on one or other of these military blocs either .
The EU countries Sweden and Finland should play an active role in this .
Ukraine 's decision to remain non-aligned is a positive step in this direction .

Two things must be halted at once : firstly , all efforts to shoot down the Middle East peace process through international terrorism ; and secondly , neutral population groups must no longer fall hostage to escalating military confrontation .
The first can be stopped , and assistance can be provided for the neutral population - the group whose very name is a blasphemy has now admitted that it receives support from Iran , that Iraq is providing transport , and Syria weapons .
The international community should make it clear once and for all that what these countries are supporting is a criminal attack on peace , which must be condemned as international crime and dealt with accordingly .
Katyusha rockets have to be supplied and transported , and anyone who does so is collaborating in a crime against peace .
The international community should call to account the perpetrators and their accomplices , and do everything in its power to help the innocent people who have become involved .
That concludes voting time .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.30 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Madam President , just half a minute to mention a sad situation .
The Portuguese public have been faced , yesterday and today , with pictures of terrible violence resulting from the savage and barbaric beating of eight East Timorese citizens who tried to find refuge in the German Embassy .
Again today another three East Timorese tried to seek refuge in the Dutch Embassy .
I should like again to mention the fight of the people of Timor and I should like to ask the Presidency of the European Parliament to do all it can and to make all of the possible contacts in order to remain informed about the events which are taking place in Jakarta in order to safeguard the rights of the people of Timor .
Madam President , indeed once again there has been a flare-up of the situation in East Timor , in relation to Indonesia .
I should like to say that the reaction of the police force and regime in Indonesia has now gone even further than that to which we were used and what we were already used to was bad .
On the other hand , it is vital that we be given an explanation about exactly what has happened , especially since one of the events concerns the Embassy of a European Union country in Jakarta - I am referring to the German Embassy .
I would like to have all the necessary information - in particular , as to how this situation came about so that the European Parliament can take a stand on this matter , as it always has in the past .
Thank you , Mr Costa Neves .
Like Mr Apolinário , you are well aware that those were not really points of order , but in view of the gravity of the events you have reported I am nevertheless glad to take due note of them .
Topical and urgent debate
The next item is the topical and urgent debate on subjects of major importance .
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0501 / 96 by Mr Imbeni and Mrs d 'Ancona , on behalf of PSE Group , on the insult to the memory of the victims of the extermination camp at Auschwitz ; -B4-0509 / 96 by Mrs Lalumière , on behalf of the ARE Group , on the insult to the memory of the victims of Auschwitz ; -B4-0511 / 96 by Mr Nordmann and others , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on respect for the memory of the victims of Auschwitz ; -B4-0517 / 96 by Mrs Roth and others , on behalf of the V Group , on the demonstration by the extreme right on the site of the former concentration camp at Auschwitz ; -B4-0529 / 96 by Mrs Seillier and others , on behalf of the EDN Group , on the desecration of the site of Auschwitz-Birkenau ; -B4-0533 / 96 , by Mr Pasty and Mr Ligabue , on behalf of the UPE Group , on respect for the site of Auschwitz ; -B4-0534 / 96 , by Mr Provan and Mr van Velzen , on behalf of the UPE Group , on the insult to the memory of the victims of the camp at Auschwitz ; -B4-0540 / 96 by Mr Piquet and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the desecration of the concentration camp at Auschwitz .
Madam President , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , I wish to condemn in the roundest possible terms the insult to the memory of the millions of victims of the Holocaust , in the shape of the demonstration organized some weeks ago by some hundreds of neo-Nazi militants inside the Auschwitz concentration camp .
It is the most recent and most serious of a series of provocations over the past few years designed to diminish and even to deny that the extermination of the Jews perpetrated by the Nazi system and its allies before and during the Second World War ever actually took place .
The choice of Auschwitz is no accident , since it is the very symbol of the Holocaust and more than a million Jews were massacred there .
It is significant and important that today all the democratic political Groups of the European Parliament are jointly expressing their own firm condemnation of that iniquitous demonstration and of any act of anti-Semitism , racism or xenophobia .
We intend by this means to reaffirm that the memory of the horrors of the past cannot be wiped out , that civilization and European democracy have asserted themselves by the very means of the victory against Nazism and fascism and that the fight against every act and every ideology of discrimination and extermination must always be at the basis of the Europe of today and tomorrow .
We wish to express our solidarity not only with the memory of those who lost their lives as a result of Nazi barbarity but also with the Jewish community which has once more been outraged .
A serious warning is emanating at present from Poland .
We ask the Polish authorities not to tolerate the resurgence of anti-Semitism but to prevent these criminal acts , to work to preserve the evidence of a tragic past but one which must serve as a lesson for the future .
For these reasons the plan to construct a commercial centre in the vicinity of the Lager of Auschwitz must be rejected once and for all .
Auschwitz , which was and is the symbol of the ultimate limit of the Nazi and fascist aberration must become a place for conveying the historic memory and for creating a stronger and more far-ranging awareness , above all for the younger generations , of democratic values and tolerance .
The European Union has a great duty in this direction and we therefore strongly advocate the strengthening of specific information and training programmes directed towards the young and more active preservation of the integrity of places which hold the memory of the Holocaust and of the crimes committed by Nazism and fascism against the peoples .
In the next few weeks the 51st anniversary of the defeat of Nazism and fascism will be commemorated .
That must be a further opportunity not only to honour the memory of the victims of the past but also to commit ourselves to building a common future in which the evils of racism and anti-Semitism are for ever banished .
Madam President , when I visited Auschwitz at the invitation of the Jewish Congress for the anniversary of the camp 's liberation , I was immediately struck by the fact that it was possible to live at Auschwitz and to lead an ordinary kind of life there .
I was struck by the fact that the Polish authorities themselves resorted to a kind of trivialization of those tragic past events , as if no one bore any further responsibility for them .
And now we learn that preparations are under way , on the actual site of Auschwitz , for the building of a supermarket . We learn that the Prefect of the Auschwitz region has apparently authorized a demonstration by the Far Right , under Nazi banners , and really it is hard to say which is worse - the violent denial or the commercial trivialization .
Whichever is worse , both are intolerable .
The Group of the European Radical Alliance , which I represent here , believes that all the discussions - all the many discussions - that take place between the European Union and Poland must include the duty to protect and preserve sites such as Auschwitz - and , alas , there are others in Poland .
We also believe that the European Union must now give early consideration to the possibility of financing a programme to preserve these sites , to commemorate the places where European humanity faced its most violent challenge and where , happily , it ultimately won the finest of victories .

Madam President , the Liberal Group naturally has no difficulty in endorsing the content of what has just been said by Mr Vecchi and Mr Hory , and we adopt on our own behalf the reasons on which they base their motions for resolutions and their attitudes .
I would simply like to add how shocked we were by the justifications advanced by the Polish neo-Nazi leader , Techkowski , when he stated that Auschwitz was essentially a place of Polish suffering which was a matter for the Poles and for no one else .
This , of course , is to deny the essentially anti semitic aspect of the extermination at Auschwitz , and also denial of the fact that some places belong not just to the States which have territorial sovereignty over them but to the entire human race .
Auschwitz , obviously , is such a place .
And Mr Techkowski 's attitude shows us the lengths to which ultra-nationalistic abberations can go .
Let me add one further thought .
We are of course anxious about the attitude of Polish authorities , and it is indeed necessary for the European Union to be able to exert the necessary pressure .
But we are equally anxious , bearing in mind that this matter comes so soon after the matter of the Carmelite order , about the attitude of certain Polish religious authorities , which are admittedly swift to denounce anti-semitism in general but refrain from denouncing Polish antisemitism , including the antisemitism that prevails within the Polish clergy .
There are grounds here , I am sorry to say , for doubt and anxiety . These doubts and anxieties also underlie our motion for a resolution , and our vote in favour of the joint resolution .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen : Auschwitz - the very name will signal for ever the end of normality , since at Auschwitz the end of humanity was administered and implemented .
Those who support a return to the normality of supermarkets and anti-Semitic chanting at Auschwitz are seeking a return to the normality of barbarity and inhumanity .
But no one has a right to destroy justice , and those who wish to suppress freedom must have no freedom of opinion or association .
The European Parliament is therefore pleased that both the President and the government of Poland have condemned the building of a supermarket and the march by neo-Nazis at Auschwitz .
It is in fact in the first instance up to the Polish authorities to decide how to respond to the provocative acts of 6 April , and who must be called to account for them .
However , whatever their response , the peoples of Europe must ask themselves whether they can tolerate any longer the existence of economic and political circles which are evidently determined to undermine the political and moral foundations of the post-war period .
The answer to this question should be an unequivocal one .
Madam President , it is more than fifty years since the nazi regime came to an end .
The need to confront the horrors of the holocaust and the inability of many people to come to terms with it left Europe traumatized and embittered .
How was it possible that our countries , with their civilization and culture rooted in Judaeo-Christian values and traditions , could allow the Jews of all people to be exterminated on so massive a scale ?
The Auschwitz concentration camp , the final resting place for millions of Jews , serves both as a memorial and a warning .
Here our young people can be taught what racism , antisemitism and xenophobia led to in our own time .
Here the nameless victims of the totalitarian nazi regime can be remembered with honour and respect .
I am speaking also for the rest of my Group when I say that recent events concerning Auschwitz shocked us very much .
We deeply deplore the local Polish authority 's absurd plans to build a supermarket in the immediate vicinity of the former camp and the offensive demonstration by a group of neo-nazis on the site of the former camp .
The Polish Government only reacted to the local authority 's commercial plans after a protest from the Polish President and a number of groups .
Can the Commissioner in fact confirm reports that the Polish Government has now definitively ruled out the building of a shopping centre close to the former concentration camp ?
During the demonstration mounted by the neo-nazi splinter group influenced by Techkowski the police did not intervene and the Government reacted only three days later amidst a storm of protest .
In Poland itself there was little reaction to the demonstration .
Only one liberal Polish newspaper reacted directly to it .
The line was that the actions of this insignificant neonazi group were disgusting , but hardly a threat to Poland 's democracy .
According to this newspaper the fact that democrats do not take to the streets to protest against antisemitism and racism constitutes a greater threat .
Techkowski 's neonazis are there for all to see , says the paper , but where are we ?
We share this concern about the Polish Government 's attitude and shall ask the same question in our own countries .
It is a question we must keep asking ourselves and the Polish Government .
The terrible truth of our history entitles us to do so .
Racism , antisemitism and xenophobia exist everywhere in the world .
We need to take action .
Where are we ?
Madam President , there is a great feeling of moral outrage in this Parliament at what has happened at Auschwitz .
It was only in April last year that we celebrated - if that is the right word - the fiftieth anniversary of the closing of that concentration camp and its liberation .
Today we see an entirely different situation of right-wing fanatics bent on demonstrating antisemitism to try to show the world that they are in control and that they are going to close and cover up history .
We cannot morally cover up the past .
We have a real opportunity to recall the history of Europe and some of the real trials and tribulations people have gone through and , indeed , the death of many millions of people during the World Wars .
In a legal sense one can understand the local authority , but in a moral sense there is outrage at what it is trying to do .
It is significant that the President of Poland and the government of Poland seem to be in conflict with the local authority .
I hope our Commissioner whom we all respect and who , we all know , can wield considerable influence will use his influence in this case to make sure that we can pay tribute to the human suffering that has taken place by building some sort of European centre so that we can all learn from history .
Madam President , I should like to express my absolute and total support for what has been said here by my colleagues .
How could I not do so ?
Fifty years ago , the Nazis were trying to destroy the camp at Auschwitz to erase the traces of their atrocities .
And fifty years later , today , young neo-Nazis , proclaiming the same ideology , are demonstrating within the actual perimeter of the camp in another endeavour to wipe our the memory of these massacres .
Of course , I myself and my group , like everyone else , can only and strongly condemn this demonstration , as we condemn all the attempts to impair the symbolic character of the Auschwitz camp .
For example , we condemn the proposal - which has been mentioned here - that a hypermarket should be built there .
We believe , Madam President , that the decision by the Polish authorities to authorize this neo-Nazi demonstration is unacceptable . It is all the more worrying , to my mind , in that it goes hand in hand with a resurgence of racism and antisemitism in Poland .
I therefore welcome the fact that our Parliament considers it necessary to maintain a duty to commemorate all the victims of Nazi barbarity .
And I believe , that as a contribution to this , the governments of all the European States should further strengthen their legislation against racism and antisemitism , the more so since the organization of the European Year against Racism , in 1997 , should enable us to encourage further activities .
In conclusion , I should like to call upon the European Institutions , and especially the Commission , to continue their activities intended to contribute to the development of Community and national initiatives to ensure the protection of the Nazi concentration camps as historic monuments , as was recommended in our motion for a resolution that was adopted by a large majority on 11 February 1992 .
Madam President , I address the House on behalf of Mr Donnay , who is not here .
It is with some emotion , and also with some indignation , that I speak in this debate .
The Second World War and the atrocities which it produced cannot and must not be forgotten after no more than a few decades .
And yet , what is happening ?
There are plans today to build a supermarket on the site of Auschwitz , the location of the prison camp so grimly notorious for its exterminations .
This is an insult to the memory of a million men , women and children who were massacred on that site in the name of the ideological insanity of a few people .
But what increases my indignation , Madam President , is the demonstration organized by young neo-Nazi extremists on that site , the site that should be sacred to the memory of and remembrance of the million victims who disappeared there .
I cannot accept the trivialization of such actions , because it is our duty to keep alive the collective memory , to ensure that such events can never happen again .
We will therefore support the text of the motion for a resolution tabled by all the groups .
Madam President , the Group of the National Alliance associates itself with the indignation aroused by the desecration of the former concentration camp at Auschwitz by fanatics advocating racial hatred and impossible historical revisionism .
We wonder how it can have been possible for the Polish authorities to authorize such disturbing demonstrations and we think that the European Union must do everything in its power to ensure that there is no repetition of such episodes .
At a time when confrontation between religions is disappearing and the Pope is relaunching dialogue and understanding between the various religious faiths it is all the more necessary to stifle at birth everything which may put back the clock of history .
The Group of the National Alliance agrees with the content of the joint resolution and will therefore vote for it ; we hope also that such sites which saw the horrors , may be maintained in their entirety out of respect for the dead and as a warning for the Europeans of tomorrow .
We hope also that the places which witnessed the Stalinist barbarity and where the opponents of Marxism-Leninism were physically and morally annihilated may enter into the collective memory of the peoples of Europe .
Madam President , several speakers today have already pointed out that the demonstration by hundreds of right-wing extremists and skinheads at the Auschwitz concentration camp was an outrage which took place with the permission of the Polish authorities .
I find this incomprehensible and an abomination .
To my mind , the statement by the leader of the authority responsible that the lesser of two evils had been chosen , because if the rightwing extremists had been refused permission to march there might have been riots on a larger scale , is in no sense an adequate justification .
And I think this is all the more alarming in that Poland is currently ruled by a post-Communist president , Mr Kwasniewski .
I would not have expected such events there , under such a government .
We must now insist that demonstrations should be banned in the vicinity of all former concentration camps and memorial sites recalling the horrors of the Second World War , as well as around the graves of the fallen .
Reverence for the dead and the memory of this barbarity are of greater moral value than the democratic right to demonstrate freely .
We are therefore calling on all the institutions of the European Union to urge the Member States ' governments to prohibit such demonstrations .
And this applies above all to the candidate countries in Central and Eastern Europe , within whose borders many of these memorials are situated .
Demonstrations of this kind in front of a shrine to humanity must be condemned in the strongest possible terms .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0498 / 96 by Mr Fassa and others , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the situation in Liberia ; -B4-0510 / 96 by Mr Pradier , on behalf of the ARE Group , on the situation in Liberia ; -B4-0523 / 96 by Mrs Aelvoet and Mr Telkämper , on behalf of the V Group , on the situation in Liberia ; -B4-0527 / 96 by Mr Newens and others , on behalf of the PSE Group , on human rights and the situation in Liberia ; -B4-0530 / 96 by Mr Schwaiger and others , on behalf of the PPE Group , on the situation in Liberia ; -B4-0532 / 96 by Mr Pasty and others , on behalf of the UPE Group , on the situation in Liberia ; -B4-0541 / 96 by Mr Pettinari and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the situation in Liberia .
Madam President , once again Parliament must come to a decision with regard to most serious events afflicting an African country .
The present situation is made worse by the fact that the disturbances affect Liberia , one of the African States which has long been independent , at least if we look at its original history .
At least two points in the resolution in support of which I am speaking on behalf of the Liberal Party seem to me to warrant the full attention of the European Parliament and other Community bodies .
The first concerns the thousands of Liberian boy-soldiers who need to be reintegrated into civilian society by means of school , occupational training and if necessary psychiatric help .
The second concerns the hundreds of thousands of Liberian refugees in the Côte d 'Ivoire , Guinea-Conakry and Sierra Leone who , whilst waiting for the situation to settle down , which unfortunately seems a long way off , need humanitarian help from everyone , but above all from the European Union .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it really is an appalling situation to be forced , year after year , to consider the fate of a wretched country experiencing the same disasters over and over again !
Today , once again , that country is being carved up between more than half a dozen factions who are fighting over the wreckage following the collapse of the Government , which went down with all hands .
Chaos is the order of the day : bands of adolescents , intoxicated with drugs and alcohol , rounded up by gang leaders to indulge in slaughter and looting .
Clearly , we can no longer look to the Government for assistance here .
Instead , what we need is a military force , properly equipped , properly officered and properly trained , either to intervene or to keep order .
We cannot avoid this situation .
So let us have the courage to say so openly .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , what we are seeing in Liberia is an example of what happens when constitutional rule breaks down and populations are abandoned to their fate , at the mercy of factions battling for power .
What is striking here of course is that all international efforts , such as they were , have achieved nothing of lasting worth ; every cease-fire is broken , and hostage-taking continues .
The latest attempt at a cease-fire was on 12 April and it has promptly collapsed .
But those who live in glass-houses shouldn 't throw stones .
You will note that the efforts of the world community get less energetic when only human lives are at stake rather than economic interests .
We thus call for a strengthening of the African countries ' powers to intervene and for better control on arms supplies , because it is the free circulation of arms which allows horrendous wars of this kind , which no one can then contain , to happen in the first place .
Madam President , the recent resurgence of fierce fighting in Monrovia , the capital of Liberia , could , unless it is speedily halted , lead to a new human catastrophe of major proportions .
During the course of a savage civil war which lasted some six years , an estimated 150 , 000 people lost their lives and a majority of the population were forced to leave their homes .
In these circumstances , in which large numbers of refugees are unable to get away from the fighting and have no independent means of support , the number of potential victims of the fighting is enormous .
Many of these are already suffering from malnutrition and disease and it is vital for all possible pressure to be brought to bear on the warring factions to cease fighting and restore the peace agreement of Abuja .
We totally condemn the savage crimes committed and the taking of hostages in this new round of hostilities .
The need for humanitarian aid is immense and exists not only in Liberia but in numerous neighbouring countries to which thousands of Liberian citizens have fled in fear of their lives .
The European Union , along with United Nations agencies and other international donors , must do everything possible to help provide and deliver the necessary supplies .
Renewed efforts need also to be made to prevent the delivery of arms and enforce the embargo approved by the United Nations .
It is tragic to reflect that a state begun as a homeland for liberated slaves should have degenerated into a hell on earth .
We must press not only for peace , followed by elections and the emergence of a stable government , but for continuing aid and an end to the policies of strategic adjustment which have produced crisis and breakdown in a number of African states .
Madam President , the civil war in Liberia has flared up again for the umpteenth time .
A number of warring groups have been responsible for some 150 000 deaths in the seven years since 1989 .
Soldiers of the militias , but many more civilians , have been killed in the fighting .
A number of groups signed a cease-fire last August and declared themselves ready to try to disarm their forces and prepare for democratic elections to be held before August 1996 .
The fighting has not stopped .
The groups appear to have become even more fragmented .
Recently on 6 April fighting broke out again when the police tried to arrest one of the warlords , Roosevelt Johnson , for his dubious role in the whole conflict .
One really wonders if it might not be best to detain all the leading activists who constantly cause this war to flare up again .
Since the war has been in progress the situation in the country has steadily worsened .
There is starvation , there are 100 000 refugees , there is a massive loss of health care and education and the country is gradually sliding into the abyss .
The question is what can be done ?
In the first instance I think we must support the African peace-keeping force in Liberia , ECOMOG , but they ought really to be given the freedom as soon as possible to disarm and detain , maybe re-educate and feed the young soldiers who are randomly running around shooting and stealing , most of them fourteen- and fifteen-year-olds high on drugs .
It is obvious to everyone that something has to be done in Liberia and I think it is equally obvious to everyone that Europe cannot just stand by and look on .
But my question to the Commissioner is this : what is Europe going to do here ?
It is precisely as one honourable Member said just now .
Liberia is not a Kuwait .
We have no great economic interests there , but we are witnessing a tragedy in the making .
The umpteenth tragedy in Africa .
Liberia 's tragic situation forces Europe to launch an immediate political initiative to persuade the parties to the conflict to lay down their arms and start the process of material and economic reconstruction of the country .
Here , in fact , the road to peace lies in the first place through determined support for the institutions set up by the peace agreements of Abuja on 20 August 1995 , which remain the only legal national and international framework capable of allowing Liberia to find once more the path to development .
It is therefore necessary for the European Union to support the State Council and the provisional government set up by those same agreements and to relaunch economic cooperation and development through these new representative bodies so that new and free elections may be organized and so that the civil population may return to their own villages .
My Group is convinced that ECOMOG must be given responsibility at international level for disarming the factions and for deploying its troops in the capital , Monrovia , and throughout the country .
We think in fact that the European Union should ask the Economic Community of the West African States to reinforce the international presence in Liberia , since there is the question too of ensuring that the arms embargo , laid down in 1992 by the United Nations Security Council , is respected , since it seems that there is a shortage in Liberia of everything but arms .
We cannot remain indifferent to the agony of a whole country and people .
The European Union is the only international institution which today can help to create conditions of stability and peace in that country .
Now that many European and American residents have been evacuated there is a risk that all talk of the war in Liberia will cease , whereas the urgency for a political and diplomatic intervention remains the same .
I hope therefore that the Italian presidency of the Council , in consultation with the United Nations and ECOMOG , will produce political initiatives , so that a serious cease-fire is declared and respected , together with a programme of economic cooperation with the new , weak authorities in Liberia .
Madam President , once again there is violence , civil war and death in an African country ; and once again , there are thousands of refugees , displaced persons and hostages .
Liberia is in the news in the international press because its tragedy , its process of self-destruction , has once more become topical .
The people of Africa do not deserve such suffering , such large-scale and senseless death .
Africa does not deserve to be condemned to oblivion , hopelessness , starvation and poverty .
Africa and its inhabitants do not deserve to be ruled by corrupt governments which hold sham elections in order to stay in power , by brutal dictators who become rich by consigning their people to poverty .
And Africa and its citizens do not deserve the developed world to stand by and watch , with a mixture of indifference and horror , the torment of a continent which , with a few exceptions , is slipping increasingly into underdevelopment and injustice .
Liberia is just the latest episode in a collective tragedy which appears to have no end - and we cannot remain apart from all this .
We cannot stand by and watch the destruction of not only a country , but almost an entire continent - for we too shall pay the consequences of so much horror .
If action is not taken , other names will be added to those of Rwanda , Burundi , and now Liberia .
The ACP-EU Joint Assembly must take rigorous action .
I believe that the ACP-EU Joint Assembly is far more than simply an observatory ; it must also be a means of taking preventive measures and action .
Only by acting within the framework of the Lomé Convention - reiterating the United Nations resolution , demanding respect for the arms embargo on Liberia , reaffirming the Abuja peace agreements of August 1995 - and with decisive , responsible and rigorous action by the Organization of African Unity , is it possible to think about starting to rebuild what used to be a country called Liberia .
Madam President , some speakers have already indicated that we are particularly shocked to see Africa 's oldest democracy , which in spite of the unfavourable circumstances under which it was founded in the last century , has nevertheless managed to represent what might be called a model of development , plunged into such difficulties .
We are now seeing that such a lengthy tradition of democracy has been incapable of stemming the tide of violent reaction .
Some colleagues have already referred to the problem of youngsters involved in military organizations .
What is even more alarming , if anything , is the fact that these groups have begun to spawn independent gangs of youths who are acting with ruthless violence and are completely out of control .
What is particularly disquieting in this respect is the report in today 's press that a certain American television station which operates worldwide has in a sense been providing instructions on how to seize vehicles from relief organizations , convert them into combat vehicles and use them for totally unlawful purposes .
It goes without saying that we call for arms embargoes to be respected , but on the other hand , we have to acknowledge that there is a flourishing black market which will not be in the least concerned by any number of resolutions we might adopt , calling for an arms embargo .
The joint resolution which has been tabled asserts that aid for the population is a matter of urgency , but also that it is extremely difficult at present to provide assistance .
Given these circumstances , we should consider how to enable the aid teams at least to protect themselves and their equipment , so that they too do not fall victim to the mob .
Madam President , in Monrovia , a week after the sudden flare-up of violence , the capital presents a scene of desolation that grows worse day by day .
How can we not condemn these acts of violence , which to make matters worse are being perpetuated by armed adolescents .
A catalogue of violence , murder , rape , looting and destruction of dwellings - that is the sad picture today .
And yet Monrovia had been relatively calm since 1993 and had never experienced this kind of conflagration in six years of civil war .
So what happened ?
Excluded from power because he has been found guilty of murder , the head of the Khran tribe , Roosevelt Johnson , unleashed a counter-attack which very rapidly developed into urban guerilla warfare .
The Khran rebels , holding some six hundred civilians hostage , used them as human shields .
The United States , whose historical links with Liberia we know , organized the evacuation of foreigners at a cost of millions of dollars .
The Americans responded with a literal flood of resources .
Five thousand American troops are in the region .
Because of the extreme violence of recent days , and in the absence of any real authority , all the humanitarian NGOs , including the International Red Cross and MSF , have had to abandon their posts .
They were only too well aware that there was nothing more they could do and that the rebels had no respect for anything .
The present situation is disastrous , and we urgently call upon the Commission and the Member States to provide effective humanitarian aid , because the population is seriously afflicted by starvation and disease , especially cholera .
It is essential that the UN Security Council , and the Council of the European Union , should resolve upon urgent action aimed at national reconciliation to promote the return of peace .
Madam President , as we know , the swift deterioration of the crisis in Liberia is having tragic consequences for the civilian population .
The European Commission fully shares the European Parliament 's anxiety and concern over the humanitarian situation on the ground there .
A great deal of hope was placed in the Abuja peace agreement which was signed in August 1995 by the leaders of the main factions and provided for the setting up of an interim government in which members of all factions would be represented .
However , the exclusion of Roosevelt Johnson 's Ulimo from important government posts and failure to comply with the agreement 's stipulations on disarmament and demobilization lit a new slow-burn fuse .
It became possible for thousands of armed fighters to enter Monrovia together with the faction leaders .
The attempt to arrest Johnson on 5 April last had more to do with factional politics than with justice .
His followers naturally resisted his arrest and within a few hours the situation had got totally out of hand .
As a result of the fighting hundreds of thousands of civilians were killed as they fled and most of Monrovia 's businesses and private houses were looted .
Unless peace is restored quickly it is to be feared that the already alarming situation will end in even greater disaster .
One of the many alarming aspects of the past week 's unrelenting violence was reports of attacks on the aid agencies .
Many aid workers were seriously harassed and their offices and living quarters were looted .
The UN headquarters was stripped bare .
Most of the non-governmental organizations have already lost their equipment and vehicles .
Most foreign personnel have been evacuated .
Intense pressure from all those concerned narrowly saved the European Commission 's aid coordination office in Monrovia , still manned by a skeleton staff , from being looted .
It is vital to keep this office going not least because many people are dependent on water supplies provided under an EU water project .
If things do not get better in the next few days the Commission too will have to pull its people out .
The Commission has contacted its NGO and UN partners on the possibility of an emergency aid programme .
A meeting is to be held in Brussels on 23 April with representatives of the main bodies currently or previously operating in Liberia .
The Commission emphasizes once again that it is prepared to look favourably on requests from the partners for humanitarian aid and that it will continue to monitor the situation .
The Commission also draws Parliament 's attention to the presidency statement of 11 April on Liberia which strongly deplores the renewed violence and calls on all faction leaders to keep their members under control .
The statement also stresses that the Abuja agreement remains the best hope for peace .
It is clear that the Council and Commission warmly and strongly support the continuing efforts spearheaded by the United Nations to get the parties to return to compliance with the agreement they concluded previously .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
China / Tibet
B4-0514 / 96 by Mrs Larive and others , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the need for dialogue between China and Tibet ; -B4-0520 / 96 by Mrs Aglietta and others , on behalf of the V Group , on the motion for a resolution on China ( Tibet ) within the United Nations Commission on Human Rights and the position of the EU States ; -B4-0525 / 96 by Mr Dupuis and others , on behalf of the ARE Group , on the China / Tibet motion for a resolution at the United Nations Commission on Human Rights and the position of the EU States ; Malaysia
B4-0496 / 96 by Mr Eisma and others , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the Bakun dam ; -B4-0500 / 96 by Mrs Pollack , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the rights of the indigenous population and the Bakun dam ; -B4-0522 / 96 by Mr Telkämper , on behalf of the V Group , on the Bakun hydroelectric power station ; -B4-0551 / 96 by Mrs González Álvarez , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the rights of the indigenous population and the Bakun dam ; Colombia
B4-0546 / 96 by Mr Carnero González and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on human rights in Colombia ; Morocco
B4-0542 / 96 by Mrs Elmalan and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the human rights violations in Western Sahara ; Patrick Kelly
B4-0497 / 96 by Mr Cox , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the application for the transfer of the republican prisoner Patrick Kelly from Maghaberry Prison in Northern Ireland to a prison in the Irish Republic ; -B4-0503 / 96 by Mrs Malone , on behalf of the PSE Group , on Patrick Kelly , a seriously ill detainee at Maghaberry Prison in Northern Ireland ; -B4-0508 / 96 by Mrs Ewing and others , on behalf of the ARE Group , on the fate of Mr Patrick Kelly , a seriously ill political prisoner in Northern Ireland ; -B4-0515 / 96 by Mr Collins and others , on behalf of the UPE Group , on the holding of Patrick Kelly in detention in Northern Ireland ; -B4-0521 / 96 by Mrs McKenna and others , on behalf of the V Group , on Patrick Kelly , a seriously ill political prisoner being held in Northern Ireland ; -B4-0538 / 96 by Mrs Banotti and others , on behalf of the PPE Group , on the transfer of Mr Patrick Kelly to Portlaoise Prison .
Madam President , I am glad that despite opposition from the European Christian Democrats we have managed to get Tibet put on today 's agenda .
Today of all days , when the European Parliament 's China delegation is meeting here in Strasbourg with the Asian European Parliamentary Partnership it is most useful to send a political signal and to impress on the Chinese delegates that dialogue and constructive cooperation with the people of Tibet are urgently needed .
They are needed because recent reports show that the position of the Tibetan people is getting worse and now , for example , there are more political prisoners than ever before in the past six years .
They are needed too because China 's constant refusal to engage in dialogue with Tibet damages the relations between the European Union and the People 's Republic of China .
The European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Group is very happy with the European Union 's decision to submit a resolution to the UN Commission on Human Rights on the situation in China and Tibet .
And we must urge our Member States to gather as much support as possible here , because we have Russia , Ukraine , Brazil and Chile , for example , and we have to steer the same course as the United States too .
We ask them too to hold a thorough , in-depth debate ahead of the vote in the UN Human Rights Commission .
We must not be afraid to raise the imprisonment of Wei Jinseng , the disappearance of the Panchen Lama , the situation in the Chinese orphanages , the death penalty , the continuing policy of moving ethnic Chinese to settle in Tibet and the dismal conditions of the Tibetan people in general .
Madam President , the Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Group would like to have a roll-call vote here and we hope that our vote today will be one of conscience and not opportunism and self-censure .
I hope and expect that the Dutch Foreign Minster will be prepared to submit our resolution tomorrow in The Hague , when the Chinese Foreign Minister Qian Qichen is present .
Madam President , unfortunately greed seems to be gaining ground in relations between the EU Member States and China .
For example , the President of Finland is currently in China with an 80-member trade delegation .
In my opinion it is completely impossible to condone this because China 's human rights record has really not improved at all .
Nor has there been any improvement in relations between China and Tibet ; on the contrary .
The genocide which has been going on for 40 years is still in full swing and it is the European Parliament 's responsibility to remind the Member States , the Council and the Commission continually of this terrible tragedy .
I am glad that there are members of the EP-China delegation who firmly intend to bring up the subject not only of China 's human rights records but also of the tragedy of Tibet .
We must continually keep this matter in the public eye .
The UN Human Rights Commission should adopt the resolution defending human rights in China and the position of Tibet .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , the text of the motion for a resolution finally submitted by the European Union to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights in Geneva is an extremely feeble one , a text which barely condemns the Chinese authorities and merely touches upon the tragic matter of Tibet .
We probably owe this text to a sudden burst of guilty conscience on the part of the Union following Mr Li Peng 's visit to France .
Yet this feeble burst of dignity would be no more than an alibi unless the Union were to make the determined effort - and everything seems to suggest it is not doing so - to persuade as many third States as possible to vote with it in favour of this resolution .
Hence the importance of a positive vote by this Parliament , today , to remind the Union and the Governments of the Member States that the principles from which they derive their legitimacy will not allow them to skirt around the question of human rights , anywhere in the world .
On the Bakun hydroelectric power station in East Malaysia , Madam President .
It seems that things are not going smoothly with this dam which has long been a source of contention .
That worries us .
We fear that the building of this dam will destroy tropical rainforest and trample over the rights of indigenous communities in the area .
It is not the first time we have talked about this .
We adopted resolutions on it back in 1988 and 1993 , but other issues have emerged since then .
Loss of biodiversity as a result of clearing large areas of tropical rainforest is a very real fact and the environmental impact assessments are not satisfactory here .
We thus urge the Commission to remain vigilant and aware of this and to continue monitoring the huge consequences which this dam will have for the environment .
I will not details all the appeals we have made ; I hope and am confident that Commissioner van den Broek will share our reservations concerning this hydroelectric plant in Bakun and will take action accordingly .
Madam President , the Bakun dam is an ecological and social disaster : it is a massive hydro-electric project which will flood 70 , 000 hectares of prime tropical rainforest in Sarawak and displace 7 , 000 local subsistence farmers .
Undersea cables are planned to take power to peninsula Malaysia and nobody is really sure if the whole thing is necessary at all .
In the face of massive protest in the 1980s , the project was abandoned in 1990 , and the Malaysian Prime Minister actually said to the world that this was proof that Malaysia cares about the environment .
But in 1992 the project was resurrected . It puts in serious doubt Malaysia 's commitment to manage its forests in a sustainable manner .
Fortunately , European Union funding is not being used here .
The hope , with this resolution , is to press European investors , construction companies and world bodies to pull out .
The resolution goes into much more detail , which we do not have time to deal with in our short speaking-time , but I commend it fully to the House .
Madam President , 20 years ago , when I worked in Malaysia for a while , there was considerable concern that the Bakun dam might be built .
That time has now come .
Forest clearance and construction work have already begun , even though the government declared in 1990 that the project was to be shelved for environmental reasons .
That decision was reversed in 1993 , and we are once again extremely concerned that huge areas of tropical forest are about to be destroyed : the area of land affected is about the size of Singapore .
After the confrontations which have taken place , we are very afraid that human rights are being abused .
What , we wonder , will happen to the rights of the people living in the region ?
How will their traditional , established rights - which are partially unwritten - be protected ?
What measures are being taken to resettle and protect them ?
We hear from Malaysia that the whole process is flawed .
There are flaws in the legal procedure for the environmental impact assessment : it has been split into four separate parts , and construction work has started even though not all of these have been carried out .
Such a procedure is intolerable from a legal point of view , and some of the demands of the local population have not been met .
I think it is essential for the Commission to raise this problem in its negotiations with Malaysia .
We simply cannot accept such goings-on .
Finally , European companies must be put on the spot and asked what moral standards they can have if they work in this region , import tropical timber , disregard biodiversity and flout human rights : take , for example , the German firm Lahmeyer International .
Other European firms should also bring their operations there to an end .
Madam President , once again , we have to raise the subject of Western Sahara , the defence of the Sahrawi people and their right to self-determination , and the need for the referendum which is being constantly delayed .
In the motion for a resolution which our group tabled this week , we refer to this indirectly .
However , the detention and condemnation by a military court to 20 years in prison of a 24-year-old woman - and I shall read out her name : it is Keltoum El Ouanat - simply for demonstrating peacefully in support of selfdetermination for her people , reminds us of the repeated postponement of the referendum in Western Sahara , which must be held without delay , but which is being blocked .
The United Nations resolutions stipulated that a referendum on the selfdetermination of the Sahrawi people should have been completed by the end of 1992 , but we are still discussing this subject today .
These two issues are connected , therefore : defending the freedom of a 24-yearold woman ; and the need for the European Parliament and the other Community institutions to give a decisive push to this stalled process .
Also as regards Colombia , sadly , we must once again speak of human rights violations .
In our last debate on the subject of Colombia , we used a word which is today constantly on the lips of all those who work to safeguard human rights in Latin America : impunity .
Not only in Colombia , but also in Bolivia and other Latin American countries , impunity is the word which is constantly on the lips of all defenders of human rights .
The motion for a resolution which we are introducing today refers to nine more murders which we fear will go unpunished - in the same way as the 94 other murders committed in recent years .
And Colombia is afflicted not only by drug trafficking and murders , but also by the permanent conditions of poverty and injustice which give rise to these scourges .
We therefore urge President Samper not to succumb to the temptation of approving the reintroduction of the death penalty , as this will only make the situation in Colombia worse .
Rather , we appeal to him to take measures to combat the impunity - a word which , sadly , we shall hear again many times in this Chamber - of those responsible for the murders .
Madam President , the situation in Colombia is deteriorating day by day .
That is nothing new ; you know that from the papers , from television and the radio .
The controversy surrounding President Samper is undermining the authority of the Government , which has to contend with continuing bloodbaths .
The Colombian Government must do everything possible to halt the spiral of violence , human rights abuses and other activities which undermine the rule of law .
The overwhelming priority of the Colombian Government must be to restore the rule of law ; reintroduction of the death penalty and the lifting of the state of emergency are being misused as instruments of human rights violations and they are not the answer .
On the contrary , they merely lead to a further escalation .
Instead the Government must bring those responsible for the killings to justice and take responsibility itself for seeing that human rights are upheld by the forces of law and order .
Only if the Government itself shows respect for the rule of law can it persuade others to do likewise .
Lastly , Madam President , in order to help halt the spiral of violence the United Nations should appoint a human rights envoy for Colombia and I urge the Member States of the Union to advocate that strongly in the UN Human Rights Commission ; I also convey that same message , of course , to our most estimable Commissioner .
Madam President , I want to speak on the motion on Patrick Kelly , which is a resolution before you under the human rights heading .
Patrick Kelly is an Irish citizen who is a prisoner in Northern Ireland and who is suffering from cancer and is critically ill .
The resolution requests his transfer on humanitarian grounds to Portlaoise prison where he will be nearer to his family .
He has only seen his three-yearold daughter a few times since she was born .
It takes his family 11 hours to complete the round trip from their home to the prison where he is presently incarcerated .
Under the Convention on the transfer of sentenced prisoners ratified by all European countries , Mr Kelly is clearly eligible for transfer to a prison in the Republic of Ireland .
He has applied for such a transfer so that he can spend whatever time remains to him close to his family .
In view of the Convention and his rapidly deteriorating health I call , on behalf of the Socialist Group , for his immediate transfer in the interests of justice and decency .
We are joined in this request by politicians from parties in Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland , including colleagues from the Irish Labour Party who have visited Mr Kelly on numerous occasions .
A petition has been signed for his transfer by 85 % of members of the Irish Parliament , including Dick Spring , the Tánaiste and Minister for Foreign Affairs .
In conclusion , I want to point out that no logical or legal impediment exists to prevent Mr Kelly 's transfer to Portlaoise prison .
I would ask all Members of the House to support the motion .
Madam President , I wish to add my voice to the views expressed by my Irish colleagues in requesting the early transfer of Patrick Kelly from the prison in Northern Ireland to a prison in the Irish Republic .
I believe that there are powerful humanitarian and compassionate reasons for this request ; reasons that will surely convince the British authorities to allow him to be transferred to a prison near his family .
Patrick Kelly is gravely ill and his health continues to deteriorate .
This situation has caused enormous hardship and distress to his family who , in visiting him , are all too aware of the precarious state of his health .
Transferring Mr Kelly to a prison which is in the jurisdiction of the Republic of Ireland would be clearly of great benefit to him and greatly alleviate the anguish being felt by his family .
Bearing these factors in mind , I urge the British authorities , in a spirit of compassion and humanitarianism , to accede to the request for Mr Kelly 's transfer .
There is growing support for such a move .
Political parties in the Republic of Ireland and in Northern Ireland are very supportive .
I hope that my British colleagues in Parliament would acknowledge the importance of this matter and would also lend their support .
I would also emphasize to the British authorities that the Convention on the transfer of sentenced prisoners has been ratified by all European countries and that the Convention allows for the transfer in cases where the justification is on humanitarian grounds .
It is overwhelmingly evident that the case of Patrick Kelly meets these humanitarian requirements .
Madam President , I welcome the fact that this resolution is on the agenda today .
Britain has ignored calls from all sides , both North and South , on the Kelly issue .
Kelly is a 44-year-old prisoner who is seriously ill .
I do not think it is very good for the peace process in Northern Ireland to take this approach .
The Home Secretary , Michael Howard , is an absolute disgrace for refusing to transfer somebody who is seriously ill .
You can contrast the harsh treatment that has been meted out to Patrick Kelly with Private Lee Clegg , a British paratrooper , who was actually convicted of murdering a joyrider : he only served two years of his sentence and then was released .
It is absolutely disgraceful that one person is treated in one way and another in another , particularly taking into account that Patrick Kelly was sentenced to 25 years for conspiracy . Conspiracy , do not forget , is not when a crime is committed but when a person conspires to commit a crime .
Some people have serious doubts about this kind of conviction .
In addition , he was denied medical treatment for over a year .
The British authorities were aware of the fact that the skin cancer that Kelly had could reoccur .
It was over a year afterwards , and only after appeals from the Irish Government , that they gave him access to a cancer specialist .
This did not need to happen .
There is a high recovery rate from melanoma .
It is very important in future that this does not happen . That is why we have two amendments down to this resolution .
We do not think it is strong enough . We would like the fact that he was denied treatment to be recognized and that it should not happen to any other prisoner .
Secondly , we would also like to see the European Parliament playing a much stronger role in relation to human rights abuses within the European Union .
There is widespread support for the European Parliament to send an all-party delegation to visit prisoners in Britain and Northern Ireland and see the conditions there for themselves .
This proposal is also supported by many human rights lawyers who are working on these issues .
I do not think that Britain is respecting its responsibilities under the European Convention on the transfer of sentenced prisoners because this convention actually provides for transfer of prisoners for humanitarian reasons .
Patrick Kelly is a prime example of humanitarian reasons .
I am also appealing to Parliament to vote for our two amendments to strengthen this resolution and , for once and for all , to address human rights abuses within the Community and not just in China , Tibet and different parts of the world , but here in Europe where we are primarily responsible .
Madam President , the Convention on the transfer of sentenced prisoners is in force throughout Europe and is being extensively used .
All applications between Ireland and the UK are being looked at on humanitarian grounds .
This is one of the key grounds on which transfer requests are made .
Prisoners have to be treated as prisoners and Patrick Kelly was found in possession of a considerable amount of explosives .
But they should be allowed to serve their sentences as close as possible to their families .
If the worst fears which have been voiced over Mr Kelly 's health are confirmed , this prisoner should be allowed to spend as much time as possible close to his family in County Laois in the period ahead .
This could be achieved either by way of transfer to Irish jurisdiction , which the Irish Government has repeatedly requested , or by a decision by the British authorities to release him on compassionate grounds .
Every case is special .
Patrick Kelly 's association with events in Northern Ireland makes his proposed transfer perhaps more sensitive than most .
All I can say is that the sympathetic consideration of this case is of paramount importance in the context of our continuing efforts to sustain the peace process in Northern Ireland .
Indeed , I believe that the issue of prisoner transfer is central to the outcome of the peace process .
Senator Mitchell in his report also emphasized this point .
If we are to have a successful outcome to the proposed negotiations on 10 June , I believe that the transfer of Mr Kelly will be a crucial issue in the outcome and success of these talks .
I believe it should be addressed urgently both because of its potentially damaging impact on confidence and for basic humanitarian motives .
I would like to thank all the political groups in Parliament who have supported this joint resolution .
However , I would like to make one point about the two amendments from the Green Party .
I have already signified my own willingness and anxiety to visit the prisoners in England . I do not believe that many Members of this Parliament can support the amendments because of the language used .
Unfortunately , we will not be able to support them . However , my group will be voting in favour of the resolution .
May we return to China , Madam President ?
The attention of the whole world is fixed on that great country and especially on the market opportunities it offers .
Eagerness to take advantage of them brings a willingness to turn a blind eye to the inhuman situations there which we have repeatedly debated .
The recent aggression against Taiwan has also caused many Asian countries to rethink their policy on China .
Much criticism has been voiced in Parliament about the upholding of human rights in Asian countries and sometimes we even go so far as to call in our resolutions for a halt to investment .
I have never as yet heard anything like that said about China , so there is a bit of a double standard here .
Madam President , investors can improve working conditions in a country , but not its whole policy on human rights .
But if investors are backed by the criticism of 15 Member States the country concerned will have to take that on board sooner or later .
So the resolution represents a call by Parliament for the EU and UN to send a signal to China .
The European Parliament , Madam President , has nothing at all to gain from constantly pillorying China , but it does have a responsibility to promote stability in the world economy which is becoming more and more interdependent , and China is a factor of major importance in it .
Madam President , I also speak as rapporteur for the European Parliament on EU / China relations , a subject which is occupying much attention both here and in Asia , based on the fact that there is an enormously important trade between our two continents , one which we would like to develop and which was solidified at the recent Bangkok Summit .
I visited China recently and went to Tibet .
I had meetings with many ministers and officials during which I raised the matters which the European Parliament has been preoccupied with for so long , including the question of human rights , the status of religious freedom , the problems in Tibet , the Panchen Lama , the orphanages but also those more positive aspects relating to the new economic policy in China .
I was present at the opening of the academic session of the Europe China Business School in Shanghai .
Concerning the resolution , if we are to be consistent and if we are to support our Member State governments in the development of a common foreign and security policy , we should support the resolution before the House which addresses itself specifically to the Geneva meeting .
The timing of this resolution is that of the United Nations .
I am conscious that a delegation visiting Parliament today from China is deeply disturbed by this matter and I simply report that to the House .
The leader of that delegation Mr Zhu Qizhen said this morning that the Asia / Europe parliamentary partnership meant a dialogue .
We need that dialogue .
The European Parliament should not just be about business as usual but about politics as usual .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am speaking as chairman of the Interparliamentary Delegation for Relations with China .
I have taken a few minutes off from a most important conference being held here in this building on the initiative of the President of our Parliament , an initiative which was a follow-up to the governments ' initiative to give parliaments too a part to play in Europe-Asia relations .
There is no doubt that today 's initiative for an umpteenth resolution which sounds like a condemnation of the Chinese Government , regardless - and I wish to stress regardless - of the meaning or the content of that resolution , the merits of which I do not wish to discuss , is inappropriate .
Some minutes ago , in the course of our meeting , the chairman of the Chinese delegation threatened to withdraw and left the meeting because he regarded today 's vote as a provocation to his government and his country .
I think that the duties of hospitality to some extent justify him and that we cannot fail to take account of that .
For that reason I should like , with due humility , to give the authors of these resolutions the free and independent opportunity , as is fair , as in any parliament , to withdraw these documents today and not to put them to the vote , as a sign of respect and regard for our guests , but above all for the consequences , for the importance of the conference we are now holding ; a conference which tomorrow , if the Chinese delegation were to withdraw , would appear in the newspapers exclusively because they walked out and not because of its importance or because of the role and the prestige which parliamentarians want to have .
That is why my Group spoke yesterday against this urgency , without going into the merits ; that is why my Group , in supporting this opportunity , will vote against if my request to withdraw the motion is not accepted .
I hope , however , that wisdom , strength and political richness , if only in the contrast and the variety of opinions in every Parliament , will persuade the authors to accept my pressing , cordial , friendly and fraternal request to withdraw the motion .
Madam President , concerning the position of Mr Patrick Kelly .
The European Parliament , as we have seen , has reason to be concerned for the fate of this seriously ill man , Patrick Kelly , who as we have heard is a detainee in Northern Ireland .
The European Parliament is particularly eager to uphold human rights in areas where they sometimes come under pressure as a result of political problems .
It would not be right for Kelly , who is suffering from skin cancer , to be the victim of setbacks in the Irish peace process .
It ought to be possible to separate he fate of this sick man from the controversy - to put it mildly - which surrounds the Irish peace process .
I hope that these calls for the British Government to show humanity will be heard and that the Government will show the necessary flexibility and political sensitivity in respect of the European Convention on the transfer of sentenced persons .
The European Parliament , Madam President , has a reputation to maintain on human rights both inside and outside the Union .
We must not sit on our hands in this case either .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , formally speaking Colombia is a democracy but as we all know , the rule of law does not operate normally there and there are regular violations of human rights .
That has been documented clearly enough in a number of UN reports , and a conference held in Parliament itself stated the central requirement that a special rapporteur should be appointed by the UN to conduct further investigations into human rights abuses .
To my mind this is also the central requirement in the resolution , the original resolution now before us .
I should point out , ladies and gentlemen , that curiously a number of members of the Spanish delegation tried very hard to water down the force and scope of this resolution , to draw its teeth , as it were .
I would find it most regrettable if all the amendments aimed at changing it were accepted , because the resolution would then lose its importance .
And I should say here that I would find it most regrettable if personal relations , between the delegation and the Colombian ambassador , were more important than the defence of human rights particularly when we know that Ambassador Marie Landa is responsible for the fact that 450 dispossessed families were driven off his estate by paramilitaries , and I am not talking through the back of my head here , I have documentary evidence to prove it .
Mr President , China seems likely to feature permanently in our debates on topical and urgent matters .
I would remind you of China 's countless abuses of human rights in general , of the situation in the orphanages , of the political terror waged against Taiwan and today , sadly , for the umpteenth time , of her occupation of Tibet .
The Tibetan question has been raised here on more than one occasion , including that of a visit by the Dalai Lama himself .
Has that ever cut any ice with China ?
On the contrary , it seems that the policy of genocide against Tibet continues unabated and with no less brutality .
We the European Parliament and the European Union generally should thus take further action ourselves , given the manifest recalcitrance of Beijing ; we should establish real diplomatic and parliamentary ties with Taiwan and the representatives in exile of the Tibetan people , for example .
I ask myself why it is that the European funds formerly available to finance resistance to the apartheid regime in South Africa , for example , are not now forthcoming when it comes to backing legitimate resistance on the part of the Tibetans .
On the contrary we all know that all the time , and this very day in Parliament , the red carpet is being rolled out for the Chinese communists .
I will end there , Mr President .
I shall vote for the compromise resolution , but in my view it does not go far enough .
Mr President , next time in the Conference of Presidents I shall ask if we cannot have a rather more logical order in our human rights debate , because we are hopping about from an Irish prison to China , from China to Colombia , on which I would like to say a few words .
It is most confusing .
I have very little to add really to everything that has already been said on the subject of Colombia .
I think the essential point in this resolution is that we should collectively call on the United Nations to appoint an envoy on human rights in Colombia ; that is vitally important , not because envoys ' reports change or improve things in themselves , but because the terrible human rights abuses there show that constant vigilance is needed , vigilance which may be the best way of halting the spiral of violence .
I take note of your comments , Mrs d 'Ancona , and I myself will be raising the question in the Bureau of whether it is possible to arrange the order of business in such a way as to deal with the human rights issues item by item , in order to make the debate more coherent .
Mr President , I can only endorse Mrs d 'Ancona 's request .
It is something for which this House has long been calling .
Today we are asking yet again about the European Union 's priorities at the Geneva meeting , particularly as regards the subject of China .
I myself had the opportunity of raising these issues at the UN Commission on Human Rights in Geneva last week .
One of the critical resolutions submitted there relates to the human rights situation in China and Tibet , to which we ourselves have often drawn attention .
Our resolution puts us very much on the same wavelength as our Member States and the European Union in Geneva .
It might perhaps have been more considerate , and this was of some concern to my group , not to raise this issue until we examine the outcome of the Geneva meeting in May , when a large delegation of parliamentarians from Asia will be here in the House .
But that in no way alters any of our arguments or responses .
We are criticized for preaching moral standards to other countries : this House has learnt the hard way to unite its efforts in campaigning for human rights , and we should also like to pass on this message to our Asian colleagues .
Mr President , I am now speaking on the motion for a resolution on Western Sahara .
We have already adopted many resolutions on Western Sahara , all of them with the same basic tenor : recognition of the West Saharan people 's right to self-determination .
This is a longstanding colonial conflict , and we are responsible - not only the former colonial power , but also the European Union as its successor - for enforcing the right to selfdetermination .
The resolution before us today , however , deals with a very specific case , that of Mrs Keltoum El Ouanat .
She is 24 years old and was born in Western Sahara , in other words in the region under Moroccan occupation , and has been in custody in the Moroccan prison of Ben Sergaou near Agadir since 1993 .
She was arrested on 10 October 1992 for having taken part in a peaceful demonstration in Smana calling for the right of self-determination .
What we are entirely free to do here leads to being arrested there .
She was sentenced to 20 years ' imprisonment by a military court in 1993 .
I regard this as an intolerable violation of human rights by Morocco .
Both we and the UN should take up this case .
The peace process must be supported here , and the matter brought before the 52nd session of the UN Commission on Human Rights which is currently taking place .
Looking today at the Amnesty International report on Morocco , which is still hot from the press , I note a large number of human rights infringements in that country .
The Commission must be quite clear in its policy towards Morocco , a country with which we have concluded a whole series of agreements in the tourism and fisheries sectors , on how it wishes to see this right of self-determination enforced , and what pressure we can bring to bear .
Mr President , one of the major reasons for the European Convention on the transfer of sentenced prisoners was , obviously , humanitarian .
The issue at stake in the resolution on Mr Patrick Kelly is totally and absolutely confined to the humanitarian issue : Mr Kelly is suffering from a very serious disease - a life-threatening disease - and the humanitarian point is that he should be in a prison or a hospital as close to his family as possible .
That is the central and only point of this resolution and I am very grateful that it is being supported by all groups in this House .
Other issues which relate to the peace situation in Northern Ireland do not come into this debate .
This is a straightforward , central , humanitarian request to allow a human being , who is seriously ill with a life-threatening disease , to be as close to his family as possible .
Mr President , the violence in Colombia has three main causes . Firstly , there is the conflict between the various armed groups - such as the FAR and the so-called National Liberation Army - which have been operating in Colombia for over 30 years .
Successive governments have offered these armed groups the possibility of dialogue and reintegration into the political process .
However , when former guerrillas rejoin civilian life , they are frequently murdered by more radical elements in their group .
Secondly , the guerrilla groups are playing havoc with the Colombian military , which is sometimes obliged to respond to their attacks .
And thirdly , we cannot address the subject of Colombia without mentioning the drug cartels .
There is frequently close cooperation between the guerilla groups and the drug traffickers , and there are often violent clashes between the different criminal organizations .
In any event , we must not forget that the political situation in Colombia is currently in a particularly delicate phase . Now more than ever , therefore , we must be aware of the need to defend and support the democratic institutions and the rule of law in Colombia .
I cannot end without pointing out that the death penalty was abolished in Colombia more than 80 years ago , by means of a constitutional reform . And I would remind the House of that today , in order to prevent the confusion which sometimes arises between the settling of accounts among armed groups and the Colombian judiciary 's legal means to combat violence .
Mr President , it has just been said once again that this is a question of a colonial war and self-determination in Western Sahara .
Let me emphasize that the first country to propose self-determination in the Sahara was Morocco .
Since then , the Polisario has persistently been following a policy of obstruction , doing all it could to deprive the region 's new inhabitants of the right to self-determination .
Much has changed in the past 25 years , and this has led to a different population structure .
There is no reason to ignore these elements , however , and to keep harking back to the circumstances of over 20 years ago .
It is wrong to do so , in my view .
I am all in favour of the young lady being released , to the extent that this is an issue of human rights , but I am not in favour of linking that with political untruths .
Mr President , a few words on China to begin with , since so many speakers have talked about China .
On the subject of China , Parliament will be aware that the European Union takes every opportunity , and has taken every opportunity in the past , to voice its concern either in the specific dialogue on human rights , the last session of which was held in Beijing in the third week of January , or on an ad hoc basis as and when specific questions arise between the Union and China .
Regarding Tibet , the Union has always sought to promote direct dialogue between the Chinese authorities and the representatives of the Tibetan people .
This reflects the European Union 's firm belief that a positive approach forming the basis for a constructive relationship is probably the best way of achieving progress .
Confrontation would very probably not only achieve nothing ; it would actually be counterproductive .
In recent weeks and months the European Union has constantly sought to establish a real dialogue with China based on constructive cooperation .
But given that China was not prepared to offer sufficient meaningful assurances here , the Union had no option but to submit a resolution to the Human Rights Commission of the United Nations , albeit in a way which left the way open for further dialogue .
We acted in close concert with the United States on this , primarily by making joint approaches to many member states of the UN Commission on Human Rights .
It will be apparent from this , Mr President , that far from avoiding discussing and criticizing China on the subject of human rights , we give fresh thought in every case to what the best way may be of moving forward on this front .
Results to date are admittedly not too promising but we must not give up .
Mr President , several honourable Members have referred to the Bakun dam .
The Commission is aware that the Malaysian Government decided recently to continue with the building of this dam in Sarawak , East Malaysia .
In its cooperation with Malaysia the Commission has always consistently taken account of Parliament 's resolutions on Sarawak , from 1988 onwards .
These point out the negative effects of wholesale deforestation .
Mr Eisma did so again .
The Commission has also stressed - and we shall continue to do so - that families and others who suffer disadvantage as a result of the building of this hydroelectric plant must be receive assurances that they will be treated fairly .
As mentioned in a number of resolutions , some seventeen studies on the technical feasibility of this project , carried out in 1980 , were deemed classified under the Official Secrets Act and are thus not available for inspection .
The Malaysian Government is also waiting for the results of the environmental impact assessment for this project , which appears to be split into three parts .
The European Commission does not yet know if this study will be made public .
In the absence of such official documents the Commission is not as yet in a position to state a view on something which will presumably be one of the biggest infrastructure projects in South-East Asia , valued at 18 billion ECU or thereabouts , and we cannot say what the long-term effects of it will be on the immediate environment or what the implications of it will be for population groups which may possibly suffer disadvantage as a result .
The Commission will , however , instruct its delegations in South-East Asia to monitor developments closely and will consider how this project affects the project for forest conservation and sustainable forestry management in Sarawak which the Union is funding .
Mr President , the Commission has long been monitoring the human rights situation in Colombia .
It deploys all means at its disposal to support the efforts made on the Colombian side to ensure compliance with and guarantee human rights in Colombia .
The Commission fully agrees with the resolution in which the European Parliament expresses its serious concern over the violence in Colombia .
It also shares Parliament 's concern at the Colombian President 's announcement that the death penalty is to be reintroduced .
The European Commission has under the budget line ' Support for democratization and human rights in Latin America ' funded a variety of initiatives aimed at developing and consolidating the rule of law .
Abuses of the kind listed in the draft resolution now under discussion will continue to be systematically targeted by the Commission .
Now to Western Sahara , Mr President . The Commission has long been keeping a close eye on the efforts which the United Nations Secretary-General has made at the instigation of the Security Council to obtain a referendum in the search for a peaceful solution to the dispute over Western Sahara .
We believe that regional conflicts must naturally be resolved by peaceful means if the Mediterranean area is to be a zone of peace and stability .
But by way of its contribution to this , the Commission maintains partnership agreements with most of the countries in this area .
The text of the association agreement with Morocco was signed at the end of February 1996 .
Under the terms of the agreement on political dialogue either party can initiate discussion of any matter of mutual interest .
Talks are due to start this year with Algeria on an association agreement once the Council has approved a mandate for the Commission .
This means that an institutional platform is being created on which the European Union can continue raising these questions with the countries concerned which are involved in the conflict over Western Sahara .
Mr President , the Commission also believes that the Euro-Mediterranean Conference launched a process of multilateral debate which will promote harmonious coexistence between countries to the north and south of the Mediterranean .
These , Mr President , were the subjects raised .
You will appreciate that in line with the custom of the House , the Commission does not comment on human rights issues or related matters in Member States of the Union .
Thank you , Mr van den Broek .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0502 / 96 by Mrs d 'Ancona and Mr Meier , on behalf of the PSE Group , on strategic nuclear arms control , disarmament and the test ban and the G7 + 1 summit to be held in Moscow on 18-20 April 1996 ; -B4-0506 / 96 by Mr Hory , on behalf of the ARE Group , on the G7 + 1 summit in Moscow on 19 and 20 April 1996 and the control of strategic nuclear weapons ; -B4-0507 / 96 by Mrs Ainardi and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on nuclear weapons and international law ; -B4-0512 / 96 by Mr Bertens , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the G7 + 1 summit in Moscow and the CTBT ; -B4-0524 / 96 by Mrs McKenna and others , on behalf of the Green Group , on strategic nuclear arms controls , disarmament , a test ban and the G7 + 1 summit to be held in Moscow from 18 to 20 April 1996 ; -B4-0535 / 96 by Mr Wim van Velzen and Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the PPE Group , on the Moscow summit on nuclear safety ; -B4-0547 / 96 by Mr Puerta and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the G7 summit in Moscow on nuclear disarmament .
Mr President , the G7 + 1 summit is taking place today in Moscow on disarmament matters .
So this resolution could hardly be more topical , but I should point out that for years this House has been working to achieve an end to the arms race , pressing for the reduction of nuclear arsenals , the halting of nuclear testing .
Consequently , Mr President , we make another urgent appeal today to the Russian Federation to ratify START II , the treaty limiting nuclear arsenals , to China to end its test programmes , and to all parties concerned , amongst them the European Union , the US and the Russian Federation , to return to the negotiating table in Geneva to sign a comprehensive test ban treaty .
Parliament 's Committee on Civil Liberties has already looked at the black market in nuclear materials .
In a world ravaged by terrorism it does not take much imagination to realize the kind of world disasters into which such a trade might lead us .
Thus it is our fervent hope that this point too may be considered at the G7 + 1 summit in Moscow .
Mr President , we have too few reasons for satisfaction in this House not to emphasize those we do have .
Well , the year 1996 could be a decisive year for the decline of the detestable ideology of military strength based on nuclear power .
Admittedly , there are still reasons for anxiety : the attitude of China , the present silence of the States which are parties to the Threshold Treaty , the distribution of nuclear resources in the former USSR , and the trafficking in nuclear materials by organized criminals .
However , this year will have been notable for the final cessation of the French tests by the confirmation of the moratorium by America , Britain and Russia and the American ratification of the START II Treaty ( pending , we hope , the signature of the Treaty on the total banning of nuclear tests ) .
It seems to me , then that the human race will have taken a significant step forwards along the road to reason , because not only is using - or threatening to use - a nuclear weapon unlawful , but it also represents a terrible confession : he who threatens nuclear war is speculating on the other 's moral superiority . ' We are capable of doing to you what you dare not do to us . '
That was how , not so long ago , we justified out claim to the humanitarian high ground .
Finally , let me return to the blatant proposal by Mr Chirac , a few months ago , that France 's nuclear resources should be employed in the services of the defence of Europe .
We should be glad to obtain further details of his idea , and especially to know how it would fit into the institutional structure of the Union .
Mr President , every opportunity must be grasped to bring the talks on a comprehensive test ban treaty to a successful conclusion .
The talks are exceptionally difficult but of course they are not unimportant .
Following the assent of France , the USA , Russia and the United Kingdom it is very important that the momentum should be sustained .
We continue to favour a zero option without a safeguard clause with good monitoring of implementation .
The peaceful nuclear testing which China wants are undesirable .
The door must remain closed to nuclear testing .
We must press China hard to abandon her isolated position or there is the risk that the CTBT may not be concluded by the end of 1996 .
We must also continue to work for further arms reduction , but we must be careful not to tie the CTBT to nuclear disarmament , otherwise we may not achieve a result at all .
Today 's joint resolution is thus right to press for the Duma to ratify START II .
There are so many encouraging signals such as the various ' nuclear-free zones ' which have been agreed that we must now do everything possible to get the CTBT completed .
Mr President , one of the important points with regard to stopping the spread of radioactive materials is of course to get a grip on the unprecedented problems which exist in the former Soviet Union .
The joint resolution several times makes the point that it is a question of creating an infrastructure to allow the strict monitoring of flows of nuclear material from the former Soviet Union and of combating trafficking in nuclear material , which often also originates in the former Soviet Union .
One of the people who has done most to ensure that we know what is really happening in the former Soviet Union is the former nuclear inspector Alexandr Nikitin , the Bellona activist , who is regrettably in prison in St Petersburg .
The European Parliament has already , on 15 February , called for his release .
Numerous petitions and resolutions have been drawn up urging his release , signed by the former President of the Commission Jacques Delors , among others .
As part of this debate I should like to remind the House of this and most strongly urge the representatives of the European Union who are to attend the conference in Moscow to take this issue up with President Yeltsin and ensure that the Russian leadership demonstrate the seriousness of all their promises that democracy will prevail in the country and that there will be freedom of information so that it will be possible to monitor how radioactive materials are dealt with .
We know that there is a mafia , disorder and chaotic tendencies in Russia .
A person such as Alexandr Nikitin should in such circumstances be regarded as a great champion of peace who should receive the full support of the European Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the control of strategic nuclear arms , a ban on nuclear weapons testing , and disarmament in this field will remain urgently needed until further progress has been made .
The G7 + 1 summit in Moscow provides a direct opportunity of drawing attention to the significance of an issue which is so vital for human beings throughout the world , as Parliament has already done in a number of resolutions .
Above and beyond people 's important , everyday need for freedom , employment and a decent standard of living , one of mankind 's prime concerns is to live in safety , especially given the danger of the nuclear threat , which has no respect for national borders .
An overwhelming majority of people everywhere would come out against nuclear weapons and in favour of nuclear disarmament .
It is therefore the duty of responsible politicians throughout the world , and of course in Europe , to take a firm stand against the dangers of destructive and deadly nuclear weapons - and I would happily include other weapons too - by promoting practical measures such as controlled disarmament and a test ban , and to divert the money spent on life-threatening arms into peaceful economic policies such as employment , social measures and a healthier environment .
This Parliament , which represents the citizens of Europe , is directing a renewed plea to this effect to the participants in the G7 + 1 Conference , and to all politicians .
I therefore support all the calls contained in this motion for a resolution : to ratify the START II Treaty and urge all the countries concerned to do likewise , to respect the ABM Treaty , to end nuclear testing once and for all , and to take further steps towards disarmament .
We in Europe should of course set an example and show the world that peace reigns in Europe .
The European Parliament is launching a powerful appeal to this effect to the conference on disarmament .
Our thanks to the European Parliament , Mr President , for reminding us today of the importance of a successful outcome to the Moscow summit which President Santer is attending on behalf of the European Commission .
On the one hand we are glad that the end of the cold war has also led to arms reduction agreements in the nuclear field too , so that the danger of a nuclear war has , to all intents and purposes , disappeared .
At the same time , however , new problems are arising , new risks , the uncontrolled spread of nuclear weapons or nuclear knowhow , for example , whilst we increasingly have to focus attention on the whole issue of the safety of nuclear power stations .
The twin objective of this summit is thus on the one hand to help stop the uncontrolled spread of nuclear knowhow and weapons from proliferating and on the other hand to continue with measures to make nuclear plants safe and help make them even safer .
The summit will be endorsing a number of political declarations in this regard .
I will take this opportunity , Mr President , of briefing Parliament on the objectives the European Commission will be pursuing at this summit .
The first priority is safety . The safety of existing nuclear facilities must be improved and those which cannot be brought to a sufficiently high standard of safety must be closed down .
Secondly , structural reform of the energy sector is important , so that nuclear power station operators can be assured of an income they can spend on safety .
That , as we know , is a very costly business .
Thirdly , Russia and the Ukraine must be encouraged to sign the Vienna agreement .
This concerns legal liability for nuclear damage , to make it easier for European firms to operate in those countries and indemnify them against risks .
Fourthly , aid must continue under programmes such as PHARE and TACIS with a view to improving reactor safety .
In conclusion , though it hardy needs saying , Mr President , the Union is firmly in favour of strengthening non-proliferation and wishes to promote it further . We have lent our support to several measures designed to achieve that aim , notably the aim of extending the Non-Proliferation Treaty , which has been mentioned today .
The European Union naturally supports the negotiations currently under way , and also favours an end to nuclear testing .
Mr President , I believe that this is indeed an important summit in that it will raise and broaden awareness on issues such as nuclear safety and nonproliferation .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0495 / 96 by Mrs Spaak and others , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the increasingly explosive situation in Kosovo ; -B4-0499 / 96 by Mr Cars and Mr Bertens , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the situation in former Yugoslavia .
Mr President , the Dayton Agreement , the NATO-led implementation force and the aid programme for reconstruction , under the leadership of Carl Bildt , are the USA and the EU 's joint contribution to peace in the former Yugoslavia .
The Agreement and other measures must be implemented .
Nobody in this Parliament has any doubts about that .
We would all prefer not to think about what the consequences would be if the package failed .
There is nevertheless of course a great deal which gives rise to concern : the people 's freedom of movement is still limited , the legal proceedings against those suspected of war crimes are facing difficulties , the negotiations between the Croats and the Muslims are proceeding slowly , the city of Mostar has not been integrated and reconstruction work is going badly .
There is still hope , however , Mr President - hope that the efforts now being made will result in a permanent peace in Bosnia even after the withdrawal of IFOR .
Nevertheless , we are very concerned about the situation in Kosovo .
Everything is going in the wrong direction there at present .
Verwoerd , Malan and other apartheid leaders have found keen followers among the Serbs in Kosovo , among the minority who with the assistance of police violence and discrimination hold the ethnic Albanian majority in an iron grip .
How long can we expect the Albanians to put up with being cruelly oppressed and humiliated ?
What will happen when the bomb goes off ?
Parliament 's recommendations to the Council of Ministers on the former Yugoslavia can be summarised as two points .
Do not hesitate to use sanctions against anyone who breaks the Dayton Agreement or who sabotages it in any way .
Do not wait to act in Kosovo until violence has been met with counter-violence , which could once again fan the flames of war in Yugoslavia .
Put pressure on Serbia now and convene an international conference on the future of Kosovo as soon as possible .
Mr President , in November of last year I was approached during the OSCE meeting in Warsaw by a man from Kosovo who was of Albanian extraction .
He gave me a truly depressing account of the position of the Albanian minority in the area which had become marginalized within a very short period of time and since then , as we all know , the overall human rights situation there has worsened .
Kosovo is a vital part of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia which will , if prevented from developing satisfactorily , radiate a dangerous and negative influence into the surrounding area .
So it is crucial to this area 's development that Belgrade should begin talks with the elected representatives of Kosovo .
My Group regards this as an important prerequisite before the EU restores diplomatic ties with Yugoslavia and lifts the economic sanctions which are still in force .
Consequently it is regrettable that a number of EU Member States believe that the time is right to recognize Yugoslavia .
In general many obstacles remain to recovery in Yugoslavia .
President Tudjman is certainly making little effort to reunify Mostar , there is still no international civilian police force , road blocks are still in operation , the financial aid promised for the tribunal is still not forthcoming .
In short , things are not looking good .
The Council and Commission thus need to keep their finger firmly on the pulse .
To come back to Kosovo , my Group endorses the proposal for an international conference on Kosovo and it would be a good idea to set up an EU office there .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the number of debates held by Parliament on this subject is almost legion .
But new elements keep appearing , and it is always helpful to explore them .

Although the Dayton Agreement ended the war , peace has not yet taken hold : firstly , because the accord provides for two separate states in Bosnia , the Serbian part of which continues to reject Bosnia as an entity , and the MuslimCroat part is still not functioning ; secondly , because freedom of movement is still being impeded , persecution on ethnic grounds is continuing in many areas of Bosnia , very few displaced persons and refugees are being allowed to return home , and they are also being illegally expropriated ; thirdly , and finally , because war criminals such as Karadzic are skiing in the mountains around Sarajevo rather than standing trial in The Hague .
It is high time that we exerted some pressure in this respect : anyone failing to honour the Dayton requirements should not expect financial support from the EU .
A second aspect of the resolution relates to the fact that an increasing number of Western governments , apart from the USA , are recognizing Serbia-Montenegro .
I find this reckless , or short-sighted to say the least .
What other pressure can we exert to compel Belgrade to solve the Kosovo question once and for all ?
By taking away Kosovo 's autonomous constitutional status in 1989 , Serbia triggered the disintegration of Yugoslavia , and it is only thanks to the peaceful conduct of the Albanians under their leader , Mr Rugova , that Serbia 's inhumane treatment of the 90 % Albanian majority - not minority , Mrs Van Bladel - in Kosovo has not yet led to war .
But this could change very quickly unless the situation receives the necessary attention from Europe and the world at large .
Mr President , I will make the most of the time available to me , to congratulate Mrs Pack on the medal she received together with Mr Habsburg , from Mr Tudjman , and to say that I hope other sides in this war will also recognize the balanced and objective role that the European Parliament must play , especially our delegation to that area , which is chaired by Mrs Pack .
I would like to refer to the motion for a resolution and mention , as one of the rapporteurs on behalf of the Committee on External Affairs , that notable work is being done between the Committee on External Affairs , the Committee on External Economic Relations , the Committee on Development and Cooperation and the Committee on Budgets , to formulate a common approach to the rehabilitation of former Yugoslavia and the provision of aid to it .
Some of these positions are expressed by this motion for a resolution .
Nevertheless , I want to express certain reservations about the positions adopted by the joint compromise motion for a resolution by certain groups concerning the Kosovo problem .
It is true that in Kosovo human rights are being flagrantly suppressed , and it is true that Kosovo 's autonomous character under the Constitution of the former Yugoslavian Republic has been revoked .
But on the other hand , we must not forget that the civil war in former Yugoslavia started in Kosovo , and we must be careful about the means we use when dealing with a very sensitive and difficult situation .
From that standpoint , facile recourse to sanctions , facile recourse to means of international intervention , and the attempt to prevent the European Union from recognizing the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia - new Yugoslavia - will , I think , result in polarization on that point and orientations opposite to those we want .
I think the European Union should take greater care to give real support to the rights of Kosovo 's Albanian population .
I do not wish to reply to Mr Alavanos ; there is no point .
I would merely ask you to ensure that all Members are treated in the same way as myself , that is all .
Mr Alavanos was allotted one minute and spoke for two .
I am sorry , but that must not happen again .
Mrs Pack , I have never cut a speaker off during his or her speech .
I simply confine myself to indicating - albeit quite forcefully - when a speaker 's time is up .
Mr Alavanos originally had one minute 's speaking time , but he informed me that another member of his group had given him his minute .
I waited until the two minutes were up , and then I indicated that to Mr Alavanos .
I did not cut him off , just as I would not have cut you off , Mrs Pack , for two reasons : firstly , because I never do ; and secondly , because you would not have allowed me to .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to make the point that I personally have the most explicit reservations regarding everything relating to Kosovo in the motions for resolutions that have been put before us .
Always as far as the former Yugoslavia is concerned , I have learnt , during this Parliament or the previous one , that it was difficult to swim against the tide of the prevailing ideas .
However , I do not allow that to discourage me .
The prevailing idea here is extremely simple : it would be appropriate to encourage all attempts to break up the former more or less totalitarian groupings - whether it be the former USSR or Yugoslavia - about which the West has been so complacent for so long .
Starting from this a priori , the European Parliament as not - I am sorry to say - taken a responsible attitude to the Yugoslavian crisis , and indeed I believe it has helped to make matters considerably worse .
It was premature to recognize the independence of Slovenia , of Croatia , of Bosnia and even of Macedonia .
That step should have been preceded by precautions enabling all the populations to be associated with it , and a Yugoslav confederation to be constructed and associated with our European Union .
We did not arrange these preliminaries , and in the course of the inevitable conflicts which independence was bound to generate we were forced to take sides , always blaming Serbia as being capable of any evil .
And so we brought about precisely what we were pretending to fear .
In Bosnia , we asserted our principles : independence , territorial integrity of a multi-ethnic and multi-cultural entity .
We asserted those principles so intrinsically that many Bosnians thought they could take what we said literally and paid with their lives for European cowardice .
I do seriously urge you , ladies and gentlemen , not to start the same process again tomorrow .
So soon after the flames have died down in Bosnia , let us not throw oil on the smouldering embers - and they are smouldering ! - in Kosovo .
The road to hell , as we know , is paved with good intentions .
Admittedly , the rights of the Albanians in Kosovo must be defended .
Admittedly the excesses committed in the name of autonomy until 1989 triggered a process of recentralization which highlighted certain equally deplorable excesses .
But that is not to say that one injustice can be remedied by committing another .
We cannot pretend to aid Kosovo while ignoring the position of Serbia , of which Kosovo forms part and , indeed , represents the historic heart .
None of us would accept similar interference in his own country .
We cannot transfer to the case of Kosovo diplomatic and economic sanctions which , rightly or wrongly , were adopted in order to resolve the Bosnian crisis .
The way to a lasting , just solution to the problems of this region is via an open , positive and constructive dialogue between the European Union and the Republic of Yugoslavia .
Let us have no more of this anti-Belgrade oversimplification , an oversimplification which , in this case , can only lead to another war .
Mr President , in this , my maiden speech as a Member of the European Parliament belonging to the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , I wish to express our concern at the serious deterioration of the human rights situation in Kosovo .
Since the removal of Kosovo 's statute of autonomy and the subsequent loss of its right to independence , which had been decided in a referendum , the situation in this region - and especially that of the Albanian minority - has steadily been growing worse .
This could be a new source of conflict in the region , and I therefore believe that it is vital for the European Union to continue its efforts to ensure compliance with the agreements under the peace plan .
Similarly , in line with the conclusions of the last donors ' conference , held in Brussels on 12 and 13 April , the European Union must step up its efforts to assist the rebuilding of former Yugoslavia .
Only on this basis will it be possible to make progress in the process of democratization and the defence of human rights in the territory of former Yugoslavia .
Thank you , Mr Mohamed Alí .
As you said at the beginning of your remarks , that was your maiden speech in the European Parliament .
Allow me , therefore , to welcome and congratulate you , as did our President at the opening of the part-session on Monday , and say that this House is sure that your presence here will make a positive contribution to the atmosphere of freedom , coexistence and respect for democracy that is the hallmark of this Chamber .
Thank you , Mr Mohamed Alí .
Mr President , on Yugoslavia we have reached a stage where progress has been made , but you cannot say that the peace process has been consolidated and stability assured .
Pressure , political urging and even an insistence on preconditions is still needed to take the process forward .
There is nothing I need to say about I-FOR .
It is now fully operational and , I think , working well .
Our attention is now fully focused on completion of the civilian part of the Dayton Agreement , which the EU 's representative Carl Bildt is responsible for coordinating .
The reconstruction work is beginning clearly to take shape .
Both the World Bank and the Commission have had a significant presence in Sarajevo since last January which makes for better coordination and easier liaison with the bodies receiving aid .
You will have read about the second international donor meeting last weekend in Brussels , which was attended by representatives of the European Parliament , and you will gather that the aims of that meeting , namely to raise the monies needed to ensure the funding of reconstruction plans for the current year , were successfully achieved and that the requisite sums were indeed pledged by the international donor community .
Priorities were once again agreed .
Areas such as energy , transport , telecommunications , housing , jobs , de-mining operations were all discussed and it is good to see that the international donors are coordinating those priorities amongst themselves .
One thing which cast a shadow over the conference was the absence of the Bosnian Serbs .
They actually excluded themselves despite the fact that our aid effort is directed in principle at the whole of Bosnia Herzegovina and thus at the Republika Srpska too .
But the absence of the Bosnian Serbs incontrovertibly shows how much influence is still exerted by people suspected of war crimes , Mr Karadzic and Mr Mladic .
It proves too how important it is that these alleged war criminals should be arrested and brought before the international tribunal .
Their continuing presence will be an enduring and unacceptable obstacle to stability and will also hamper our reconstruction work in the Republika Srpska .
So I hope , and I said so at the donor meeting , that Carl Bildt and the international war crimes tribunal will be given every possible assistance in resolving this question , because , I repeat , it is intolerable that people like Karadzic and Mladic should not only still be at large but should also jeopardize the stability of Bosnia by their activities .
Responsibility for the success or failure of the peace process depends also and primarily on the parties themselves ; they must demonstrate a genuine will for peace .
The same goes for the continuance of the Muslim-Croat Federation in Bosnia .
The success of the Federation is also of decisive importance to the unity of Bosnia Herzegovina and a very great responsibility in this regard rests also with President Tudjman of Croatia and President Izetbegovic of Bosnia Herzegovina .
A second major conference to review the peace process is scheduled for 13 and 14 June , not a conference to pledge funds but to assess the progress made in carrying out the Dayton Agreement .
I think it would also be a good thing if the resolution now being debated by the House made it clear at some point that total support needs to be given to the very difficult task facing Carl Bildt , to whom credit is due for getting the implementation of the civilian part of Dayton up and running , with all the complex problems that effort entails .
Lastly a brief word on relations with Serbia-Montenegro since a number of speakers have touched on that at length this afternoon .
It is perhaps opportune to make the point that the European Union needs to pursue a coherent , consistent and clear policy on recognition of the republics of former Yugoslavia .
It was agreed last October that we would only recognize Serbia-Montenegro provided that country in turn recognized the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , and that once that proviso was met , the countries of the European Union would also recognize Serbia-Montenegro .
And that is what happened , though somewhat regrettably one Member State decided at a given moment that it did not need to wait for Belgrade to recognize Skopje and took the step of recognizing SerbiaMontenegro unilaterally .
At the same time , moreover , it was agreed that further normalization of relations with Serbia-Montenegro , namely structural and contractual ties , would be made conditional on the usual political provisos imposed by the Union on all the former belligerents in the former Yugoslavia .
And these political provisos include full and continuing compliance with the terms of the Dayton Agreement , and thus by implication the requirement to assist the work of the war crimes tribunal , total respect for human rights and notably the rights of minorities ; provided Serbia was prepared to see a just solution for Kosovo and more especially for the benefit of Kosovo , the European Union said that whilst it could not support any aspiration for independence on the part of Kosovo , for which in any case there was no justification , the Union was concerned about the human rights situation there and particularly the failure to respect the rights of the Albanians who are a minority in Serbia but a majority in Kosovo , and the Union expressly reiterated its desire that Belgrade should give back the autonomy which it previously withdrew from Kosovo .
That is the position which the Union has maintained for months now and I see no reason to change it .
Finally may I draw your attention to the passage in paragraph 11 of the resolution which talks of calling on the Council to instruct the Commission to open an office in Kosovo .
May I point out that institutionally this causes me some difficulty in that it is not for the Council to instruct the Commission whether or not it should open an office in Kosovo .
In all seriousness , we have enormous problems at present , budget restrictions , which make it difficult for us to open delegations in a lot of important countries .
We do not even have an official delegation in Sarajevo yet .
I am sure you will agree that this should have priority .
But for the rest I readily agree with much of what has been said about Kosovo .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The topical and urgent debate on subjects of major importance is now closed .
( The sitting was suspended until 5.30 p.m. )
Mr Pasty has the floor on a point of order .
Mr President , I would just like to make a comment .
I am absolutely delighted by the vote which has just been taken , but I note that , since voting began , the quorum has not existed .
I have not asked for the quorum to be established , but I have observed , as a result of the electronic votes , that there are not 207 Members present in this House , and I deplore that .
Are you asking for the quorum to be established , Mr Pasty ?
I am not asking for that , I am simply saying that no quorum exists .
In any event , Mr Pasty , let me thank you for your observations .
At the same time , however , I must tell you that they will have absolutely no effect on the result of the vote .
Mr Falconer has the floor on a point of order .
Mr President , I would just like to say that if Mr Pasty has any problems about the attendance , if we all went to Brussels , we might get a quorum .
Mr Falconer , the Chair does not consider that to be a point of order , and under no circumstances will it allow a debate to be started on a subject which is not that currently on the agenda .
If at some time you wish to initiate a debate on that subject , there are ways in the House for you to do so .
On a point of order , Mr President , there is an embarrassing oversight in paragraph 11 , mea culpa , it is most embarrassing , also for the Commissioner who is here and above all for Mr van den Broek who has spent the whole afternoon with us .
He himself drew my attention to it .
The paragraph talks of calling on the Council to instruct the Commission , etc . , and naturally that cannot be correct .
It is not possible under the Treaty , so I would ask you to substitute the following ' Requests the Commission to open an office in Kosovo ' .
It will make very little difference , because the Commissioner has already said that there is no money for it .
Thank you for that clarification , Mr Bertens .
1994 Cohesion Fund ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the report ( A4-0069 / 96 ) by Mr Costa Neves , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , on the complement to the Commission 's annual report on the Cohesion Fund ( 1994 ) ( COM ( 95 ) 0222 - C4-0237 / 95 ) .
Madam President , I firstly wish to say that I regret the lack of continuity in this debate between the rapporteur 's introduction of his report and the speeches which will now be made , since this will to a large extent distort the message .
I must therefore now return to the speech by Mr Costa Neves and his report .
I should like to begin by congratulating him , since I believe that he has drawn up a considered , objective and unbiased report on the very important subject of the implementation of the Structural Funds in 1994 .
In view of some of the comments that are made concerning the monitoring of the Structural Funds , I believe that there is a need for Parliament to underline the substantial impact which these funds are having on the development of the economies , social cohesion and general welfare of the countries which receive them . These are countries which are lagging behind the rest of Europe in terms of GDP , per capita income and a range of other factors , but which will hopefully one day cease to be so .
In particular , I wish to say that in Spain , we are proud not only of our utilization of the Structural Funds - because in Spain , the take-up rate is very high , not to say comprehensive - but also of the fact that these funds have clearly and efficiently helped to transform Spanish society .
At the present time , Spain 's economy is in relatively good shape .
It could even be said that is in better shape than the economies of a number of other European countries which are more advanced in terms of infrastructure and technology .
And the unequivocal message which I wish to convey to Parliament and the public today is that the Structural Funds are an essential means of removing obstacles and transforming and modernizing the countries which receive them .
These are substantial funds which - I acknowledge - must be supervised , and we agree absolutely with whatever efforts to monitor , evaluate and rationalize their use are considered necessary .
However , these are also funds which are serving to bring our infrastructure up to a level which is necessary to foster not only competitiveness , but also social cohesion .
I thank Mr Costa Neves for his report , and I believe that reports on the various annual assessments of the implementation of the Structural Funds should continue to be presented , since this provides Parliament and the beneficiary countries with a guarantee .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the report on the application of the Cohesion Fund in 1994 , which deserves our full support - and I take this opportunity to offer my congratulations to the rapporteur - includes various amendments tabled by us , accepted by the rapporteur and approved in discussion by the Committee on Regional Policy .
I should like to pick out those which call for the need to carry out an appropriate and prior assessment of the environmental impact project and the need for elected regional and local authorities to take part with increased powers in the supervisory committees .
In a political framework in which certain sectors insist on suspending funding to those countries which fail to meet the criteria of nominal convergence imposed by Maastricht , it is right , above all , to emphasise the adoption of amendments which we also presented and which advocate that the regulatory aspects of the Cohesion Fund must not be interpreted in an inflexible manner , accentuating at the same time that it is a protocol , outside the Treaty on European Union which , therefore , does not give it equal legal force .
Along these lines , it is also worth pointing that the Cohesion Fund does not favour only the beneficiary countries but also increases demand for goods and services throughout the European Union - which therefore , in the end , benefits all Member States .
It is also a well known fact that for every 100 ECU handed out by the structural funds , 45 ECU benefit the less-developed countries of the European Union .
Therefore - and to make sure that this is made quite clear - we can be sure to oppose and denounce firmly anyone who pretends and even accepts the idea of imposing conditions relating to monetary convergence of an even stricter nature on countries following 1999 which continue to need the Cohesion Fund and , not content with that , who might have the idea of extending the same conditions to the allocation of structural funds in the future .
Nor can we accept that countries affected by the Cohesion Fund should therefore be marginalised in the allocation of various financial incentives , as happened recently in respect of the construction of trans-European networks .
Madam President , cohesion is more correctly referred to as economic and social cohesion .
However , even a microscope will hardly reveal the social element of projects funded from the Cohesion Fund .
It is not just common knowledge , but is actually stated in the document ' Europe 2000 + ' , that investment in transport stimulates development in regions where growth is already strong .
At a hearing in the Committee on Regional Policy , the Spanish Secretary of State for the Environment said that this was leading to greater polarization in the economic power of some central regions .
The point here is that environmental projects do not always protect the environment .
For example , under the ' green dot ' system introduced in Germany , waste is eliminated simply by changing its name from waste to ' recyclable material ' .
This avoids having to avoid waste .
The system has caused one environmental scandal after another , and a study is now being financed with a view to trying out a similar scheme in Portugal .
This is how the reserves of the new structural policy are being used .
The present annual report will surely be the last one where cohesion funding is paid out without respecting the convergence criteria .
Things are going to change in the future .
In future , in fact , the disadvantaged regions will be even more disadvantaged .
If we are wondering how to set about reforming the structural policy , the Cohesion Fund springs to mind .
I am of the opinion that we should come out clearly against preserving the convergence criteria for structural policy purposes , because for social and economic cohesion to be undermined by convergence criteria is counter-productive .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by congratulating the rapporteur , Mr Costa Neves , on his excellent report .
According to the principles governing its operation , the aim of the Cohesion Fund is to support the efforts of the less developed Member States whose GDP is less than 90 % of the Community average to narrow the gap between themselves and the other Member States ; in other words , to strengthen economic and social cohesion .
The fund is a significant instrument of economic policy and can play a not inconsiderable role in reducing regional disparities in the European Union , particularly in terms of environmental protection and infrastructure schemes in the context of the trans-European transport networks .
The fact that the year 1994 is being discussed here , and that the Court of Auditors reports a payment rate scarcely in excess of 50 % , shows that the form employed by the Commission to provide information for that year was inadequate , since it has merely supplied a complementary document .
On the other hand , the funds have been properly administered and the projects completed on time .
This proves that the beneficiary countries have been keen to use the opportunities provided by the Cohesion Fund to move closer to the goal of convergence .
Although the balance between financing environmental and transport infrastructure projects has largely been redressed , it must be said that road-building is still being prioritized unduly .
However , the increased attention being given to projects to protect the environment , such as water supplies and the treatment of waste water and other waste , is welcome .
But the approval of projects must be subject to a proper environmental impact assessment .
Finally , as an MEP who does not come from a cohesion country , I would stress that this fund has not just been a useful instrument of Community initiatives for the beneficiary countries , but has boosted trade and stimulated demand for goods and services throughout the European Union .
Madam President , despite solemn promises I have not received a Swedish translation .
I regret this and am therefore compelled to read out the text which my colleague Mrs Wulf-Mathies drew up in German .
I trust the honourable Members will excuse my German .
This is what my colleague wanted to say :
It is a pleasure to discuss with you today the resolution produced by Mr Costa Neves on the complementary report on the Cohesion Fund ( 1994 ) .
As last year , I note with satisfaction the many positive remarks and constructive criticisms made by Parliament about particular policy aspects of the Cohesion Fund and its administration .
Let me take up some of these points .
First of all , following criticism from the House last year , the Commission has agreed with the Member States that the monitoring committees will meet three times a year , and that the exchange of information between meetings will be stepped up .
Secondly , the ' polluter pays ' principle forms the basis of action in the environment sector .
We have therefore started to consider how best to apply this principle in practice and , more particularly , what form of assessment - charging systems , for example - is best suited to the various different situations on the ground .
On the important question of the balance between transport and the environment , I would remind you of the line taken by the Commission , which in its communication of 22 November on cohesion policy and the environment not only confirmed its intention of achieving a 50 / 50 balance between transport and the environment for the whole duration of the Cohesion Fund , but decided to incorporate the environmental dimension more routinely into structural policy considerations , to increase the monitoring committees ' awareness of environmental issues , to monitor the adherence to conservation criteria more closely , and to keep Parliament informed on a regular basis .
I welcome your comments concerning our success in improving the balance between the environment and transport , and in promoting rail transport .
I take very seriously your concern about the small number of projects in the most remote regions , and will consult the Member States regarding ways of improving support , particularly for environmental schemes .
I have already notified the Member States that further discussion is to be held with the European Parliament in this respect .
I share your view that regional and local authorities and the social partners should be involved in the monitoring committees wherever possible : their support or cooperation is crucial if the aid projects are to be successful and accepted by the citizens .
At the same time , however , the Commission must remain within its legal bounds .
As the legislation stands , local and regional authorities and the social partners are not entitled to be involved in project selection .
However , it is an important step in the right direction that local bodies do now take part in monitoring committee meetings when projects based on local initiatives are under consideration .
Turning now to the principle of conditionality : the Commission laid down the procedure for checking on the principle of conditionality in a confidential internal communication dated 20 December 1995 .
Both in that document and in preparing for our discussions at the time , the Commission agreed on a wellrounded interpretation , making it clear that conditionality represents an incentive to budgetary discipline , consisting of three elements in particular .
Progress in achieving the targets set for the reduction of budgetary deficits is reviewed twice a year , so that it is possible to lift a suspension of aid within the year .
This constitutes a direct incentive for the Member State concerned to adapt its budgetary decisions accordingly .
A suspension of aid is preceded by a comprehensive review , which means that small divergences from the set targets in absolute terms can be allowed for , as can any irregularities undetected by a Member State .
Basing decisions on forecasts inevitably entails a degree of uncertainty , which must be taken into account and evaluated very carefully before a final decision is made .
On 25 January 1996 , the Committee on Regional Policy was informed at length by the Director-General of DG XVI about the Commission 's decision to enforce the legal obligations arising from the principle of conditionality .
The facts of the matter are these : in September 1994 , the Council established that - unlike Ireland - Spain , Portugal and Greece had excessive budget deficits .
The Council 's recommendation therefore set specific targets for these three countries for 1995 .
In July 1995 , the Council confirmed these 1995 targets and set new ones for 1996 .
An investigation this spring , once the 1995 figures are available , will show whether or not the targets for 1995 were met .
Should any Member State have failed to meet its 1995 target , the Commission will decide not to finance any new projects from the Cohesion Fund in that Member State or , in the case of large , multi-stage projects , any new stages of a project .
If aid is suspended in spring 1996 , it can be reinstated in autumn 1996 , as long as the forecast indicates that the Member State is likely to meet its target for 1996 .
In any event , the Commission will inform Parliament immediately about any decision to suspend aid .
Madam President , let me to conclude by thanking Parliament again on behalf of the Commission , and in particular the rapporteur , Mr Costa Neves , for this positive and constructive resolution on the implementation of the Cohesion Fund in 1994 .
Thank you , Mrs Gradin .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
North-South cooperation and the campaign against drugs
The next item is the report ( A4-0070 / 96 ) by Mr Liese , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the proposal for a Council Regulation ( COM ( 95 ) 0296 - C4-0380 / 95-95 / 0167 ( SYN ) ) on North-South cooperation in the campaign against drugs and drug addiction ( Budget heading B7-5080 ) .
Forty to fifty million people worldwide are addicted to illegal drugs - the fate of any one individual is awful enough to demand action .
The Committee on Development and Cooperation has presented a report , which it adopted unanimously , to contribute to solving the problem .
The crops used to manufacture drugs are cultivated primarily in three areas : in the Andean countries , the countries which form the ' golden crescent ' , and the countries of the ' golden triangle ' in Asia .
A crucial reason for the concentration of cultivation in developing countries is the dire poverty of the people in those regions .
When the alternative is to grow coca or suffer abject poverty and death , the Mafia has an easy task .
Development cooperation is therefore essential , not only in the EU 's own interests , but also out of solidarity with the people concerned in this area .
It cannot be stressed often enough that the problem of drugs is also a problem of development .
Europe realized too late in the day the need for joint measures to combat the drugs problem , and we are still being too tentative .
I take exception to any nationalist attitudes in this area : we must act together .
Not only must we act together in Europe , but we must also cooperate with the United Nations , taking account of the relevant international conventions and ensuring at last that these are enforced much more strictly .
The question ' should drugs be legalized - yes or no ? ' has exercised the House on more than one occasion . I made it clear very early on that such calls for liberalization had no chance of being put into practice either within or outside the European Union , and that international cooperation is imperative .
On the substance of the matter , too , I came out at a very early stage against liberalization , because I believe that such an approach would solve nothing .
I am very grateful to the committee for having rejected every amendment which did not explicitly rule out liberalization , so that we were able to focus more closely on the essence of this report , namely how to master the drugs problem through development policy .
That was very beneficial to the committee 's work , and I should like to thank all those colleagues who were of assistance .
So how should the resources from this budget line be spent ?
The European Parliament created the budget line ' North-South cooperation in the campaign against drugs and drug addiction ' in 1987 .
The total take-up of funds up to the end of 1995 was ECU 75.68 million .
Clearly , there can be no effective campaign to combat the problem simply by activating these funds , since the turnover of the drugs mafia is many times greater .
But this could serve as a model for the use of funds from other EU sources - such as the European Development Fund and LAA programme resources - so that other countries can follow our lead .
The Commission proposes that initiatives could be funded under the UNDCP programme in particular , for example aid to monitor and combat the drugs trade .
The committee wholeheartedly supports this idea , and we agree that prevention and treatment should be another priority , since it is important and true , and unfortunately not widely known , that there is a large number of drug addicts in the developing countries themselves .
On one point , we are firmly convinced that the Commission 's proposal is in need of improvement : the Commission proposes that a substantial part of the budget line for feasibility studies should be spent on investigating whether the GSP is functioning properly .
I think that we should save this money , and the committee agrees with me .
It would be preferable to devote the money to specific projects , because calling into question the GSP preferences - even indirectly - would send the wrong signal to the developing countries .
These preferences must be maintained and in fact extended .
One cannot always prove whether one cabbage imported by the European Union replaces one coca plant ; the problem is far more complex than that .
It is all to do with sending out a political signal and with the shaping of opinion in the countries concerned .
We focus on alternative development .
Alternative development means offering producers alternatives so that they are no longer dependent on the cultivation of drugs .
It is not enough simply to promote substitute crops : technical knowhow , infrastructure and marketing structures are needed too .
All this must be provided .
There are some very good projects in this area which are extremely successful .
Unfortunately , the EU - the Council and Commission - has not declared its unequivocal backing for such schemes , so we in Parliament should adopt a clear-cut position in order to send a signal to the Council and Commission .
The committee has unanimously done just that , and I am grateful to all the colleagues involved , in particular Mr Schmid - who unfortunately could not be present today for personal reasons - who gave me some very valuable suggestions .
But I wish to thank all my other colleagues too .
I should like to conclude by drawing attention to one particular aspect : the Council challenges the legal basis of this programme , saying that everything to do with the campaign against drugs automatically falls under the third pillar .
I wish to state emphatically on behalf of the committee , and also on behalf of the members of the Committee on Budgets , that in our view , this is an impertinence .
When we pursue a development policy and disburse funds by way of assistance to developing countries , that is development cooperation . Parliament has the power of codecision , or at least has competence , in the field of cooperation , and we shall not allow this competence to be disputed .
If the Council is of a different opinion , we shall find ways of asserting our rights through the budgetary procedure .
I thank you for your attention , and urge you to support this report from the Committee on Development and Cooperation .
Madam President , the road to hell is paved with good intentions .
When I say hell , of course , I mean the hell of drug addiction .
As for good intentions , the proposal for a Council regulation which is before us today is a perfect illustration of such intentions .
After all , what could be more praiseworthy than the desire to finance projects for North-South cooperation in the campaign against drugs and drug addiction , in order to make the developing countries more aware of these problems .
However , although we believe that it is necessary to help those countries , the draft which is proposed to us today leaves us sceptical .
First , it is inconsistent .
Parliament has on several occasions expressed its opinion as to how the campaign against drugs should be conducted , especially at international level .
We regret the fact that this proposal takes insufficient account of that opinion , and that it refers only to the United Nations International Drug Control Programme .
Moreover , the overall budget that would be allocated to the project is too limited for the latter to be really effective .
In this respect , we would like to have a more accurate idea of what activities will be financed .
Furthermore , the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , of which I am the draughtsman of the opinion , would have liked to see an approach which was more geared to prevention and which took account of the needs of local communities in the area of health education , especially for high-risk groups .
Moreover , the committee has already emphasized the need for a global campaign against the consequences of poverty and the promotion of a genuine programme of education in the developing countries .
In conclusion , and more generally , I would remind the House that , whether it be in the developing countries or in Europe , the prohibitionist approach has never yet provided an effective way of combating the escalation of supply and demand for drugs .
We should not choose the wrong target and be too precipitate in pointing the finger at the developing countries .
The synthetic drugs that have appeared in the Western countries prove that .
The Ecstasy taken by young Europeans in Amsterdam or in Paris is just as harmful as the glue sniffed by street children in Rio or Mexico City .
Consequently , only a genuine codevelopment policy will enable us to take effective action against this scourge , both here and there .
Madam President , I think we need to focus on the most important aspect of this debate , and Mr Liese should be warmly congratulated on his contribution and report for advocating more than just a policy which seeks legislation and the destruction of crops , because that often has disastrous consequences , firstly because it pushes demand up rather than down and secondly because , and Mr Liese knows this too , a one-sided strategy of this kind leads to poverty , human rights abuses and often damage to the environment .
Happily the European Commission is aware of that fact too .
At the beginning of this week a meeting was held in Bolivia between foreign ministers from the Latin American countries and their European Union counterparts .
The Cochabamba communiqué stressed the need for collective , concrete measures to tackle the worldwide drugs problem .
Commissioner Marín said at the meeting that the European Union had a different view from the United States on how to combat drug trafficking .
Marín sees little benefit in the US policy of forced destruction of crops , and that is a view reflected in the report , the Commission proposal on which the Liese report comments .
The Commission maintains that measures against drugs have in fact been unsuccessful so far .
It puts the blame for this on certain economic patterns which also apply to the drugs trade , in that where there is demand it creates supply , and where there is greater freedom in trade because borders have been abolished , this helps the drug traffickers too .
Fortunately the European Commission is increasingly recognizing that there is a need to balance the fight against drugs with the general social and economic development of the drug-producing countries .
Ideally the European Union needs to appreciate that cooperation on measures to combat drugs should be born of broad cooperation on measures to foster a good civilian society in its partner countries .
That of course is a long job .
In short , Madam President , north-south cooperation and measures against drugs have failed in terms simply of a war on drugs .
The outcome is negative in two respects : the objectives pursued are not met and the effects of a heavy-handed policy are disastrous .
I think the Commission is on the right road with its proposal for a regulation .
I think Mr Liese has raised the profile of this subject a little and I hope that a few of my amendments on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs will be adopted , thereby giving the whole thing a bit more of a human face .
But I very happy with this report and I compliment Mr Liese on it .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , millions of people are addicted to drugs .
Cruel tragedies are taking place out of sight of our proposals , reports and amendments .
The victims are drug abusers , though not only them but also their families and all too often children and young people ; it is the latter who probably suffer the most in the vicinity of drugs .
A liberal policy is just as irresponsible as a passive one .
Cooperation must be increased , not only across borders but worldwide .
There must also be greater cooperation within countries , between social services , the police and schools and other educational establishments .
A dialogue has been initiated between the USA and Europe and it is obvious that Europe will have to do more if it is to be equal to the American challenges .
On this issue the committee has received a number of opinions from several other committees with relatively mixed results .
I am happy to see that the Committee on Development and Cooperation has succeeded in distilling a constructive and consistent line from so many contradictory standpoints .
It would be naive , however , to believe that the EU can replace all drugs with other crops and simply buy solutions to the problem .
This is unrealistic .
We can provide development aid , set a good example and contribute to development activities to create better infrastructure .
This is where progress in the area can be made .
If the problem of financing in this connection is to be resolved we must have thorough research , evaluation , accounting and monitoring , as well as proper public scrutiny .
The problems involved are massive and we cannot solve them through resignation ; rather we must counter them with greater efforts and endeavours .
We therefore expect the Intergovernmental Conference to find much more effective ways of taking decisions where drugs trafficking is concerned .
After all , we cannot then take a retrograde step in this connection .
The victims of drugs trafficking cannot simply be left to their fate .
We are all responsible , not least those Members of the Council who do not wish to meet the obligations imposed by the proposed measures but who do not have any alternative proposals either .
I welcome the humane viewpoint which I believe permeates both the proposal and the report .
It shows a way towards an alternative development which will result in less demand .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the campaign against drug addiction is a subject which gives rise to a great deal of polemics and passion , because unfortunately there is no miracle cure to stamp out this scourge which is poisoning our society , creating greater and greater devastation , and giving rise directly to delinquency and prostitution .
I am a grass-roots politician .
The Nord-Pas-de-Calais region , which I represent , has seen a considerable increase in this phenomenon during recent years .
Drug seizures increased by 272 % in 1995 as compared with the previous year .
The number of drug addicts in the region is estimated at 15 , 000 , or 10 % of the French total ; the population of the region represents 2.5 % of the population of France , so that Nord-Pas-de-Calais sadly has four times as many drug addicts as the national average .
The proportion of heroin addicts in the region is increasing ; it exceeds the national average by 15 % .
Multiple addiction is spreading .
It is the young generation that is affected : 90 % are under 30 and half are under 21 ; most of them are male and 65 % are job-seekers .
Drug addicts are not just dreamy intellectuals trying to escape , from time to time , the reality of everyday life ; they are also young people , victims of the economic crisis , lacking roots , values and standards .
Far from solving the problem by eliminating the attraction of forbidden fruit , the legalization of the sale of soft drugs , persistently called for by some Members , would merely exacerbate it by increasing the supply and making it easier to purchase drugs .
Every country or region that has tried this experiment has found it a failure and has turned back .
The Dutch also acknowledge that , although their policy has had satisfactory results over a long period , their liberal intentions are today being perverted by international traffickers .
What they have seen in the Netherlands is nothing less than drugs tourism , and they are the first victims of it .
In 1991 , 61 % of the heroin sold in France came from the Netherlands .
In the last two years , more than 40 people from the Department of Nord have died of an overdose in the Netherlands .
The French and Dutch police believe that young French people are making 200 trips per day to the Netherlands to buy drugs there .
An association from Lille , set up in 1995 , has set up a contact group in Rotterdam to repatriate these deeply distressed young people .
It is essential now to devise a plan for global action .
First , greater cooperation between the Member States is necessary to ensure better comprehension of mutual problems and the harmonization of policies .
We cannot organize the coexistence of such different models as those that exist at present .
Secondly , we need to reinforce the health programmes and information campaigns .
That is what we set out in the Burtone report .
Finally , we must boost international cooperation to combat organized crime and reduce supply .
As our rapporteur quite rightly stresses , while the only choice is between growing coca and extreme poverty or death , the Maffia will be on velvet .
It is crucial , then , to encourage substitution development strategies to offer certain developing countries other alternatives to the production of drugs .
The proposals by the Commission and the rapporteur are satisfactory .
We must allocate substantial resources to implementing them .
We shall therefore support this report , which is a step in the right direction .
Madam President , notwithstanding the very proper concern voiced by the previous speaker , Mr Donnay , he seemed to be talking about northsouth cooperation , between the Netherlands and France , and I thought the report dealt with something different from what Mr Donnay was talking about , but I do share his concern .

Madam President , I know from my own experience - don 't get me wrong here - that drugs and drug-related crime are spreading in third world countries . Corruption is also spreading and so is the absolute dependence of various third world countries on this abhorrent trade .
The harm this does to stability and economic development in these countries gives us cause not only for great concern but also cause to reflect on what is in effect the failure of our development cooperation .
Many citizens of these countries appear - as I said - to be totally powerless to halt the expansion of the drugs trade , the drugs industry , the cultivation of narcotic crops .
Because people live in poverty , the result of the failure of large areas of our development cooperation , they often have no alternative .
Consequently we must not only look at the position here in Europe as part of a coherent and global campaign against drugs ; it is very much in our interest to offer a viable alternative in the areas to which Dr Liese has pointed .
One major element in our global policy on drugs is thus cooperation between north and south ; it has to be .
It is a useful means of strengthening the institutional capacity of the countries concerned so that they in turn can have the weapons with which to act against the laundering of drug money and fight the drug barons .
In another important aspect of our north-south cooperation , however , we must try to encourage the cultivation of alternative crops to get off the ground .
This cannot be an ad hoc policy . The encouragement of alternative crops can only succeed if we ourselves open up our markets to third world products , including agricultural products .
The funds for north-south cooperation are far too modest , Madam President . Ten million ECU is of course nothing , peanuts .
More must be found if Europe really wants to provide serious help with the problem we are discussing .
We must also cooperate with the United Nations and the Member States to make our efforts more effective .
This north-south cooperation must also be a part of our overall policy of development cooperation : human rights , the environment and the role of women all have their place , but I tell you , the most important requirement of all is action to tackle and defeat dependence on the drugs trade , the drugs industry , drug manufacturing .
What we must do here in Europe , whoever we blame for drug addiction , whether it is the Netherlands or Belgium or another country , we must send out an important signal to the roots from which this abomination grows , and I am happy that Mr Liese , who know what he is talking about , has given that signal .
My compliments to him .
Madam President , Commissioner , it is generally believed that in the fight against international drug trafficking , the key to success lies - and this was confirmed by the European Council in Madrid - in drawing up measures to reduce demand , combat the illegal trade and establish international cooperation .
There is no agreement , however , on how to reduce demand - and without the reduction of demand , the other measures will be largely ineffective .
This aspect of the question should be borne in mind , even though we are at present discussing international cooperation ; for what is the point of reaching agreements with the countries concerned to eradicate drug crops from certain areas , when the criminal organizations can simply grow those crops somewhere else ?
Indeed , the eradication - or at least the attempted eradication - of drug crops from certain geographical areas has not resulted in the reduction of the quantity of those crops .
The question is not so simple - would that it were .
Consequently , I believe that we must continue our attempts to increase the budget for promoting alternative agricultural development in the countries concerned , with a view to ensuring that the substitution of traditionally grown narcotic plants with alternative crops is genuinely feasible . At the same time , however , I believe that we must address the serious problem of drug addiction from many different angles and without preconceptions .
Madam President , plans drawn up around the conference table do no good .
They have resulted , in the ' golden triangle ' for example , in crops being grubbed up , causing villages to slide away because of erosion , and driving people who lose their jobs and homes in rural areas into shanty-towns around the big cities ; once there , they have sunk into poverty and have themselves begun to take drugs .
One solution would be to involve local people from the outset in all restructuring plans for which aid is intended , but we can see few really positive examples of this .
The problem with international institutions receiving funds from the European Union is that the EU often loses any control .
When one considers what is actually being done nowadays to combat drugs , it really is an act of desperation : the police are being used in the campaign against drugs , and the root causes are in no sense being addressed .
Generally speaking , we are in favour of Mr Liese 's report .
But we fail to understand why he has suddenly developed such an admiration for trade preferences .
Basically , these benefit only large concerns , whereas small farmers gain absolutely nothing .
In Colombia , for example , in the flower plantations run by these large concerns , serious violations of human rights are taking place , particularly against female workers .
Their health is being damaged irresponsibly , and yet aid is being provided .
Is that what we want ?
Parliament has been demanding investigations for years now , but the Commission does nothing .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Madam Commissioner , not all the members in my group agree with the point I am about to make , so I shall speak personally .
The rapporteur proposes the development of alternative crops to persuade peasants in Third World countries to abandon the unlawful production of hallucinogenic plants .
The broad stratagem suggested is to offer customs preferences for the export of legal agricultural products .
In a nutshell , what the rapporteur is offering these Third World peasants is that we should pay them a few pence extra for their potatoes and ask them to forego incomes a hundred times as great that they can earn by devoting their efforts to illegal crops .
This policy , which has been christened with the resounding name of ' alternative crop policy ' , is actually nothing more nor less than the same tired policy of the American DEA , the Drugs Enforcement Administration , which has been implemented for twenty years with results that we know , though it seems necessary to remind the honourable rapporteur of those results .
In twenty years , the DEA has spent hundreds of millions of dollars a year to finance the destruction of thousands and thousands of hectares of illegal crops .
Over those same twenty years , production and consumption of illegal drugs , for its part , has increased to an extent that is literally unparalleled in the history of mankind 's consumer habits .
Europe 's response to the blatant failure of this American policy - though it has not lacked resources , to say the least - is to propose the same policy , with financing amounting to ECU ten million .
All this would be ludicrous , Madam President , if this whole drugs business were not totally tragic .
Tragic for many Third World democracies which have already been destabilized by clandestine organizations whose enormous power crushes them ; tragic for our democracies , slowly but surely infiltrated by dirty money ; tragic for those hundreds of thousands of European citizens who have suffered at the hands of consumers of illegal substances , literally forced into crime ; and tragic for those millions of consumers who have been so definitively marginalized .
After twenty years , after thirty years of error , tragedy and evil effects of all kinds , there is not another minute to lose .
Individual States and the international community must be given back genuine control over the production and distribution of all the substances that are at present illegal .
We must regularize and legalize all drugs , straight away .
And let us stop telling the anti-prohibitionists that a debate on the legalization of drugs will be a waste of time .
Confronted with a disaster on this scale , it is the prohibitionists who must now bear the burden of proof .
Madam President , first of all I must compliment the rapporteur on the excellent report which he and the Committee on Development and Cooperation have produced .
Unlike the opinions delivered by other committees his report provides a balanced account and has avoided the temptation to make unduly forthright comments about liberalization and legalization .
Because that is not what we are about here .
The Commission 's aim with this proposal is to enable developing countries to combat drug addiction effectively and to involve them in existing international cooperation efforts on the subject .
Our job now is to examine this proposal from the point of view of development policy .
And that is what we must do .
People in developing countries do not grow coca and poppies because they believe in principle that drugs should be freely available ; usually they grow these crops purely in order to subsist .
And meanwhile the cultivation and sale of these crops also causes a lot of economic and social problems in their own countries too , which often have enough other problems as it is .
It is awful to realize that so far Europe has done precious little for the developing countries .
I also find it awful that some people are again trying to steer the debate towards liberalization and away from the real subject of this report .
We must not forget that the growing of narcotics is often the result of a deeper underlying problem , poverty .
We need to set up an international policy of cooperation with the developing world to combat the worldwide problem of drugs .
But this will lead nowhere unless we in Europe can offer these countries a real prospect of a better future .
Studies have shown that Europe has developed more in the direction of a closed market vis à vis the developing countries than an open market .
Until such time as we take development policy seriously and stop undermining it with our economic policy we cannot expect programmes like these to produce anything much that is worthwhile .
So I shall warmly endorse Amendment No 2 to Mr Liese 's report , which emphasizes this point .
I shall also support the other amendments which seek to channel aid as directly and as specifically as possible to where it is needed .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this is actually a very interesting report on a useful idea : the idea of granting aid to the less developed countries in order to enable them to abandon drug production in favour of alternative crops .
However , this report places a great deal of emphasis on economic aspects , and less on the power relationships underlying this problem .
In many cases , whole populations are forced by the drug traffickers to produce drugs , and the problem is not so much an economic one as a problem of real political sovereignty and so , ultimately , virtually a military problem .
As the rapporteur has quite rightly noted , the credits released by the European Union in this area are far too modest , to say the least , in the light of the scale of the challenge represented by the drugs market today .
But it is not just the credits that are modest .
I fear that the same applies to our actual intentions .
As things stand today , waging war on drugs means resulting to completely exceptional measures .
In our opinion , this cannot be done unless we reintroduce , and actually apply , the death penalty for the drug barons , as is being very successfully done in certain countries such as Singapore .
For ideological reasons that are only too familiar , this approach is considered to be out of the question . Instead , efforts are made to handle the problems created by the drugs traffic from an economic angle , and even to establish research credits , although the efficacy of such credits is not really proven .
We tend to forget that the drug traffickers are not just shady businessmen but actual murderers , and that consequently the problem is not a purely economic one - I say again , it must be dealt with politically and I will go so far as to say militarily , bearing in mind the scale of the traffic today .
There are no signs at present that the European Union , or the Member States , intend to pursue this line .
For this reason , although the report is a good one , we once again feel that the heart of the matter has been overlooked .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Civil Liberties is in a critical position with regard to the Liese report because it is based on a Commission proposal in which the European Union 's action envisaged for the fight against drugs in developing countries is based on an absolutely ineffective strategy .
Moreover the Commission 's own document reflects a certain lack of confidence in stating that the international community , including the European Union , must note the obvious failure of the fight against drugs .
That failure is derived from certain economic laws which apply also to the narcotics sector .
In the proposal under consideration the importance of the system of generalized preferences is confirmed .
However , it is not in fact clear that it is really to the advantage of the small growers who have cultivated staple crops instead of drugs or who have helped in some way to reduce the areas cultivated for drug production .
The production , sale and use of drugs has increased out of all proportion in recent years and that tendency is confirmed in Interpol 's statistics according to which , for example , in the space of thirteen years the quantity of cocaine seized in Europe has increased 200-fold .
It is now clear that , given what this represents in financial terms , the drugs traffic and related illegal activities create corruption at all levels and the infiltration of criminal organizations into the management of public affairs and the organization of the economy .
The drugs problem is a real political problem in the producer countries , because it is known that the cartels use the resources they have accumulated to interfere in the democratic and economic processes of their countries , thus controlling policy and taking control of key sectors of business life and the financial services sector .
The problem has world dimensions and it is precisely in the field of cooperation policy and development aid that Europe can and must take stock of the situation to bring all aspects of the phenomenon into focus , to evaluate the policies implemented hitherto and to provide for setting up new forms of intervention capable of promoting cooperation between the producer States and the importing States and between the public authorities at all levels as well as assessing the suitability of root and branch changes of approach and of particular intervention policies .
The policies of crop destruction and the financing of alternative products are recognized by all studies and analyses as a failure .
As regards the allocation of appropriations it may be noted that in the proposal before us , whereas significant tranches had hitherto been reserved for measures to encourage a reduction in demand , the Commission seems to want almost to halve appropriations available for restraining demand , and this at a time when it is coming more and more to be recognized that only by reducing demand will it be possible to solve the drug problem as , moreover , the Commission itself has recognized in referring to the growing consumption of drugs .
It is essential therefore for the Commission to reconsider the scale of allocation of resources and it would be appropriate , moreover , to provide for rules with regard to co-financing .
Finally respect for human rights must be one of the Union 's objectives in the field of the fight against drugs and not only in the context of prevention measures , treatment and rehabilitation of addicts .
In fact legislation against drugs and its implementation by police or military forces may involve risks of breach of human rights which can in no way be endorsed by the Community .
Madam President , the production , marketing and consumption of drugs has increased beyond measure in the past few years .
Interpol statistics relating to drugs seized show clearly the trends in recent years : from 1 366 kg of heroin seized in Europe in 1989 to 6 100 seized in 1990 ; from 59 kg of cocaine seized in Europe in 1977 to 12 912 in 1993 .
As regards amphetamines , the total amount in 1990 was 380 kg seized as against 184 in 1989 .
The illegal trade in cannabis and marijuana is increasing throughout the world : in 1990 211 tonnes were seized as compared with 160 in 1989 and 242 in 1992 .
It is now clear that trafficking and related illegal activities , in view of the financial value of the phenomenon , create corruption at all levels and infiltration of criminal organizations into the management of public affairs and the organization of the economy .
The drugs problem is world-wide .
The international cartels are adopting an ever more aggressive and expansionist strategy in invading fresh markets with new drugs , with constantly changing distribution arrangements and with an increasingly remarkable ability to conceal and transfer the proceeds trafficking .
It is primarily a political problem in the producer countries , because it is known that the cartels use their accumulated funds to interfere in the democratic and economic processes of their countries , thus controlling policy and taking control of key sectors of business life and the financial services sector .
Organized crime can employ the best brains , avail themselves of the latest technologies , of the leading experts in laundering , make use with impunity of so many arrangements and places .
Ladies and gentlemen , we must go to war against drugs in all spheres .
It is an absolute ethical commitment which we must make our priority in order to allow our children to live in a future in which the values and the joys of living must not be jeopardized by the chemistry of drugs .
It is a true commitment requiring serious responses , an army of organized criminals cannot be beaten by the chatter of demagogues .
The road will be long , hard and not yet entirely sure , but free men who believe in life have the duty to travel it .
Though the problem is of world dimensions it is precisely in the framework of cooperation policy and development aid that Europe can and must take stock to bring into focus all aspects of the phenomenon , to evaluate what has been done , to determine new forms of intervention capable of encouraging cooperation between producer States and importing States , between authorities at all levels .
The approach must be a global one and there must be an in-depth reappraisal in the United Nations of the results of policies hitherto followed in the matter of drugs , leading if necessary to a revision of the UN Conventions on the matter .
We are fully aware that the powers of the United Nations are very slight , but the road is worth travelling , in a framework of North-South financing in the drugs sector .
Madam President , before the Commissioner responds to Mr Liese 's excellent report and gives the Commission 's views on the various amendments , I would like it confirmed that the Commission has been properly informed that Amendments Nos 31 , 32 , 34 and 35 , submitted in the names of Mr De Coene and Mrs d 'Ancona and the Socialist Group , have , in fact , been withdrawn .


Madam President , the battle against drugs is a priority issue for the Commission .
The abuse of drugs is a great worry throughout the world .
Between 40 and 50 million people are addicted to illegal drugs .
In recent years the number of drug addicts has increased dramatically in developing countries too .
Within the EU there are hundreds of thousands of addicts .
This situation is extremely serious .
The Commission has a clear policy in this area .
The emphasis is on efforts to reduce availability and demand , efforts to combat illegal trafficking and efforts involving international cooperation .
It is essential for the EU to cooperate closely with developing countries in the battle against drug abuse .
It is a question of providing assistance in such a way that people are not forced into drug production simply out of poverty .
They must have the opportunity to earn an income from other crops .
It is a question of supporting countries ' own efforts , together with other international organisations .
If the problem is to be dealt with effectively , efforts must be made in various quarters .
In concrete terms this means that the measures taken should be intended to reduce both supply and demand and to combat illegal trafficking and money laundering .
The Commission welcomes the report from Mr Liese and the excellent work done by the committees concerned .
To a large extent it corresponds with the analysis and guidelines proposed by the Commission .
A large number of amendments have been tabled .
Unfortunately we were not informed of whether any of these amendments had been withdrawn .
Of the amendments tabled , the Commission accepted the following : Nos 1 , 3 , 4 , 6 , 7 , 9 , 11 , 13 , 14 , 16 , 17 , 19 , 21 , 24 , 28 , 30 and 33 .
As regards Amendments Nos 5 , 8 , 10 , 15 , 18 , 20 , 22 , 23 , 25 , 27 , 29 and 36 , these are essentially problematic and cannot therefore be accepted by the Commission .
Amendment No 5 proposes that the associated countries should have the opportunity to reject the evaluation criteria .
The Commission is the only body responsible for evaluation and it is therefore only reasonable that it should also be the Commission which decides the criteria .
Amendment No 8 concerns the European Development Fund .
This is not a financing body belonging to the Community and it is not therefore possible to refer to other financing bodies in a legal act concerning budgetary matters .
Amendment No 15 refers to giving priority to direct measures to tackle the drug problem .
This would reduce the Commission 's freedom of action with regard to cooperation with developing countries to far too great an extent .
Amendment No 10 puts forward a limit of 10 % for , inter alia , the evaluation of projects .
The Commission considers that this could hinder the development of projects and that it would inappropriately restrict the opportunities for evaluation .
Amendment No 18 proposes a reference to Article 205 .
As the proposal concerns a legal act which will become Community law the whole Treaty must be respected .
There is neither any need to confine oneself to a single article , nor would this be meaningful .
Amendment No 20 proposes an amendment to the budget regulations governing the European Community 's general budget , which the Commission cannot approve .
Amendment No 22 concerns comitology and the July 1987 decision of the Council .
This issue can only be resolved within the framework of the 1996 Intergovernmental Conference .
Amendments Nos 23 and 25 concern reports to Parliament , to be made twice a year .
The Commission 's proposal was for an annual report .
The Commission considers that Article 10 in its proposal meets the two legitimate demands that the Commission 's operations should be open to scrutiny and that it should concentrate on project administration .
Amendment No 27 concerns measures to combat illegal trafficking .
The Commission does not wish to reduce its measures to combat illegal imports and the manufacture of illegal drugs and cannot therefore approve the amendment .
Amendment No 29 in part concerns the same issue as Amendment No 10 , i.e. a limit of 10 % , and also refers to studies and cooperation with specialised agencies .
I have already considered the issue of the 10 % limit and I would add that the Commission 's studies are generally carried out by experts .
Amendment No 36 refers to controlling the use of coca leaves .
It has proved extremely difficult to control such use .
Amendments Nos 2 , 8 and 12 can be approved by the Commission after some editorial changes which do not alter the substance .
The Commission can only accept parts of Amendments Nos 26 and 31 .
Amendment No 2 proposes the inclusion of words to the effect that the Union will not take any measures which would result in loss of income or greater poverty in the south .
In principle the Commission shares the view that the European Community should not take measures which have negative consequences for developing countries .
It is , nevertheless , of the opinion that the European Community cannot commit itself to not taking such measures .
The Commission proposes that reference be made to the need to eliminate poverty in developing countries .
Amendment No 8 refers , inter alia , to the Dublin Group 's definition .
In the interests of greater clarity , the Commission proposes that the Dublin Group 's definition of alternative development should be attached in an annex to the report .
Amendment No 12 concerns protection against reprisals .
Bearing in mind the nature of the other measures which it usually supports , the Commission cannot commit itself to the protection of farmers from reprisals which drug traffickers may take .
Allow me in conclusion to stress the enormous importance which the Commission attaches to cooperation with developing countries in the fight against drug abuse .
We welcome the European Parliament 's considerable commitment to the issue .
Thank you , Mrs Gradin .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
Civil protection action programme
The next item is the report ( A4-0100 / 96 ) by Mrs González Álvarez , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a Council Decision ( COM ( 95 ) 0155 - C4-0221 / 95-95 / 0098 ( CNS ) ) establishing a Community action programme in the field of civil protection .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this is the international decade for the prevention of natural disasters , which will end in the year 2000 .
In 1994 , there were 580 natural disasters across the world , causing 16 000 deaths and more than USD 65 million worth of material losses .
Consequently , the establishment of a Community action programme in the field of civil protection is of the utmost importance in tackling not only natural disasters , but also man-made disasters of a technological or industrial kind .
This very week , we have had a debate in plenary to mark the tenth anniversary of the Chernobyl disaster - the ultimate example of a disaster caused by the irresponsibility and imprudence of man .
And I believe that the Chernobyl disaster makes crystal clear the vital need for Europe-wide civil protection measures .
In 1985 , a first ministerial meeting laid the foundations for Community cooperation in the field of civil protection .
And since 1984 , the European Parliament has delivered a number of opinions in favour of the introduction of more effective measures , especially in the field of prevention .
The Council resolution of October 1994 recalls the declaration in the final act of the Treaty on European Union , which states that the question of introducing a specific title on civil protection into the Treaty establishing the European Community will be examined on the basis of a report which the Commission is to submit to the Council by 1996 at the latest .
We have therefore reintroduced the amendment which Mrs Díez de Rivera tabled in the Committee on the Environment - and which was not adopted - concerning the need for the Intergovernmental Conference to establish a legal basis for Community civil protection measures .
Fundamental to this proposal are measures in the areas of forecasting , prevention , training and information , the self-protection , awareness and solidarity of citizens , and cooperation and coordination between local , regional and national authorities .
Consequently , our amendments seek to enhance these aspects , whilst underlining the need to pay special attention to the isolated and ultraperipheral regions , which face enormous difficulties and are often affected by emergencies - typhoons , fires , hurricanes , and so on .
The role of the non-governmental organizations and the need for adequate funding are the subject of other amendments adopted by the Committee on the Environment .
We respect the proposals and amendments put forward by Mr Schnellhardt , with whom we have held discussions , but we were obliged to oppose a number of them , particularly as regards the committee which we call advisory , but which Mr Schnellhardt proposes should manage the action programme in conjunction with the Commission .
We do not agree with this , because we believe that it would mean returning the measures to national control , and because of course disasters do not usually respect national borders and therefore require joint measures to be taken by the Commission - with consultation , naturally , of a committee in which the Member States are represented .
Such a committee is clearly provided for in Article 4 of the proposal , and we believe that consultation and the requirement that the Commission must take its views into account are sufficient .
Finally , in the explanatory statement , we strongly recommend that a European Union intervention fund should be set up to guarantee immediate and effective action in the case of disasters .
We believe that this would not mean spending more money . Indeed , on a daily , weekly or monthly basis , the Commission and the other institutions send money to the various countries hit by disasters to help them cope with the consequences .
Having an intervention fund would be an important means of ensuring a more rapid and effective response .
I should like to end by thanking my colleagues in the Committee on the Environment who helped to improve this report , the representatives of the Commission , who also assisted us , and our committee secretariat , which also collaborated in this report , which the scant attendance in the Chamber may perhaps suggest is unimportant , but which I believe to be one of great importance .
Madam President , the proposal for a decision now before the House on the extremely important subject of civil protection is vague and inadequate , despite the rapporteur 's courageous attempts to improve it .
For years , inefficiency at Community level - due , amongst other things , to a lack of staff - has delayed the development of a coherent and effective policy in this field , despite the fact that for more than ten years , the European Parliament has been calling for the promotion of preventive measures , mutual assistance and training , the use of new technical equipment , the coordination of efforts , and the establishment of citizens ' information and awareness campaigns .
Furthermore , a specific chapter was devoted to this subject in the fifth action programme on the environment , directly following that on nuclear safety and protection against radiation - because as we recalled yesterday , the consequences of the Chernobyl disaster are still in everyone 's mind .
Given that civil protection is a matter of fundamental importance to the Union 's citizens - as it is to the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions , notwithstanding the fact that , incomprehensibly , this question is being debated when the sitting is almost over - how is it possible that the Treaty on European Union should only mention it in the first declaration , even though transnational action and cooperation between states are essential to its effectiveness ?
The vague and ambiguous provisions of Article 3 and an ephemeral legal basis are all that we can count on to deal with serious environmental disasters such as oil spills , accidents in the transport of hazardous substances , radiation leaks , forest fires , and so on .
I am therefore proposing that the Intergovernmental Conference should address this issue , and I thank Mrs González Álvarez for her comments concerning my amendment .
Having said that , it is true that something is better than nothing .
It is also true that the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection has extensively amended the Commission text , emphasizing in particular the need for preventive measures , training , cooperation and shared responsibility , without forgetting the specific problems faced by the smaller islands and the valuable contribution that non-governmental organizations have made to tackling countless disasters .
I should like to end , Madam President , by congratulating Mrs González Álvarez once again , although I fear that the Union 's citizens would have preferred a more ambitious and specific text .

Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , civil protection is an area which has until now , as it were , been located on the extreme fringes of Community competence : the Member States have been acting by means of intergovernmental cooperation .
The Commission proposal now before us adopts the right approach , setting out an integrated action programme which complements existing Community activities in the field of civil protection .
What does this involve ?
The draft action programme is based on the premise that civil protection falls under the competence of the Member States , since prompt action by those responsible at local and regional level is crucial to rapid and effective assistance in the event of a disaster .
EU involvement should therefore be restricted to additional help in cases where there is a need for cross-border action .
In short , it is a matter of transferring know-how , providing mutual assistance and exchanging experiences .
This was the thinking behind the existing activities , and in my opinion it should be maintained in principle .
In the past , there has always been a good deal of interest in the transfer of know-how .
I also welcome the proposed new measures to improve the ability of European citizens to protect themselves against risks , however , since this should help considerably to restrict or reduce the damage caused by disasters .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection has proposed a few additions to the content of the future action programme , most of which my group endorses .
Opinions differ , however , as to how the future action programme should be implemented , especially in terms of who should take the final decision on the measures to be carried out .
Hitherto , the so-called network of civil protection correspondents , consisting of representatives of the Member States , has been responsible for putting EU actions into effect .
The Commission is now proposing that it should have the final say , and it is just not true , Mrs González Álvarez , that the committee simply expresses its opinion and then this is implemented ; the exact opposite is the case .
The new civil protection committee , consisting as before of Member States ' representatives , would have a purely advisory role .
Its members would merely be informed whether or not the Commission was following their recommendations .
I find this unacceptable .
I strongly urge Parliament to adopt a different stance here , namely that the final power of decision should rest with the Council when - and only when - the views of the Commission and the committee diverge .
I fully realize that the European Parliament has its own , critical attitude to the question of comitology , and quite rightly so in many cases .
I am not seeking blindly to hand over all decision-making power to the Council and take away responsibility from the Commission and Parliament .
Rather , it is our duty to devise appropriate Community procedures for an area of activity which is on the extreme fringes of Community competence .
I could only support a solution on the Commission 's lines if civil protection were to be included in the Treaty in its own right .
However - and here I have to contradict you , Mrs González Álvarez - neither the Commission , nor the Reflection Group , nor Parliament has called for this , which means that the matter will not even be discussed at the IGC .
No such passage will be inserted into the Treaty , and we must therefore make the necessary changes .
Let us be consistent and remain within the framework which we ourselves have adopted as a guide , and let us at least apply the rules of comitology .
Madam President , I welcome the proposed action programme on civil protection .
It has been a long time coming - probably because the Treaty as we have already heard does not provide specific powers to act in this area .
The programme had to be put forward under the general Article 235 .
We can only hope it will not suffer the blocking fate of the poverty programme and the Action for the Elderly programme which are under this legal base .
There is a good argument for a Treaty amendment in this area in due course , not because the European Union wants to dictate to Member States on civil protection policies - far from it , but because exchanges of best practice and action to prevent cross-border disasters such as flooding , fire and acts of terrorism must be able to be coordinated at European level where that is desirable .
I am proud to support the London Fire Service , the largest and probably the best in the world .
It has suffered severe financial cutbacks and restrictions in recent years under the present Conservative Government in Britain and it is very much in favour of these cross-border exchanges to pursue its campaign to promote the Hazchem system to exchange its expertise in disaster management with other countries in the European Union and perhaps further to the east as well .
I trust Parliament will approve the funding in the 1997 budget once this important action programme has been approved by the Council , and I hope the Council will listen to our arguments in support of the programme and approve it as soon as possible .
Madam President , the Commission would like to extend its thanks to the Committee on the Environment and to the Committee on Budgets , and in particular to the Mrs González Álvarez and Mrs Gredler for their work and commitment to the report .
Disasters are happening all over the world .
Everyone in Europe is exposed to many and various risks .
These include earthquakes , forest fires and volcanic eruptions in the southern part of the Union or floods , storms and technological risks throughout the Union .
Community cooperation in civil protection matters is intended to increase safety levels , as regards both natural and technological disasters affecting people , the environment and property .
The most important elements of this cooperation are the sharing of experience , learning from previous events and the coordination of efforts in those Member States with a responsibility for civil protection .
The proposal also provides a legal basis for budget item B4-3300 concerning civil protection and environmental disasters .
With that , permit me to move on to the amendments which have been tabled , Madam President .
The Commission accepts many of the proposals .
Amendments Nos 3 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 9 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 15 and 19 improve and clarify the text and elaborate the Commission 's proposal .
The Commission approves them in their entirety or substance .
Certain amendments must be clarified .
These are Amendments Nos 2 , 4 , 8 , 10 , 14 , 20 , 21 , 22 , 23 , 24 and 31 , which can therefore be approved in part .
Certain amendments cannot be approved by the Commission , however .
We believe that the Commission 's proposal concerning comitology provides the best balance between the institutions , as a result of which Amendments Nos 16 , 17 , 18 , 27 , 28 and 30 cannot be approved .
What the Commission is proposing is in fact a committee procedure of type 1 .
Changing to a different procedure would mean a less effective decision-making process .
Amendment No 25 would allow voluntary organisations to obtain support from the Community for their work .
The resolution on mutual assistance which was adopted in July 1991 by the Council and representatives of the governments of the Member States means , however , that only the competent authorities may apply for and obtain support within the Union .
Voluntary organisations are not authorities and cannot therefore be approved .
We should , however , remember that non-profitmaking organisations play a very important role in civil protection in our Member States .
We have every reason , therefore , to encourage them in their work .
In Amendment No 26 it is proposed that the 1996 Intergovernmental Conference should provide civil protection with a special legal basis .
A programme of measures is , however , not the right place to establish views on what the Intergovernmental Conference should result in and we cannot therefore accept the amendment .
As a result of the amendments tabled the proposal concerning civil protection has , I believe , been much improved .
At the same time I should like to point out that no appropriations have been earmarked as part of the budget item for civil protection , that is to say B-3300 for 1996 , despite the Committee on the Environment 's excellent report .
This situation will present considerable problems .
The Commission cannot therefore support activities of the kind involved in the three simulation exercises to be conducted this year in Italy and Sweden and on the Dutch-German border .
The same applies with regard to the European Fire Services Training College 's summer course in fire and rescue work .
The situation can be improved , however , if Parliament approves without delay the request for the transfer of appropriations to the budget item for civil protection which the Commission intends to submit in the very near future .
Thank you , Mrs Gradin .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 7.45 p.m. )
I understand from a well-intentioned leak that today is the birthday of the chairman of the PPE .
I will take this opportunity to offer him , on your behalf , our very best wishes .
Thank you for your good wishes , and thank you all for your kind thoughts .
Many thanks .
Madam President , I would like to draw attention to a somewhat regrettable misunderstanding which occurred yesterday .
And in drawing attention to it , I hope that something or other may be done so that it does not occur again .
I had a group of visitors who were sitting up in the gallery , and I was going to show them around Parliament .
Our agreement was that they were to send me a note when they had finished in the gallery , so that I could be called from the Chamber where I was voting .
However , I never received the note in question , and it was only an hour and a half later when the group of visitors was about to leave , that I caught up with them .
In the meantime the Danish head of the visitors ' service had been summoned .
She had looked around the Chamber , but as she did not expect me to be sitting here , where I do not really feel that I belong in any case , she was not able to see me in the Chamber , and she told the group that I was not in the Chamber .
That means that the group were given the impression that I had not been here , that I was not doing my job , and that I could not be got hold of .
The long and the short of it is that I was not able to show the group around Parliament at all , but only found them five minutes before they were due to leave the place .
I think that this is highly regrettable , and I cannot understand why the note was not passed to me , and why it was said that I was not here .
I would , at any event , like to be assured that such a thing does not happen again .
One might be waiting for some very important messages sitting here in the Chamber .
Mrs Sandbæk , I have read about this incident and the misunderstanding that occurred .
I do of course realise that it is very unfortunate , and I want you to know that everyone regrets it very much and that , since we cannot put things right , we shall ensure that nothing of the kind can happen again .
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
As regards the resolution on Tibet , my name does not appear although I did vote in favour , by roll-call vote .
That error will be corrected , Mr Caudron .
Are there any other comments ?
( Parliament approves the Minutes )
Madam President , this morning I was presented with a hotel bill for the week of this session , and the price was almost 25 % higher than in March .
I have heard that all the hotels in Strasbourg have introduced this special price for the weeks when Parliament is in session .
Would the Bureau please try to persuade the competent authorities to break this price cartel and , if necessary , impose fines on those concerned .
As an immediate measure , I would suggest that during those weeks when we meet in Strasbourg , we should not meet here in the Palais but at the Espace Leopold building instead .
By so doing we shall show that we are not prepared to be held hostage by these people who are forcing prices up .
Mrs Gebhardt , that was not a point of order , but as you can imagine I was listening very attentively .
Votes
I voted against the González Álvarez report , in the first place because I do not subscribe to the proposals it contains .
In the amendments attention is called in particular to the ultraperipheral regions of the Union .
I see no good reason why this primarily requires European interference .
But what is more important is that I am against the Commission proposal as such .
The proposal is based on Article 235 of the Treaty , the article which provides a legal basis for actions unconnected with the objectives of the Treaty .
My Group thinks that civil protection is an activity which the Member States can well handle for themselves . Even more important , very often protection of the population is in the hands of large numbers of volunteers .
That alone indicates that one must be careful about European interference .
Why should the EU intervene in fields which are now looked after with great dedication by the Member States themselves ?
Cases are conceivable in which the European Union may play a useful part . Crossborder disasters for example .
They of course require a cross-border approach , that is logical .
The prevention of natural disasters by a responsible management of nature and the environment may also justify the European approach .
But that is not this programme 's primary aim .
This programme is much too broad and general and I am therefore against it .
Recognition must be given to the major importance of the programme of Community actions aimed at civil defence to be developed in the Member States of the European Union , given in particular the major impact of natural disasters and other catastrophes which regularly affect our country .
This statement contains no approach or analysis of the great variety of the different types of risk of extraordinary seriousness to which our countries and regions are subjected .
We all know what they are and we have suffered the harmful effects of many of them .
What I am particularly interested in pointing out at this time is that the Commission must give significant support to Member States in order to help them react rapidly and effectively and whenever possible to prevent or give warning of storms , floods , droughts , forest fires , earthquakes , major rock or land slips , ecological disasters , technological disasters , major transport accidents , etc , not only financial support but also in the form of training activities or preparing those most effective in terms of civil defence , by improving the technical means of acting and any equipment aimed at preventing or coming to the immediate rescue , by educating and raising public awareness in civil protection , etc . There should also be an exchange of experts and technicians between the various Member States in order to improve their knowledge and to perfect their services .
It should also be pointed out that , in accordance with the European Parliamentary report under examination , we must consider in any actions and measures to be worked on by the Commission that the isolated and ultraperipheral regions of the European Union have special features , given the existence of particular conditions of a geographical , orological , social and economic nature , which make access harder and make it more difficult to come to people 's assistance in emergencies , which means that special attention must be paid to specific projects aimed at these areas too and actually putting them into practice .
Costa Neves report
The Cohesion Fund was set up in order to reinforce economic and social cohesion , such that the European Union would fund , to the tune of 80 to 85 % , any projects in the field of the environment and infrastructure works in the sector of transport in the trans-European networks , aimed at the less developed Member States including Portugal , with the ultimate objective that all Member States should be able to participate in the final phase of European economic and monetary union .
The inclusion in the report of a pointer to the realities of ultra-peripheral and island regions , calling on the Commission to pay greater attention and set greater priority on sea transport , which is less harmful to the environment , as well as the reference to the need to open up supervisory committees to regional and local elected authorities , giving them greater powers in the selection of projects , respective priorities and financial management , not forgetting the need to make the precondition of assistance concerning excessive budgetary deficits more flexible ( Article 6 of Regulation 1164 / 94 on the Cohesion Fund ) , which could lead to a failure to fund any new project until that deficit has been corrected .
For all of these reasons , I voted for the supplementary report by the Commission on the Cohesion Fund in 1994 .
Assistance to NIS and Mongolia
The next item is the report ( A4-0107 / 96 ) by Mr Pex , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , on the draft Council Regulation ( EURATOM , EC ) concerning the provision of assistance to economic reform and recovery in the New Independent States and Mongolia ( 4546 / 96 - C4-0090 / 96-95 / 0056 ( CNS ) ) .
Madam President , unfortunately Mr Pex is indisposed this week , but since these problems have proved to be very urgent , the Committee on External Economic Relations adopted the corresponding amendments on Monday evening , and on Tuesday the House decided to hold a topical and urgent debate .
These are problems whose importance cannot be too highly estimated , namely the TACIS regulation concerning the States of the former Soviet Union and Mongolia .
This House has taken this task very seriously , and is trying to bring in a number of essential principles , now that the subject has been dragging on for such a very long time , which is not the fault of Parliament , but is due to the fact that the Council , as it were , in the middle of the process , changed its draft or produced a new basic text for the draft .
We are of the opinion that , because of these various procedural shortcomings , it would have been entirely possible , on our side as well , to have dealt with the matter at greater length .
But we did not want to delay things , because it is not simply a matter of technical parameters here , but of human beings and peoples who have suffered horribly over the last seven decades and more , and who now have the chance of starting afresh .
This fresh start , however , is once again gravely at risk .
This is why we have used some of our amendments to make it clear that the socalled former Soviet Union no longer exists , that we give a clear rejection to any attempts - like the one that occurred recently in the Russian Duma - to resurrect the Soviet Union , and that we wish to pay tribute to the independence and dignity of these peoples who , after decades of oppression , have now become free .
On the other hand , however , we do not take the view that this forced unity , which has now been shattered , should be replaced by conflict , by a sort of ' Balkanization ' of this enormous Eurasian region .
Consequently , in our amendments we have laid special emphasis on one specific area .
Here I have been working very closely and successfully with Ms Schroedter , from the Green Group in the European Parliament , in an attempt to ensure that minority rights and the rights of indigenous peoples are more firmly anchored in this regulation , to direct our assistance more strongly in this direction , and also to give special assistance to cross-border projects , particularly in the case of smaller projects and when it is a question of creating cross-border cooperation , with a view to avoiding any misunderstandings .
In doing this , we are not sticking to the fiction of the compulsory unity of the Soviet Union , which has now , thank goodness , been shattered , but rather we are trying to apply and extend systematically the process of cross-border cooperation , as we have already introduced it , first of all here , with the Interreg Programme , then with the Countries of Central and Eastern Europe , and now with countries further east .
I am particularly happy about the fact that in committee there was a large majority in favour of two amendments which I believe are of particular significance .
Firstly , we want to ensure that the Countries of Central and Eastern Europe , in other words the countries that lie between us and the area occupied by the former Soviet Union , are also actively included in this assistance , and that the regional authorities are involved in these projects .
I believe that not only is it very important to encourage cross-border cooperation between , say , Poland and Byelorussia , or between Hungary and Ukraine , and between many other countries , but it is also a question of those Countries of Central and Eastern Europe which , because of their geographical position and their more favourable internal political circumstances , have developed more rapidly than other countries further east , becoming actively involved in the reconstruction process .
In other words , these countries are , to an increasing extent , becoming donor countries too .
I think that it is very important to encourage and intensify this process .
These countries will thus be acting as bridges .
Secondly , we are insisting , and I believe that this is vital , that countries which have special links in a region , for example Turkey in the Mediterranean area and among the Turkic peoples , should become more closely involved , because we do not want to go over the heads of the people concerned , but rather to take into account their traditional structures and links .
Therefore this report has been deliberately arranged along regionalistic lines .
Madam President , the problem with the Tacis regulation is not a new one .
We have examined this problem and made a start on tackling it , and I hope that this time we shall be more successful .
The problem lies with the Council of Ministers .
I also feel bound to point out that we should not lose sight of the fact that Tacis is , to a large extent , a trompe l 'oeil window : however much we improve the window catches , they are merely ' painted on ' , and the window will still not open .
The reason for this is that , in order to carry out the task that sounds so nice in the title , i.e. ' the provision of assistance to economic reform and recovery in the New Independent States and Mongolia ' , the resources available under Tacis are ridiculously small .
Moreover , the tasks are structured in such a way as to ensure that funding goes entirely to problematical projects such as nuclear safety or infrastructure on the one hand , and to Western advisers on the other .
A further difficulty will lie in the fact that these are Western advisers , with the result that Russian , Mongolian or Kalmuk advisers will not be taken into consideration at all .
There is an enormous problem here .
However , we as a Parliament must of course attempt to do something about it .
I think that the cooperation that there has been in this area is a positive thing , though I regret the fact that no interregional , cross-border cooperation in the Baltic , for example , has been written into this regulation .
I believe Mr Posselt is quite right in saying that it is up to us to ensure that we do not create any new ' ethnic prisons ' - and I am sure we would agree on that point - but we should not be carrying out any Balkanization either .
However , I have a problem with his argument that we should simply use the traditional structures .
We should like to offer this option to those people who live in traditional structures , but we also want to encourage the new , emancipating , democratic structures that are also developing in these countries .
With this in mind , we want a Tacis regulation which will in fact be one first , small and insufficient step towards a policy of good neighbourliness , which is what we need for this large region that lies in our neighbourhood .
Madam President , I too would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Pex , for his excellent report .
It is very important that Tacis , the aid programme for the states of the former USSR , should be continued into its second phase , so that previous assistance does not come to nothing , and so that the money already spent will not have been spent in vain .
For reasons that are well known to us , the restructuring process in these countries is taking very much longer than expected ; certainly it is being obstructed often enough .
Following the total collapse of whole industries , and in view of the new economic conditions and the sort of mentality and level of qualification that is expected of the people there , and in view of the completely new and unfamiliar competition situation , it is essential , first of all , to build up structures that are capable of withstanding competition , if employment is to be safeguarded .
It is particularly important to give the people a new feeling of self-worth and of confidence in their own capabilities .
I know what I am talking about , because I was fortunate enough to run a bilateral aid programme for three years , assisting with education and further training for specialists and managers in those countries .
We should also bear in mind the fact that , with this programme , economic and technical progress in the countries receiving the assistance , and the building up of democratic decision-making structures , are also in our own best interests , as trading partners and - as I have already mentioned - as political partners too .
There is no doubt that , in future , the aid should be accompanied by more critical comment , and this is a task for the Commission in particular .
In view of much justified criticism of the aid scheme that has been in operation up to now , I welcome the fact that , following a proposal from the committee that has overall control of the scheme , there is to be constant qualitative monitoring , control and evaluation of the projects .
It remains to be seen , however , how this can be achieved in practice .
It also seems to me rather important that there should now be some coordination in bilateral aid schemes between different countries , where those aid schemes have the same intentions and development areas .
This has happened all too rarely in the past , but it is very useful as a means of pooling resources and avoiding duplication of effort .
It also seems to me essential to have a constant mutual exchange of experiences between those who are responsible for implementing projects in recipient countries , in order to achieve a synergistic effect , and here I call upon the Commission to organize this more intensely in future .
Finally , just one additional comment : the transfer of know-how , which we operate under the Tacis scheme , must work first and foremost to the advantage of the ordinary citizens themselves , and not serve the economic interests of Western investors and specialist institutions .
I am very pleased about the passage in the Council 's draft which lays down that it should not always be the same experts who are involved .
The different types of expertise , which are well known and not always made use of , should wherever possible be provided by experts with local knowledge , and accompanied by local specialists , and should be based on a very thorough knowledge of administrative , economic and educational structures in the individual countries concerned , which unfortunately has not always been the case in the past .
Mr Elchlepp , I believe this is the first time you have spoken in this House .
Please , therefore , accept my warmest congratulations .
Madam President , on behalf of the Commission I would first like to thank Parliament for the fact that the Members agreed to deal with this topic under urgent procedure .
Parliament has been of considerable assistance in ensuring that this reconsultation proceeds rapidly and constructively .
I would especially like to express my gratitude for the speed with which the report has been drawn up .
As you all know , the period of validity of the previous Tacis regulation expired at the end of 1995 .
Since then the Commission has been forced to operate in a legal vacuum .
The vote today is therefore an important step towards a stable framework for our medium-term planning .
It will also enable us to implement the programme for 1996 .
The Commission submitted an initial proposal for a new Tacis regulation as early as April 1995 .
Parliament delivered its opinion on it in time , in November 1995 .
The Council , however , modified the proposal in respect of a number of crucial points .
The Commission therefore considered that it was necessary for Parliament to be consulted again .
To summarise the Council 's new proposal briefly , it can be said that some of the ideas which Parliament put forward in its opinion in November 1995 have already been incorporated .
For example , the proposal gives greater priority to the environment , permits combined financing through Interreg and Tacis and provides for the regulation to have a limited period of validity .
Other important changes include the conditions relating to contracting procedures and the conditions for the implementation of the programme .
The Commission is able to accept these amendments because they entail a reasonable institutional balance while at the same time maintaining the conditions for the effective administration of the Tacis programme .
The new text will also improve the necessary openness of the programme .
Most of the new provisions are intended to formalise the procedures which have been applied up to now .
The Commission considers it a positive step that these are now being given a more formal basis .
Other important changes in comparison with the previous regulation will mean that in special cases it will be possible to extend Tacis to include not only technical assistance but also the financing of investments in infrastructure and the provision of capital .
Both these changes are in response to repeated requests from recipients .
They also meet other objectives which are clearly in the interests of the European Union .
Financing through the provision of capital will make it possible through Tacis to promote industrial cooperation between small and medium-sized businesses in the EU and their counterparts in the NIS .
It is important to give Tacis the opportunity to finance small-scale investment in infrastructure .
One of the aims of cross-border cooperation is after all to remove bottlenecks at frontiers , to increase trade and transport across borders .
It is also a question of fostering cross-border cooperation between the EU and the NIS and between countries in Central and Eastern Europe and the NIS .
The new regulation means that political conditions may be attached to aid .
Consequently , respect for human rights and democratic principles has been given a more prominent place in the new regulation .
The Commission accepts by far the largest proportion of the amendments tabled by Parliament .
I understand that you would like to retain the possibility of resources being earmarked for technical assistance on the one hand and infrastructure and capital provision on the other .
The Commission , however , is of the opinion that a margin of 10 % should be retained for infrastructure investment and the provision of capital , in order to ensure that technical assistance remains the most important part of the programme .
We also find it difficult to approve certain proposals in connection with open tendering procedures as this would extend the implementation of the programme still further .
As regards institutional aspects , the Commission believes that the retention of a management committee in the proposal would be a good compromise between the position of Parliament and that of the Council .
As regards the political conditions , it is the Commission 's intention that the European Parliament will be informed as quickly as possible if the Commission temporarily suspends a programme on account of serious violations of human rights .
It is our express intention to continue the modus operandi vis-à-vis Parliament introduced with regard to Chechnya when procedures in connection with the interim agreement with Russia were frozen in January 1995 .
Madam President , in sum we have every reason to be satisfied with the results of our joint efforts .
With the help of this regulation we will be able to develop the European Union 's links with the NIS and Mongolia and achieve our common goals , namely the transition to a market economy and support for democratic structures .
This is especially crucial for Russia , which is approaching important crossroads .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed with the vote .
Madam President , a slight error has crept in .
In committee , Ms Schroedter used the expression ' indigenous peoples ' , which I continued to use .
The original text was in German , but it has now been translated into other languages , and the expression ' native peoples ' has been used .
In German , however , this expression has unfortunate overtones , although as far as content is concerned it means something similar .
I should therefore like to ask you to work on the basis of the original expression , ' indigenous peoples ' - or ' indigene Völker ' in German - and to ensure that this expression is translated adequately into the other languages .
I entirely share that sentiment , and we will endeavour to find the most appropriate way .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Madam President , I could have said this at the start of the sitting , but I can see that we still have three very important reports to deal with , and only after that will we hear the Commission statement on the G7 meeting on employment in Lille .
I wonder whether the Commission is able to make its statement now .
A while ago , when voting began there were nearly 200 of us here .
Now there are about 40 .
Would it not be possible for this important subject - the subject of employment , which has brought together the seven industrialized countries and the President of the French Republic , who has made a priority of the social chapter - to be examined by bringing forward this statement ?
I should make it clear immediately that it will not in any way affect the way I allocate my time , but I imagine that , sadly , there will be more of us here if this statement is made now rather than at the end of the morning .
Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , I think that , as this statement is so important , Members will remain until this matter comes up in the order of business .
It would not be polite to those Members whose reports are to be considered first to change the order of business , and I must refuse to do so .
If any one else raises a similar point , I can tell you quite simply that I shall not be able to act on it .
We will therefore adhere to the order of business .
Interim agreement with Kazakhstan
The next item is the report ( A4-0049 / 96 ) by Mr Chesa , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , on the proposal for a Council decision on the conclusion by the European Community of the interim agreement between the European Community , the European Coal and Steel Community and the European Atomic Energy Community , of the one part , and the Republic of Kazakhstan , of the other part , on trade and trade-related matters ( COM ( 94 ) 29-5515 / 95 - C4-0605 / 95-95 / 0031 ( CNS ) ) .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this report relates to the ratification by the European Parliament of a joint agreement between the European Union and Kazakhstan for a period of 10 years , this report replacing the agreement on trade and economic cooperation between the EEC and the USSR of 1989 .
This text is very important for Kazakhstan , which has suffered from the breakup of the former Soviet Union , with severe damage to its trading system and its supply network .
In political terms , the agreement covers respect for democracies , the principles of international law and human rights , and the establishment of a political dialogue and cultural cooperation .
The economic and commercial aspects relate to trade in goods subject to mostfavoured-nation treatment .
Coal and steel occupy an important place in this partnership agreement , while trade in textile products is the subject of a separate agreement .
The provisions affecting business and investment govern the field of employment as well as the establishment and operation of companies .
Economic cooperation extends to the industrial sector , the promotion and protection of investments , and the strengthening of education and training in the widest possible range of areas .
Parliament have felt it desirable to suspend the procedure for the ratification of the partnership agreement until general elections had been held , free of the defects that marred those of March 1994 .
Further elections took place on 5 and 9 December 1995 .
The delegation of European Parliament observers deemed that these elections were such as to form the basis for the formation of a democratic parliament .
There is thus no further obstacle to reconstruct a partnership , and it is therefore possible to pronounce in favour of concluding interim agreements with Kazakhstan , as requested by the Committee on External Economic Relations .
Madam President , the partnership and cooperation agreement between the European Union and Kazakhstan was in fact signed on 23 January 1995 .
The political events which followed that signing , and in particular the dissolution of the Kazakh Parliament by President Nazarbaev , lead our Parliament to suspend the procedure for ratification of that agreement until general elections were held .
Such elections finally took place on 5 and 9 December last year and , following the report by our delegation of observers , lead by Mr Robles Piquer , we decided to unfreeze the procedure ratifying the agreements , as Mr Chesa has just recalled .

The first stage relates to this interim agreement which we are to approve today , although Parliament 's opinion on the matter is of only very limited relevance .
The Committee on Foreign Affairs considers that we should give a favourable opinion , and that is my personal opinion also .
The economic issues are important , and it would not be appropriate to delay the cooperation envisaged in the interim agreement .
However , this opinion will be without prejudice to the final position we adopt on the main agreement , that is to say the partnership agreement itself .
The facts are that the economic situation in Kazakhstan is still poor , the social situation is serious , or even tragic , and above all the political situation has once again become tense just recently .
Human rights are not respected , and President Nazarbaev seems almost insensitive to Western criticism .
But we shall see what we shall see .
For the present , the Committee on Foreign Affairs shares the point of view of the Committee on External Economic Relations and approves the interim agreement .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the agreement with Kazakhstan is often discussed purely from an economic viewpoint .
In reality , it is not only the economic aspect that plays an important part - and in that respect Kazakhstan has a great future ahead of it - but the political aspect is also very important .
In fact , Kazakhstan is a country that one might almost describe as explosive .
It is one of those Islamic states in which there is a relatively high percentage of Russians who might well be described as a fifth column , in opposition to the predominant people , the Kazakhs , who make up 40 % of the population .
Moreover , there is no doubt that the most dynamic countries have already become interested in the country .
Because when I look at what is coming into Kazakhstan from other countries , then there are three countries that are really operating in Kazakhstan : from Europe there is France , from the margins of Europe there is Turkey , and finally there is Japan .
It is therefore of very great importance to the Community that we should set an example as far as Kazakhstan is concerned .
I admit that there are endless problems : social problems , employment problems and , last but not least , a relatively weak democracy .
But when I look at how friendly we are to other states , for example Russia , where there is really not very much democracy to speak of , or even at how we behave towards Cuba , then I have to say that Kazakhstan deserves our support .
As far as President Nazarbaev himself is concerned , he has been very strongly criticised .
However , I should just like to say one thing : the man is , after all , a Turk .
He has good connections with Turkey , and these are drawing him slowly over to our side , at a time when , on the other side - i.e. from the direction of Iran - a serious threat to Central Asia is becoming apparent .
Recent events in particular have shown us that we must be careful here , and that in consequence a sign from us to President Nasarbajev would be of great political advantage to political stability in Central Asia .
In this respect , I can only say that we should be delighted that we are able to conclude this agreement , and that in so doing we are giving a sign to Mr Nasarbajev and his people , thereby leading to a political and economic consolidation which will no doubt still have to survive very difficult times ahead , but which , in the long term , will be of great value to us .
Madam President , may I take this opportunity to wish Mr Martens many happy returns of his birthday today .
But now about Kazakhstan .
The interim agreement with Kazakhstan is naturally very necessary and for our part too we are glad that we can now ratify this agreement , but not without some concern I must say incidentally , because I strongly suspect that the primary reason for this interim agreement is economic and commercial interests , as Mr von Habsburg too has just mentioned .
If you look at European interests in Kazakhstan , they are naturally not insignificant .
We rather like the idea of the reserves of oil and gas there and large-scale European undertakings are already busy making sure that they have the opportunity to exploit them .
Finally in Kazakhstan we also have Philip Morris , who has taken over the cigarette industry .
If we now look at the aid that goes from Europe to Kazakhstan - often it is milk powder and deliveries of cereals - it would actually be much better if we did not dump our own agricultural surpluses there but simply took care to see that the regional markets survived .
Finally I should like to say something about energy , because the interim agreement too touches upon nuclear safety .
Kazakhstan is actually a country which could manage very well without nuclear energy .
Only a very limited proportion of the energy supply comes from nuclear energy so this agreement should not be addressed to keeping open or improving nuclear power stations but to closing nuclear power stations and switching over to other forms of energy , just with the very reserves of oil and gas found in Kazakhstan .
I would rather see social security in Kazakhstan put before our trade and economy .
The report is to be welcomed , because the current economic situation in Kazakhstan , as has already been mentioned several times , must be regarded as very bad to catastrophic .
In Kazakhstan , however , it is not simply a question of boosting industrial production , which has declined by almost 30 % within a single year , but also , above all , a question of supporting the democratization process that is taking place there .
Mr von Habsburg has just given a very graphic description of the situation , particularly with regard to fundamentalism .
This will only be possible , however , if there is a comprehensive economic stabilization of the country , particularly by reducing the rate of inflation .
Otherwise , the creation of added value , and with it long-term economic recovery , will be almost impossible .
If the agreement is to be of benefit to both sides , the interim agreement must be accompanied by macroeconomic aid measures .
In any case , however , Kazakhstan must be willing to make the effort itself .
By this I mean , in the first place , reform plans , for example to regulate property rights , the operation of an efficient administration , a corresponding build-up of confidence in the banking sector , and of course respect for human rights as well .
In Kazakhstan , where the Kazakhs make up 40 % of the population , and where there is a Russian minority amounting to 38 % , it is most important that this question of property rights should be cleared up ; otherwise it would seem that conflict will be a foregone conclusion .
Where there is political uncertainty , one can more or less rule out any hope of foreign investors committing themselves to any great extent .
So even the planned privatization of formerly state-owned undertakings would only be successful if this political climate were stabilized .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed with the vote .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Cooperation Agreement with Nepal
The next item is the report ( A4-0072 / 96 ) by Mr Pettinari , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the proposal for a Council Decision ( COM ( 95 ) 0488 - C4-0582 / 95-95 / 0256 ( CNS ) ) concerning the conclusion of the Cooperation Agreement between the European Community and the Kingdom of Nepal .
Madam President , as you have just mentioned , this is a question of deciding to ratify the first , and therefore historic , economic and trade cooperation agreement between the European Union and Nepal .
This agreement , as one may easily imagine , represents hope for this little Himalayan country .
With its 20 million inhabitants , Nepal has always had to endure the looming presence of two gigantic world neighbours , China and India , which themselves have always attracted international interests in political and economic terms to the detriment of other countries in the region .
In addition Nepal has always had to take account of the well-known problems of Tibet and the ethnic and religious conflicts which have arisen in India , and at the same time has had to give shelter to a considerable flow of refugees from Bhutan .
The cooperation agreement , on which we are shortly to vote , therefore represents a turning point for Katmandu and gives its government the opportunity to open its markets to Europe , thus increasing the development potential , and to escape from its position as an enclave between two important regional powers .
I should therefore like to emphasize the political aspects of the agreement , above all as regards the recognition that by our vote we are contributing to the process of democratization which that country has been and still is experiencing .
Since 1990 Nepal has been engaged in a radical institutional change which has led to free multi-party elections and the alternation of democratic governments .
The new constitution turns Nepal into a constitutional monarchy , creates a bicameral parliamentary system with 265 members of parliament divided between the House of Representatives and the National Council , guarantees a division of powers between the various organs of State placing Nepal in the vanguard of countries on the Indian subcontinent .
We must not in fact deny that Nepal is one of the few countries on the Continent of Asia in which , today , democratic freedoms and freedom of political expression are really guaranteed - one more reason why Europe and the European Parliament support the political process which is evolving in Nepal .
In this connection I should like to express to the Commissioner here present the hope and the request that the Commission will open an office at Katmandu as in other Asiatic countries .
A high-level European diplomatic presence would represent an essential support for democratic developments in progress in Nepal and would mark the definitive European commitment to follow more closely the situation of a little country whose history and culture are however very important , which is asking for assistance in its evolution towards democracy .
I hope the Commission will take up this suggestion and I am sure that the European Parliament , in approving the budget , will support this request .
I must stress that the draft agreement submitted for our approval has the same features as those already concluded by the European Union with other developing countries .
I wish to point out the importance of the so-called human rights clause in the agreement , which is a positive and characteristic feature .
I should like , in fact , to remind the Nepalese Government that it is true that the requirement of respect for democratic principles and human rights is one of the principal characteristics of European policy towards developing countries .
It is also a fact , moreover , that the Government of Nepal has unequivocally committed itself to promoting and guaranteeing total respect for human rights in the country .
Europe must welcome this readiness and must confirm that it will continue both to follow attentively the human rights situation in Nepal and if appropriate to exert the necessary and appropriate political pressure .
From an economic and commercial point of view it is vital for the aims laid down in the agreement to be achieved as soon as possible .
It must in fact be stressed that Nepal has an extremely adverse balance of trade .
Its total imports amounted in 1992 to 780 million dollars , whilst export earnings were the equivalent of only 350 million dollars .
Europe must help Nepal to overcome this difficult situation because its development cannot be ensured simply by mountain tourism : it can be effectively guaranteed only by a diversification of exports and promotion of internal development .
The Kingdom of Nepal is one of the poorest countries in the world and therefore has to face difficult challenges in the field of development .
We are dealing , as I said , with a young democracy , still fragile , seeking unconditional support in order to be able to consolidate definitively its own process of democratic transition .
The cooperation agreement concluded by the European Union and Nepal sets up a stable institutional framework , capable of assisting such a situation at both political level and the level of economic and social development .
I therefore recommend Parliament to proceed without delay to ratify this economic and trade cooperation agreement .
Madam President , I congratulate Mr Pettinari on the quality of his report .
As he has said , Nepal is a small country of twenty million people , sandwiched between giants , and of course it has not aroused all that much interest in Europe now that Katmandu is no longer synonymous with journeys of initiation , as it was in the 1970s .
Respect for human rights is an important element in the draft before us .
Indeed , it is actually the subject of the first article of that draft .
Well , Nepal is not entirely above criticism in this matter .
The police still use methods which could be described as dubious , to say the least .
The practice of debt bondage still exists , political and religious proselytism is treated as an offence , and the treatment metered out to refugees from Tibet and Bhutan falls someway short of what one might hope .
Not only that , but the country is extremely poor , and ranks among the handful of most deprived states on earth , with an annual income per capita estimated at 150 dollars ( or no more than 200 dollars according to the most optimistic estimates ) .
We are now being invited to open the way to stable , sustainable development in Nepal , accompanied by respect for human rights .
However , it should be noted that the Committee on Budgets has expressed several important criticisms regarding the conclusion of this agreement perhaps because of the absence of the financial statement , although one was appended to the agreement .
The agreement is for a period of five years , and is renewable ; be that as it may , I believe that in five years the Nepalese will have been able to receive aid , and that we for our part will be able to see things more clearly .
Madam President , this is the first cooperation agreement between the European Union and Nepal and as such it is a landmark in our relations .
I welcome it most warmly as vice-chair of the South-Asian delegation .
I deplore that it has taken four months to bring to plenary because of an internal dispute in Parliament .
We must sort this sort of thing out much more quickly in future .
Nepal has made great strides in developing a pluralistic , democratic system of government in the last few years .
It is to be complimented on this .
Although it is a country of great natural beauty it faces enormous problems , not only as one of the poorest countries in the world but there are also refugees from Bhutan and from Tibet , reflecting the geo-political difficulties in the region and a huge , illegal trade in girls into the Indian prostitution trade which has been documented by Asia Watch .
One way to tackle this is to improve education for women and alleviate rural poverty .
This agreement can help in doing this .
As Katmandu is host to the secretariat of SAARC . I endorse the rapporteur 's request that the Commission put a full representative in there as soon as possible .
I regret the unenthusiastic opinion from the Committee on Budgets which might have been avoided if the Commission had put forward a more rigorous financial statement as part of the agreement .
Having discussed ideas for projects with the Nepalese Government I know that all parties are eager to get final approval for this cooperation agreement so that we can all begin to tackle some of the many problems faced by Nepal and help its progress into the modern world .
In that context I wholeheartedly commend the agreement to the House .
Madam President , the Group of the European People 's Party welcomes the fact that we have now , as the previous speaker mentioned , finally achieved this cooperation agreement with Nepal .
However , in this matter we must make sure that we do not put the cart before the horse , because it seems to me that one of the biggest problems preventing sustainable development in this area is the extremely high level of illiteracy .
I should therefore like to ask the Commission to give special attention to this sector .
One positive aspect of this country , in my view , is the fact that there is as yet no risk here of slums developing , nor is any such development to be expected in the near future , because the population is spread relatively evenly over the country , and is not , as in other regions - and especially in Asia - concentrated in the larger cities .
From that point of view we have got a good start here .
Of course Nepal still has a problem with child labour , but the country has made some progress .
I should like to emphasize particularly the fact that there has been a noticeable reduction in child labour , especially in the carpet industry , because the country is making a great effort to comply with demands for a reduction in child labour .
We cannot change conditions by this demand alone , but somewhere here there has to be some kind of quid pro quo as well ; that much is obvious , of course .
Several speakers have referred to the fact that the per capita income is extremely low in this country , and child labour is a sign of this , and must be considered accordingly .
The other problem , forced prostitution , is also a matter of common knowledge .
I very much support the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , including on the question of human rights .
The issue of imprisonment for debt is certainly a problem which is rooted in the country and its history .
I think that we must be careful if we try to tackle this problem by applying our own standards , and we should regard the new constitution , and the fact that there is a working parliament in operation , as an opportunity to express a certain amount of anticipatory confidence in the country , including in the human rights sector , instead of straightaway turning up on its doorstep in the role of constant critic and monitor .
At the end of the day , we cannot free a country from its history , which to some extent may have taken a very different course from that of our own .
Of course there is also the question of what the other wealthy countries of Asia are doing in the sort of emergency situations that we are seeing here , countries which , owing to their position , might also perhaps be involved .
In addition , I should like to draw particular attention to the criticisms of the Committee on Budgets , by asking the Commission to take those criticisms seriously and to submit to us , as quickly as possible , an appropriate acceptable financial framework .
Madam President , I thank Mr Pettinari for this excellent report .
Nepal is very high up and helping this country where needs are very great must also be high up on our list .
Madam President , the Union has hardly any links with Nepal except tourism , but no contractual relationship at all .
It is one of the poorest countries where the average income is no more than 180 to 200 dollars .
For that you can make one visit to a hotel here in Strasbourg .
Although the Union has given a fair amount of aid to Nepal there is still no agreement and this relationship must now take real shape ; naturally we liberals are great supporters of the cooperation agreement before us .
It offers the opportunity for strengthening trade and investments , for economic and technical cooperation and provides an ideal forum for regular discussion in the joint parliamentary committee .
Unfortunately there is no clear financial appropriation - and this is one of the poorest countries in the world .
Dogged by illiteracy , underdevelopment in education , and the need for water purification , and overwhelmed by large groups of refugees from Tibet and Bhutan , Nepal deserves more than ad hoc financing by the Union .
We must have a presence there just when the process of democratization is beginning to bear fruit .
Finally it is right to place great emphasis on development cooperation and sustainable economic development is of paramount importance .
Nepal is chiefly dependent for its income on tourists , but we must not let them spoil whatever remains of a good environment .
The Union , Madam President , is Nepal 's foremost trading partner .
We must support this country , which has a geo-strategically very important but isolated position between China and India .
We shall therefore naturally vote for the cooperation agreement .
Madam President , we too support this agreement with the Himalayan State of Nepal which , as explained in this report , is faced with two major infrastructure problems , namely the problem of electricity supplies and the problem of drinking-water supplies .
I myself have visited the country several times , and I have seen the problems for myself , at first hand , problems which also affect those areas that lie at a higher altitude .
My own homeland , the Republic of Austria , has tried to give the country some support , by means of several projects : a project to install electricity supplies in the Sagarmatha National Park , the so-called Sherpa Country , and a reafforestation programme , which I believe to be very important , with the aim of replanting the last of the protected forests which have now been felled .
This reafforestation programme was given a very positive reception .
I also believe that the other areas covered , namely the expansion of trading relations with this country and the expansion of tourism , as well as providing assistance to improve infrastructure in Katmandu and in the other cities of this country of 20 million people , are of particular importance .
I believe that the European Union quite simply has a duty to help this small Asiatic state .
Therefore I welcome the fact that this agreement has given rise to the present debate , and I believe that in future the Union will have to take further important decisions on this subject .
The agreement between the European Union and the Kingdom of Nepal , one of the poorest countries in the world and yet at the same time a country with such a rich culture , is something of a model agreement .
It is the first treaty between the European Union and a third country which is based on respect for and observance of human rights .
If human rights are not respected , the treaty can be suspended .
This agreement is a framework treaty , which will be , and must be , followed by further agreements concerning action and projects , because we do not wish merely to make a general declaration of solidarity ; we want to put things into practical terms .
Like Anita Pollack , I welcome this , as the Deputy Vice-President of the European Parliament 's SAARC Group .
Despite the criticism from the Committee on Budgets - and that has again been documented here today - regarding the type of financial planning proposed by the Commission , there has been broad agreement from all the competent committees of the European Parliament .
I am delighted that we are able to debate this agreement here today , in the presence of the Ambassador of the Kingdom of Nepal to the EU .
Our cooperation should serve to encourage all those politicians who , as I have been able to see for myself on many occasions in Katmandu , are putting so much energy , circumspection and courage into building up and developing their young democracy , both politically - and not only as a buffer state between two giants - , and also economically and culturally .
They have now laid the foundations , and I am delighted that we are able to build on these foundations together .
This cooperation will make it clear , without any possibility of a misunderstanding , to all these people , whether Hindus or Buddhists , who are now really living together peacefully , in contrast to many other countries , that we are ready to provide not only qualitative help but also self-help .
In practical terms , this means improving living conditions in rural areas , reducing environmental pollution in urban areas , ensuring the careful use of resources , expanding energy networks , expanding drinking water supplies , creating new employment opportunities , particularly in the farming industry by stepping up agricultural research , and bringing progress in the form of education and training in health care , in the economic and social integration of women , and in the protection of children .
We also want to provide incentives for direct investment in Nepal .
We want to encourage business links with European SMEs ( small and medium-sized enterprises ) , to give long-term support to economic development , and to guarantee better market access for Nepalese products .
I should like to wish the European Union and Nepal , a country which belongs to the SAARC , whose regional cooperation is becoming increasingly important , success and fairness in their cooperation , which has a great future ahead of it .
Namaste !
Madam President , the first bilateral agreement between the Community and Nepal will surely help improve relations between the Community and the Himalayan kingdom as regards politics , trade and cooperation .
This agreement represents a further demonstration of the importance of Asia to the Community in its efforts to develop foreign relations .
The summit which took place recently in Bangkok was another milestone .
Cooperation agreements with Bangladesh , Cambodia , Laos and Pakistan are also under discussion .
The Nepal agreement comes at a time when the country is undergoing a process of democratisation , where respect for human rights continues to be a major challenge .
The political dialogue gives us the opportunity to stress the importance of human rights and democratic principles , which of course also includes the question of child labour .
It will speed up the process leading to the opening of a delegation by the European Union and it will help promote regional cooperation between the countries of southern Asia .
The joint parliamentary committee is responsible for dialogue on cooperation and for trade and investment issues .
It is hoped that the first meeting of the joint parliamentary committee will be held in Katmandu in September or October 1996 .
My colleague , Commissioner Marín , is also planning a visit to Nepal and will of course have the opportunity there to talk with the Nepalese leaders .
Naturally , it will only be at the meeting of the joint parliamentary committee that there will be an opportunity to delimit and define certain of the priorities which need to be established .
I should , however , like to mention the following possibilities for cooperation :
1.Intensification of agriculture , which includes the development of irrigation and support for veterinary services , credit institutions and agricultural working programmes.2.Environmental protection , which includes support for forest management , promotion of the sustainable management of land and water resources and work to combat urban pollution.3.Cooperation over basic social services , which includes acceptable and reliable family planning , support for improving standards in primary education and vocational training and support for the development of health care reforms and preventive health care.4.Contributions to public bodies and policy development : these measures will include a study of migration to urban areas and Terai .
They will also involve support for democratisation and decentralisation and support for rent and tenancy reforms.5.Cooperation with small and medium-sized businesses : the possibilities in this field will also be on the agenda.I believe and hope that this Assembly appreciates these ambitious plans for future relations between the EU and Nepal .
Finally , I should like to thank Mr Pettinari for an excellent report .
Thank you , Mrs Gradin .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Support for arable crops
The next item is the report ( A4-0080 / 96 ) by Mr Goepel , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council Regulation ( COM ( 95 ) 0497 - C4-0602 / 95-95 / 0265 ( CNS ) ) amending Council Regulation ( EEC ) No 1765 / 92 establishing a support system for producers of certain arable crops .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I hardly think that I shall be taking up the whole of my five minutes , which some of you will no doubt be glad to hear , in view of the lateness of the hour , and those of you who know me know that I do actually keep to time .
Within the framework of the Uruguay Round decisions , the European Union is committed , under the Blair House Agreement , to growing a maximum quantity of oilseeds for the non-food sector on set-aside land .
The background to this arrangement is as follows : the set-aside scheme was introduced as part of the 1992 agricultural reform in order to limit the supply of cereals and oilseeds for food .
The cultivation of certain agricultural products for use in the non-food sector is permitted on such land .
The production of methyl ester - known as ' bio-diesel ' - from oilseed rape gives rise to a by-product , rape cake , which , like soya meal , can be used in animal feedingstuffs .
These feedingstuffs now compete with certain imported feedingstuffs , most of which are imported from the United States .
The European Union has therefore undertaken , under the above-mentioned agreement , to limit the amount of this rape that is grown for the non-food sector to a specific quantity , in this case 1 million tonnes of soya bean meal equivalents .
The present proposal by the Commission is intended to introduce measures to restrict the rape cultivation in question if this figure of 1 million tonnes of soya bean meal equivalents is exceeded .
Depending on how you calculate it , this quantity is equivalent to a cultivation area of about 1.2 million hectares of rape , a figure which so far has never been reached in the European Union .
This scheme has no effect on expenditure from the European budget .
However , in 1995 the amount produced was 940 tonnes , which fell well short of the maximum permitted quantity of 1 million tonnes .
This figure , which is based on the Commission 's calculations , must clearly have been set too high as a result of using conversion coefficients which were no longer appropriate .
As a result of the reduction in the set-aside quota a falling trend is actually expected in 1996 .
The Commission 's proposal therefore appears , at first sight , to have been presented prematurely ; on the other hand it does give producers a degree of security in planning their production , and it should be seized - and used - as an opportunity to get ahead in setting a new trend towards making greater use of renewable raw materials .
That is also the reason why I have to reject Amendment No 3 , which lays down that , in the theoretical case of the permitted maximum quantity of 1 million tonnes of soya bean meal equivalents being exceeded , in some circumstances a further , punitive set-aside area should be imposed the following year .
It was precisely this that we were trying to avoid in this report , which I drafted .
I should just like to make a few brief comments on the amendments . The maximum limit of 1 million tonnes applies only to by-products intended for food or feed use .
Many by-products can however be used for other purposes .
For example the meal that arises as a result of rapeseed extraction , also known as rapeseed cake , is an excellent protein concentrate , but can also be used , for example , in alternative energy production , or as a soil improver in arable farming .
Amendment No 1 therefore seeks to make it clear that this type of by-product , which can be used for purposes other than feed or food use , for example as a source of energy , as a biogas fuel or as a source of humus , is excluded from the calculation of the maximum permitted quantity of 1 million tonnes .
This means that our farmers have the chance of developing this alternative fuel on a larger scale , if they are able to grow an unlimited quantity of rape on their set-aside land .
The coefficient for calculating the soya bean meal equivalent of rape meal and sunflower meal currently used by the Commission - though not , as far as I am aware , laid down anywhere in a legally binding form - is too high .
The reason for this is that the change in the range of oilseed varieties in recent years has resulted in a reduction in the crude protein / fat content .
Amendment No 2 takes these recent developments into account by setting lower coefficients which are legally binding .
The coefficients proposed by the EDN are of course better from the mathematical point of view , but in practical terms they are not really enforceable at the present time .
Nevertheless , we suggest that these coefficients should be reviewed every year and adjusted under the management committee procedure .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mr Goepel on his excellent report .
He has taken a very complex , technical subject and made it comprehensible to us in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
He has put together what we believe is an excellent report .
It will have our complete support .
Set-aside is a very unpopular regime both with farmers and the general public .
We want to keep flexible at all stages .
That is one of the reasons why we will , in our voting , make sure that we reflect the need for flexibility .
That is one of the reasons why we will not be able to vote for the EDN resolution which we believe militates against that flexibility .
I am a Member from Great Britain , as you know .
I cannot stand up in the Chamber now without saying something about the crisis in agriculture in Britain at the moment .
I would like your indulgence while I very briefly tell you some of the things that are happening .
Many of us with rural constituencies have had the experience of farmers who have invested their lives , capital and energy in their businesses ringing us in the last few weeks , close to tears , saying : ' What am I going to do ? ' . On 20 March , overnight , businesses which had thrived for many years were simply wiped out .
It is now 17 April and I deeply regret that the British Government and the European Commission seem to be engaged in megaphone diplomacy on the issue .
I would plead for all parties involved to get round the table as quickly as possible and bring this crisis to an end .
Eighty-five percent of British beef herds have never had a case of BSE .
We can look our Continental partners in the face and say it is safe to eat British beef .
We deeply regret this terrible slur cast on our meat industry .
I do not think the entire blame for the delay lies with the Commission .
I have the uncomfortable feeling that the British Government is about to embark on the general election campaign using the beef crisis as one of its main planks .
My advice to the British Government is : please , do not go down that road for electoral purposes .
Please , use your common sense and make sure that we try as hard as we can to bring this crisis to a resolution .
I say to the British Government : please , please , please , do not play politics with people 's jobs and livelihoods .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to say , first of all , that I am very pleased with the proposed report , and that it is particularly important for Austria too .
Amendment No 1 in particular provides long overdue clarification in connection with the cultivation of crops such as rape , for example .
This amendment makes it possible for those areas of land that are not used for food or animal feedingstuffs , but are used for non-food purposes , for energy production or humus formation and the like , to be left out of the basis of calculation .
It follows from this that not only can residual waste products be made use of , but also an incentive is provided to use set-aside areas for the production of renewable raw materials .
In this field , Austria has had very good experience over a long period .
In our country we have used energy plants not only for heating , but also as lubricants or as methyl ester obtained from rape , and we have really been most successful with it .
However , I believe that in future it will be important that we should work out some taxation arrangements for energy from biomass , on a Europe-wide basis , because it is the only environmentally friendly form of energy .
I believe that we owe it to future generations to have a change of attitude on this subject .
A regular review of the coefficients will take into account the progress that is continually being observed in breeding new rape varieties , and their higher oil content .
This means that the limit of 1 million tonnes of soya bean meal equivalents will not be reached so quickly , and it will not , therefore , lead to restrictions on renewable raw materials .
This report , together with Amendment No 1 , is in line , in its present version , with the opinion of COPA , and in my opinion it is essential for ecologically orientated agriculture and energy policy in Europe .
I therefore support the report before the House , which is a vital necessity not only for Austria , but also for Europe .
Mr President , as chance would have it the start of production of biofuels in European agriculture virtually coincided with the World Environment Summit which took place in Rio a few years ago .
I said chance , and chance I meant , because the boom in production of biofuels certainly originates in the application of the reform of the common agricultural policy , which itself was made necessary by the chronic imbalance of the majority of agricultural markets .
The principle of using oil seeds for non-food purposes is simple .
The regulations in force provide for the set-aside of some agricultural land .
However , the use of that land to produce oil seeds for non-food purposes is authorized .
The only problem is that not all the oil seeds can be converted to non-food purposes .
A by-product remains , known as colza cake , and this is reused as an animal feedstuff because of its high content of nitrogenous substances , hence the desire of our main competitors in the world market to restrict this form of production .
The Commission is taking account of this constraint , and the amendments tabled by the Committee on Agriculture are mitigating its effects .
Although I have no particular problems with supporting the text as submitted by the Committee on Agriculture , I would nevertheless like to take the opportunity offered by this debate to call upon the Commission to do even more to promote alternative forms of production , including energy production .
Mr President , Mr Goepel , we support your report .
We share your view that we must have this scheme , from the point of view of both the cultivation of this crop and the conversion coefficient .
I shall therefore not go into the matter in any further detail , but will use my two minutes to give my views on set aside as a whole .
You know that the set-aside scheme was originally introduced by the Commission , amongst other things as an environmental element .
We have come a long way from that , and the fact that we are now allowed to grow renewable raw materials no longer has anything to do with the ecological element .
Moreover , oilseed rape , which is essentially what we are talking about here , is not an ecological crop , at least not in practice , the way it is grown at present .
Consequently , even though we agree with you , I should nevertheless like to ask you to have a closer look at our original idea as well , in other words , the idea of using set-aside land to grow clover / grass leys , or pulse crops , for use as fodder .
The idea behind it would be the same .
Here too we would have non-food production , but with a by-product in the form of animal feed .
It is precisely this problem on which the Americans have intervened .
If we allow pulse crops to be grown for fodder under this scheme , then we would produce the same effect , but the ecological improvement would be greater .
If we then tried to incorporate this type of set aside into crop rotation schemes , then we would also have the effect of providing nitrogen for the next crop , and would thus have the overall effect of giving farmers a chance both to save money and to produce animal feedingstuffs .
By having a flexible set-aside quota , we would also be able to ask ourselves constantly how much we want to take out of the market and how much we want to release as animal feed .
I hope that your group will also be able to come round to this way of thinking , not so much as a quid pro quo in return for our agreement , but because what we are saying makes sense !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Blair House agreement set the production of oil seed cake obtained from the cultivation of set-aside land in the European Union at one million tonnes of soya bean meal equivalent .
These plant products are now very important to us .
Let me explain : firstly , the level of European self-sufficiency in proteins intended for animal feeds is declining , on a net basis , and is no more than 29 % .
Secondly , in the crisis situation we are now passing through because of ' mad cow disease ' , demand for plant products intended for livestock is going to increase , bearing in mind the foreseeable and probable reduction - of even elimination - of bonemeals .
It will be highly undesirable for European farmers to be deprived of a source of plant protein which is compatible with the GATT agreements .
It makes sense , therefore , on this basis , to endorse the proposal by the rapporteur , Mr Goepel ( whom I congratulate , incidentally , on his report ) , whereby this quota would exclude by-products intended for purposes other than the feeding of animals , such as the manufacture of biofuels or the introduction of bio-organic matter as humus for soil conditioning .
Furthermore , Amendment No 5 , which states the position of the experts representing the French Agriculture Ministry , which has been accepted by the 15 Member States of the Council and is based on criteria that are common to the scientific and professional circles , also looks towards making better use of the quota for the entire European Union .
It proposes that the coefficients of equivalents between soya bean meal and rapeseed or sunflower seed cake should be calculated .
It is obvious that these coefficients must depend first on the specific composition of these plants , and secondly on their food value determined through their real digestibility potential .
In conclusion , then , I propose on behalf of my group that we should support the proposal by the rapporteur , Mr Goepel , while voting in favour of Amendment No 5 , which will allow optimum use of the GATT constraint on European agriculture .
Mr President , at the time of the Blair House agreements the European Union was weak enough to accept a constrain not imposed on our American partners - a ceiling on its industrial set-aside , in other words the land area devoted to crops intended not for food but for industrial use , for example the production of biofuels .
Below this first ceiling , the Union was then guilty of an even more unjustifiable weakness in allowing a second ceiling to be imposed upon it : a ceiling on the by-products of the oil seeds thus cultivated , the direct result of which was to limit the production of those oil seeds although , once again , they are produced exclusively for very important and praiseworthy purposes , such as the manufacture of green fuels or biodegradable packaging .
These one-sided ceilings are expressed , for the various crops concerned , in a common accounting unit - tonnes of soya bean meal equivalents .
But , of course , in order to make the calculations it is necessary to know the conversion coefficient for each production .
In the first half of 1995 the Commission presented a first draft of a scale of equivalences , based on the by-products ' contents of proteins and residual oils and fats .
However , the Council 's expert groups and the management committees unanimously expressed reserves regarding these coefficients , because they felt that the criteria adopted were not the right ones , and also that the result arrived at imposed far too heavy a penalty on our farmers , with absolutely no necessity , as far as this specific point was concerned , deriving from our international commitments .
It would be , as it were , a penalty unilaterally applied by us on ourselves .
Today , this House is asked to consider the proposal for a Council Regulation intended to establish the system for monitoring the ceilings .
We see this as an opportunity for Parliament to suggest the application of fairer coefficients .
That is the purpose of our Amendment No 5 , which is additional to Mr Goepel 's excellent report and bases the conversion coefficients on much more relevant criteria than those proposed hitherto , criteria which are scientifically justified .
Since these ceilings relate to by-products which , it is feared , might be used in the production of feeds or foods , the relevant criteria are associated with the nutritional value , for example the average rates of protein value as proposed by various scientific research institutes , such as the French National Institute for Agronomic Research or the Paris-Grignon Agronomic Institute .
If this Amendment No 5 will be accepted , the Community , although still subject to the GATT constraints , could nevertheless produce on industrial set-aside , up to 3.1 million tonnes of rapeseed of 3.6 million tonnes of sunflower seed , or an increase of 20 % over the Commission 's initial proposal .
This result would make the present situation more bearable in the short term for our farmers although , of course , the Community 's ultimate objective must be to correct the initial error and obtain , somehow or other , the removal of the actual ceiling .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to start by saying how impressed we are by Mr Goepel 's excellent report in this matter .
Even so , I should note that the limitation to one million tonnes of oil seed byproducts , decided upon at Blair House in 1992 , is clearly contrary to the interests of the European Community .
We should note that the crisis brought about by the spongiform encephalitis affair is probably going to provide a fresh boost to the soya cake market , which will benefit American products at the expense of Europe - obviously , since Europe is self-limited , as my colleague Mr Berthu rightly said just now - forcefully , but rightly .
In fact , imports are certain to increase , contrary to what the Commission claims .
Even in 1995 there was a shortage and it would have been possible to export , since world prices were higher than on the European market .
At that time , however , the Commission had imposed taxes on cereal exports .
So the way everything is going , it would seem that the policy pursued year by year by the Commission has been contrary to European interests and has favoured the United States , and it is hard not to feel a degree of unease at this situation .
First , Mr President , my compliments to Mr Goepel for the careful way in which he has drafted his report .
As has already appeared from the discussions in the Committee on Agriculture , we can support his amendments .
I am particularly curious to know the Commission 's reaction to one of the amendments : what is the Commission 's view on the use of the by-products for purposes other than for food or feed ?
What is the Commission 's view on the use of these by-products for energy production ?
Another aspect in this connection is that the use of biodiesel everywhere in Europe has assumed enormous proportions .
That might be because a large part of the areas set aside is being used for the cultivation of oleaginous plants .
It may also be because indirectly a subsidy is being given .
If my information is correct , there has long been a Commission proposal before the Council aimed at encouraging the use of these biodiesels by reducing the tax on them .
I should like to hear from the Commission what the situation is with regard to that proposal .
The Commission wants to encourage the use of these products .
Probably the production of oleaginous plants for biodiesel will be reduced as the amount of land set aside is reduced .
What alternative method can the Commission propose in the future so that the heartening use of these raw materials is not lost ?
Those are two specific questions .
Mr President , Mr Goepel and the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development have together produced a constructive report , on which I congratulate them .
The Commission 's proposal has been tabled on the basis of point 7 of the Memorandum of Understanding between the European Economic Community and the United States within the framework of GATT on certain oilseeds , in accordance with which the Community is to make appropriate corrections within the framework of the Common Agricultural Policy .
It is byproducts from the cultivation of certain oilseeds on land which has been set aside which are concerned .
If such byproducts exceed 1 million tonnes per year , expressed in soya meal equivalents , measures have to be taken .
The Commission 's proposal is aimed at maximising the opportunities for farmers in the European Union to cultivate the oilseeds covered by the Memorandum of Understanding , while at the same time respecting our international obligations in full .
Amendment No 1 proposes that the threshold of 1 million tonnes should apply only to byproducts used in foodstuffs and animal feed .
Other areas of use , including energy production or the provision of humus should be excepted .
The Commission accepts this amendment .
Amendments Nos 2 , 4 and 5 are aimed at ensuring that the Council regulation takes into account the coefficients which have to be used in converting rape meal and sunflower seeds into soya meal equivalents .
As this is obviously a technical question , I believe it would be more appropriate to leave it to the management committee .
Amendment No 3 proposes that sanctions should be imposed the year after the threshold has been exceeded .
In accordance with the Commission 's proposal sanctions should be applied in the same year .
This makes it clearer that regard is being paid to the Memorandum of Understanding .
It will also prevent significant fluctuations in the supply of the byproducts concerned from year to year .
The Commission thus cannot approve the amendment .
Thank you , Mrs Gradin .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
G7 meeting on employment
The next item is the statement by the Commission on the results of the G7 meeting on employment of 1-2 April in Lille .
Mr President , on 1 and 2 April Ministers of Labour , Economics , Commerce and Finance from the G7 countries , along with the President and Commissioners of the European Union , met in Lille to discuss the all-important topic of employment .
The Group came to a number of very important conclusions which the Commission was particularly pleased to note .
I believe that the most significant conclusion agreed on by the seven most-developed industrialized countries was that our aim must be to achieve both economic growth and general prosperity and that we should not have to choose between higher unemployment and widening economic inequality .
I stress this because it had been widely supposed that there was a divergence in views between the European governments and the United States , whereas the reality is that both sides agreed that they had to adapt their policies in order to attain the shared objective of improving the employment situation .
The summit agreed that this would not be easy because far-reaching reforms would be required but that they would be all the more effective if they enjoyed widespread support and if workers and employers were actively involved .
The second major point they made was that in order to attain our objective , we need to ensure strong economic growth and structural reform , which requires a well-balanced mix of macroeconomic and employment policies .
They made a strong declaration on human resources , confirming what we already know and believe , that investing in people is as vital as investing in capital , and the successful economies in the future will be those that focus on the long term by investing vigorously in training for their workers .
But they did not stop there , they went on to say that each worker should have access to vocational training and upward mobility in order to adapt to economic and technological changes .
Thirdly , they made a strong declaration about the need to prevent and fight social exclusion .
The problem of those workers who find it difficult to adapt to the labour market cannot - and will not - be resolved in conditions of continuing or increasing insecurity in their pay and living conditions .
Finally , I would like to stress that the meeting of the G7 members was characterized by an openness to change , not erecting barriers but rather encouraging opportunities to compete in the global economy .
They all acknowledged the need to pursue vigorously open trading policies and called on Trade Ministers to maintain the momentum of trade liberalization through the World Trade Organization and at its conference in Singapore .
At the same time the G7 noted the importance of unchanging core labour standards around the world , thereby acknowledging the concerns of the trade unions and of many governments .
In the context they referred to the completion of the studies by the OECD and the ILO and the social dimensions of international trade .
The conclusions of this summit serve to confirm the strategy developed by the European Union following the European Councils at Essen , Cannes and Madrid and the overall strategy of the European Council which should be encouraged , and we should use this signal as an opportunity to go forward and do even more .
Mr President , the Socialist Group supports every real - and I stress , real - initiative to deal with the problem of unemployment .
To the extent that the French presidency 's initiative for Lille can be considered real , it certainly has our support .
To the extent that it constitutes a continuation and perpetuation of pre-election , vote-campaigning rhetoric on unemployment , we are obliged to stress that the problem of unemployment is far too serious to be dealt with by rhetoric alone .
Neither is it enough , from time to time , to convene a forum for information exchange at the highest level of the political leadership of the most developed economies , a kind of seminar where we supposedly inform one another about our progress , but in fact end up informing one another about our failures to combat unemployment .
Where unemployment is concerned , the time for seminars is past .
It is true that among G7 some economies achieve lower unemployment levels than others .
Those successes - which have of course been paid for by keeping down working peoples ' incomes for twenty years , and I am of course referring to the relatively lower proportion of unemployment in the United States , which as we know , has entailed holding working peoples ' incomes down for about that long - are due to basic institutional differences that cannot be passed on by simple contacts between leaders , and even assuming that they should be passed on at all - as the Commissioner told us - there is no agreement that we must follow this method in doing so .
On the contrary .
Those are fine words , but what is to happen in practice ?
We expect something more from the meeting of the G7 leaders .
We need measures , not just discussions .
The Lille conference was long on discussions but short on measures .
At any rate , it is positive that its analyses point in the right direction .
The G7 leaders disassociated their position from the theory that development can continue within a framework of unemployment .
The statement stresses that more rapid development is a basic prerequisite for fighting unemployment .
We agree .
Development at a rate higher than at present is certainly a prerequisite for the absorption of any significant proportion of unemployment .
Unfortunately , the statement does not add that more rapid development can today be achieved much more easily by countenancing a certain inflation , because the inflationary tendencies we have seen in the past have been suppressed , which allows us to dare to encourage the economy towards more rapid development , in both monetary and financial terms .
The position stated in the White Paper is correct , and the Commissioner very rightly comments that the G7 conclusions confirm the European Union 's strategy .
The problem is that it is not enough for political leaders to meet and congratulate one another .
What matters is that life itself must confirm those policies , and for this to happen , we must of course dare to implement them , which we are not doing , even in relation to the White Paper .
And as you know , Madam Commissioner , the Commission 's report on the economic situation in Europe admits that the White Paper 's aim to cut unemployment by half by 2000 is not going to be achieved by the present policies .
G7 could indeed contribute to more rapid development , because more rapid development depends on increased investment .
Besides , so far as Europe is concerned , we have said that the investment level ought to increase from 18 % to 25 % .
The White Paper says so too .
An international coordination of macroeconomic policy - which the governments do not want just now and which is probably also not possible on that scale - could increase investment levels .
No such coordination is possible . Measures could , however , be adopted to restrict the profiteering use of capital and to encourage its use for real investment .
Taxation measures , measures to combat monetary instability , measures of a nature that can only be taken at world-wide level , so that they cannot be used by one group of countries against another .
In such a framework , structural measures to fight unemployment are of course also necessary and all this could help , but we must not think that we can start by making the markets more elastic to give the economy a boost , because that amounts to putting the cart before the horse .
In a rapidly developing economy the markets will become more elastic , working people will have better training opportunities , and all this will in turn further the speeding up of the economy .
But we cannot start with those things .
We must start with a systematic financial and monetary effort to increase the rate of development .
Everything else must come later and contribute to that .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , allow me to draw the following conclusions from the meeting of the G7 countries in Lille .
There are 18.3 million registered unemployed in the European Union , and they are a risk to social peace .
The battle against unemployment is not a purely national problem .
On the contrary , now that national economies have become integrated , it must be fought on a Europe-wide or even a worldwide basis .
It is caused by the following factors : the rise in labour costs , and particularly in costs accessory to wages , the falling off of investments , and the imbalance between job supply and demand .
Nowadays , economic growth alone is not sufficient to reduce unemployment .
The natural level of unemployment , and with it the numbers of long-term unemployed , increases with every recession .
Poverty and debt in developing countries affect exports .
The crucial factor in determining international competitiveness is now the innovative capacity of the economy .
This is threatened by a certain amount of hostility towards technology in some parts of Europe , particularly on the part of the Greens .
We need a high level of education for our employees , a highperformance infrastructure and good framework conditions to encourage innovation .
In my opinion , this summit , like so many before it , has not come up with any practical measures to alleviate the high level of unemployment , and I would therefore ask the G7 states to create , at long last , the following conditions .
Firstly , they must guarantee that the markets operate smoothly .
Secondly , they must create a favourable climate for saving and investment activity and for business creation , by means of tax-law provisions .
Thirdly , they must increase financial resources and provide guidance in technological research .
Fourthly , they must encourage industrial production in fields involving state-of-the-art technology , by setting standards and providing guidance for public procurement .
Fifthly , there must be better coordination between industrial-policy measures and trade-policy dealings with third countries .
Sixthly , when regulations and joint-action programmes are decided on , particular attention should be given to small and medium-sized enterprises , in order to take into account their special characteristics .
Seventhly , a transport policy should be implemented which aims to develop transport facilities as a necessary instrument for expanding trade with third countries .
I would emphasize , in particular , that there is still a great deal of potential for job creation in the healthcare sector , in the caring services , in tourism , in the cultural sphere and in environmental protection , as well as in services in the commercial sector .
Another important prerequisite is to do away with bureaucracy .
The social partners need to take action in the following areas in particular : better qualifications for employees , more flexible working hours and a reduction in costs accessory to wages , particularly in the case of less highly skilled employees .
Mr President , I should also like to lay claim to the extra minute that was allowed to the speaker on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists .
The countries of the European Union must increase their efforts , by giving fixed-term labour cost subsidies for the long-term unemployed , by improving the efficiency of public job-finding services , by subsidizing new products and services until they are ready for the market , and in particular by giving financial support to the setting up of new SMEs , by improving training and further education schemes , and by having a common employment policy .
I welcome the initiative of the French President in urging the G7 states to adopt a common employment policy at last , and I regret the fact that his efforts were entirely unsuccessful .
Therefore I would recommend that in future we should refrain from holding summit meetings of this kind which , when they do not produce any practical results , only serve to awaken false hopes in the minds of those who are affected by unemployment .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , I welcome the fact that the G7 have spoken so extensively about the employment situation but I think it is pretty poor if the only outcome is what we already know , namely that we must bring about economic growth and more prosperity .
I regard this meeting as a first step and I think that the G7 should draw a number of conclusions from it .
So I have a number of questions .
Is it possible to produce a comparative in-depth study of the part played by taxation and social security systems in the Union and in the other G7 States so that we can see the effect of the various systems ?
After all we still have many times more unemployment in the Union than in the United States and Japan for example .
My second question is : what part does the Union really want to play in the world debate on human solidarity as regards taking care of social security and the environment , for example in the next world trade negotiations ?
My idea is that if it does not come from the Union it will not get on to the agenda in the right way .
The Union has a social model to protect and to lose .
Finally I should like to call attention to the financing systems existing in Europe for small and medium-scale businesses .
The position is that in America there are many more opportunities for anyone starting up in business and for small and medium-scale undertakings because of the way in which the pension funds and banks are ready to finance these organizations .
As far as it goes I welcome the Liese programme but I think that it is only a first step .
Since I still have time left I should like to bring another matter to your notice and that is the question of training .
In a very recent report Mr Delors said that 6 % of the GNP should be devoted to training and many Member States are not yet coming up to that level .
I should like to see a greater effort there .
Mr President , I find it difficult to understand the source of the optimism and satisfaction displayed by the Commission and by G7 itself , concerning the fight against unemployment .
G7 may have confirmed the European Union 's positions and policies , but they are not confirmed by the reality that the Union 's citizens are living through , nor by the state of the unemployment problem itself in Europe .
It is becoming more and more clear that the development noted , and even the development it is hoped to achieve , is incapable of leading to increased employment .
Consequently , there seems no prospect of cutting the rate at which unemployment is increasing over the next few years , and that is a result of the very policy adopted both by the European Union and by other developed capitalist countries .
I would like to put a number of questions to the Commissioner :
To what extent is it estimated that the competitiveness of European companies can be increased by reducing the so-termed non-labour costs , in other words employment contributions towards social welfare ?
Against which countries is this competitiveness to be increased ? The United States ?
The new industrialized countries of the Far East ?
Which countries ?
Or is the competitiveness of European companies , precisely because of this policy , to be an internal European matter , in other words the competitiveness of the very large multinational companies will be increased within Europe itself to the disadvantage of SMEs ?
To what extent can such support contribute substantially towards increasing employment and cutting unemployment ?
And finally , will the Commission ever consider reducing working hours without loss of pay , will it ever see that this could contribute to dealing with unemployment , so that we can at last have a specific measure and not wishful thinking , which Europe 's citizens contemplate with ever-increasing disappointment and reaction against the Union 's policies ?
Mr President , I must say that words fail me - and that is something that does not , I think , happen to me very often .
The first priority that is emphasized everywhere , the scandal of mass unemployment , is being treated here like a sort of appendix to the session .
Then Mrs Gradin stands there - excuse me for talking to you like this - and says how delighted she is about the results of a summit , out of which , it is generally agreed , nothing whatsoever came .
I must say that that takes a lot of swallowing !
Mrs Gradin , why are the Commission and the Community not taking action to ensure that the subject is discussed at the United Nations Economic and Social Council ?
Has it still not occurred to you that , contrary to the OECD philosophy which aims to create working poor instead of unemployed people , there is another strategy , which is followed by the ILO , the ECE and the UNDP , and which aims to encourage social and sustainable development ?
Will the Commission finally decide where it stands in this debate ?
What sort of model for a European , active , independent policy to conquer mass unemployment do we actually want to put into practice ?
It is said to be our first priority , and then we continue to pursue a policy that sets different priorities , in the present case trade and growth , namely growth in profits , and this is happening in a situation in which , as Keynes said , the euthanasia of the rentier - not the pensioner- , the euthanasia of the functionless investor , is the only solution in the present crisis !
In this situation we can no longer go on pretending .
What will become of the Santer Pact then ?
Will it continue to be followed up , after certain Member States have already made it clear that they are not going to have anything to do with it ?
Can an employment policy be implemented without funding ?
The finance ministers did not even go to Lille !
Can an employment policy be implemented without a reform - with ecological solidarity - of the tax system ?
These are questions which the Commission needs to answer as a matter or urgency , and on which we must finally put an end to hypocrisy !
Mr President , my impression is that the latest G7 meeting took place in the same atmosphere of indifference as our debate here this morning .
And yet nearly 20 million Europeans out of work , and an unemployment rate of about 20 % among young people , might have prompted the Western powers to display a little more determination and imagination .
Instead , once again , the worn-out credo of ultra-liberalism seems to have dominated the proceedings .
The Americans have denounced social entitlements as an unemployment factor , conveniently forgetting that , in their own country , another 40 million people are living in poverty and exclusion .
Madam Commissioner , you know how much importance we in this House attach to the social integration of Europe , a Europe which cares for the well-being of its citizens and guarantees them a minimum standard of social welfare .
Only on Wednesday , in the course of the debate on the Turin Conference , we restated that necessity .
Now you have come here to tell us about the results of the meeting in Lille , and we are grateful for that , but I would have liked to know what the Commission 's position is in this debate , especially as regards the development of new forms of wage activity and new zones of technology .
In a nutshell , how are we to reconcile technological innovation , employment and accepted social benefits ?
Mr President , the conclusions of the G7 meeting held in Lille early in April are clearly aligning the industrialized countries towards an American-style economic policy , which is considered to generate more jobs at the cost of greater flexibility of employment . Unfortunately , however , its objective can also be stated in different terms : a gradual lowering of our social standards to the much lower average required by a globalization we have been unable to control .
In the eyes of the growing number of Europeans , the aim of the policy pursued by Brussels seems to be to break down national peculiarities in order to clear the road for this globalization and facilitate its progress .
Instead of protecting us , therefore , the policy of Brussels would become the implicit ally of those opposed to our societies , our ways of life and our nations .
The answer most frequently given to this serious accusation is that the best way in which the European States can defend themselves is to improve their competitiveness .
Unfortunately , however , that is only partly true .
Does the Commission think that the cost of European labour will be able to compete with the cost of labour in the emerging countries ?
Does it think that , by disrupting national societies , it will promote a competitiveness of the European region ?
And if not , how does it expect to reestablish a community preference which is capable not of preventing globalization but of disciplining it ?
Mr President , Commissioner , I am also speaking for Mr Schreiner .
The statements that have been made today admittedly make clear the Commission 's firm intention to make employment a central theme of its work .
Practical measures are lacking , however , and platitudes remain ineffectual .
Above all , the constantly expressed desire on the part of the Greens and the Social Democrats , to include the employment question as a further criterion for European monetary union , would prove to be a fatal fallacy for economic and monetary union , and would allow unemployment to rise even further .
The same applies to savings programmes without simultaneous structural reform .
It is therefore not so much the lack of a political will on the part of the European Union that I see as an obstruction to any effective campaign against high unemployment , but rather the lack of willingness on the part of individual Member States to adjust their economic and social-policy framework conditions to fit those of the international competition .
By this I mean the exorbitantly high costs associated with wages in Europe , the excessive taxation systems , the overregulation and the - to a greater or lesser extent - uncontrollable bureaucracy in individual Member States .
We shall not create jobs by adopting regulations and declarations of intent .
Jobs will only be created by competitive framework conditions and , as a result , optimistic investors who are willing to take a risk , and not by the whingeing of affluent citizens .
Commissioner , what practical proposals does the Commission have in order to reduce drastically , perhaps by means of an environmental tax system , the costs associated with wages , costs which are much too high in all the Member States ?
Mr President , I just wanted to re-ask the question : how can we breathe new life into the world economy and , more particularly , into the EU economy ?
We all speak a lot about unemployment and about job creation .
The reality , unfortunately , in my view , is very different .
High costs in the EU , lack of competitiveness in the EU , perhaps even scale of operation in the EU , together with new technologies , modern methods and other new approaches , are driving employment levels down not up .
This environment is making it much more difficult to increase employment levels .
I ask the Commission : how can we cope with this ?
Surely we cannot turn the clock backwards .
Society must continue to move forward and progress .
Every citizen in Europe wants to see this happening .
Every effort has to be made to achieve development but , unfortunately , this approach is being resisted .
It is being resisted by environmentalists .
I do not want to suggest that we should not consider environmental issues - of course we should .
But everybody seems to want to resist and oppose development and efforts to get things done .
So I want to ask the Commission : is there a way , can you reconcile these differences ?
Is the Commission looking at this side of the argument at all .
I say this with respect , Commissioner Gradin , but it always seems to me that it is pious platitudes but no action .
Can you answer my questions , please ?
Mr President , thank you for all the interesting contributions and comments on my report from the G7 meeting .
Unemployment is the most serious issue facing the European Union .
For many , it is a tragedy that there are 18 million people outside the labour market .
Everyone , I think , knows someone in their own circles who does not have a job .
It is especially tragic when unemployment affects young people .
This is why unemployment is at the top of the Commission 's working programme agenda .
The same was true at the European Council meeting in Turin , where it was felt that unemployment and employment should be one of the central issues at the Intergovernmental Conference .
It is also against this background that the Commission has put forward its proposal for a stabilisation pact , and it is for that reason that President Santer i